= = THE 
: | } iP : I ) COMPLETE ENGLISH 
; TRANSLATION 


Edited by Robert P. — sae) | 
Goldman and Sally J. ad | | 
Sutherland Goldman | | 


THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 


THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 


The Complete English Translation 


Translated by Robert P. Goldman, Sally J. Sutherland 
Goldman, Rosalind Lefeber, Sheldon I. Pollock, and 
Barend A. van Nooten 


Revised and Edited by Robert P. Goldman and Sally J. Sutherland 
Goldman 


PRINCETON LIBRARY OF ASIAN TRANSLATIONS 


PRINCETON UNIVERSITY PRESS 
PRINCETON AND OXFORD 


Copyright © 2021 by Princeton University Press 


Princeton University Press is committed to the protection of copyright and the intellectual property 
our authors entrust to us. Copyright promotes the progress and integrity of knowledge. Thank you for 
supporting free speech and the global exchange of ideas by purchasing an authorized edition of this 
book. If you wish to reproduce or distribute any part of it in any form, please obtain permission. 


Requests for permission to reproduce material from this work should be sent to 
permissions@press.princeton.edu 


Published by Princeton University Press 
41 William Street, Princeton, New Jersey 08540 
6 Oxford Street, Woodstock, Oxfordshire OX20 1TR 


press.princeton.edu 


All Rights Reserved 


Names: Valmiki. | Goldman, Robert P., 1942— translator. | Sutherland Goldman, Sally J., translator. | 
Lefeber, Rosalind, translator. | Pollock, Sheldon I., translator. | Nooten, Barend A. van, 1932— 
translator. 

Title: The Ramayana of Valmiki : the complete translation / translated by Robert P. Goldman, Sally J. 
Sutherland Goldman, Rosalind Lefeber, Sheldon I. Pollock, and Barend A. van Nooten ; revised and 
edited by Robert P. Goldman and Sally J. Sutherland Goldman. 

Other titles: Ramayana. English 
Description: Ist. | Princeton : Princeton University Press, 2021. | Series: Princeton library of Asian 
translations | Includes bibliographical references and index. 

Identifiers: LCCN 2021009370 (print) | LCCN 2021009371 (ebook) | ISBN 9780691206868 
(paperback) | ISBN 9780691225029 (ebook) 

Classification: LCC BL1139.22 .E54 2021 (print) | LCC BL1139.22 (ebook) | DDC 294.5/92204521 
—dc23 
LC record available at https://Iccn.loc.gov/202 1009370 
LC ebook record available at https://Iccn.loc.gow/202 1009371 


Version 1.0 
British Library Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available 


Editorial: Anne Savarese and James Collier 
Production Editorial: Sara Lerner 
Text Design: Carmina Alvarez 
Cover Design: Layla MacRory 
Production: Erin Suydam 
Publicity: Kate Hensley and Amy Stewart 
Copyeditor: Cynthia Buck 


Cover images: British Library / GRANGER 


For all of those—colleagues, students, family, and friends— 
without whose support and assistance the massive Ramayana 
translation project could not have been completed 


yavat sthasyanti girayah saritas ca mahitale / 
tavad ramayanakatha lokesu pracarisyati // 
—The Valmiki Ramayana: Critical Edition, 1960-1975, 1.2.35 


As long as the mountains and rivers shall endure upon the earth, 
So long will the tale of the Ramayana be told among the people. 


Contents 


Preface Xi 


Guide to Sanskrit Pronunciation § xiii 


Part I, INTRODUCTION 
INTRODUCTION 3 
ABOUT THE TRANSLATION 44 


Part I. THE RAMA YANA OF VALMIKI 

. THE BALAKANDA 51 

. THE AYODHYAKANDA 130 

_ THE ARANYAKANDA 264 

_ THE KISKINDHAKANDA 351 

. THE SUNDARAKANDA 429 

_ THE YUDDHAKANDA_ 537 

_ THE UTTARAKANDA_ 728 


aI HW NM BW NO = 


Glossary of Important Sanskrit Words, Proper Nouns, and 
Epithets 857 


Glossary of Weapons 867 
Bibliography 869 
Index 873 


Preface 


The current volume, edited and revised by the general and associate editors 
of the original translation project, represents the complete text of the 
original Princeton University Press seven-volume translation of the Oriental 
Institute of Baroda critical edition of the Ramdyana of Valmiki. That 
translation, accompanied by extensive introductions and a dense scholarly 
annotation, was published serially as the flagship work in the Princeton 
Library of Asian Translations from 1984 to 2017. 

The present volume, which includes a new general introduction and 
eliminates the original’s extensive annotation, is intended for two 
audiences: the general reading public, who may be interested in gaining 
access to a little-known masterpiece of Asian literature, and high school and 
collegiate students and faculty. As discussed in detail in the introduction, 
the original translation, directed more toward an audience of academic 
specialists, has been considerably revised by Professors Goldman and 
Sutherland Goldman with a view toward making it more accessible to these 
two audiences. 

Over the decades during which the original translation took form and 
during the period of the creation of the present one, the editors and 
translators incurred an immense debt of gratitude to many scholars in India 
and at Berkeley for their assistance. Space prevents us from naming them 
here, but they have been deeply thanked in the original volumes. Let us 
simply express our undying gratitude to Sanskrit scholar Dr. Kristi Wiley, 
who, through both avataras of the translation, has been unstinting in her 
help and unequaled in her eagle eye and good sense of the original text, 
without which neither form would have been possible. We would also like 
to express our profound thanks to Ms. Janet Um for lending her knowledge 
of Sanskrit to and her meticulous proofreading of the final versions of the 
volume. 


All references are to The Valmiki Ramayana: Critical Edition, 1960- 
1975. 


Guide to Sanskrit Pronunciation 


To better appreciate the Ramayana, it will be helpful for readers to have a 
sense of the pronunciation and prosody of the many unfamiliar Sanskrit 
names and terms they will find in the translation. Fortunately, although it 
may seem daunting at first, the pronunciation of Sanskrit is really not very 
difficult for English speakers. A few guidelines will serve to clarify the 
basic pronunciation of the sounds. English examples are based on 
hypothetical “dictionary” pronunciation. 


Vowels 


like the uv in “but” 

like the o in “mom” 

like the i in “bit” 

like the ee in “beet” 

u like the first uw in “suture” 

u like the oo in “pool” 

r like the v7 in “rig” 

e like the a in “gate” 

ai somewhat like the 7 in “high”; this sound becomes a diphthong to glide 
slightly into the i vowel 

o like the o in “rote” 

ausomewhat like the ou of “loud” with a similar lip-rounding glide 


© 


ml om: Oo] 


Consonants 


k like the & in “skate” 

khlike the & in “Kate” 

g like the g in “gate” 

ghsomewhat like the gh in “doghouse” 
n like the 7 in “sing” 


k 
c 


like the k in “skate” 
like the c in “‘eschew’”’ 


chlike the ch in “‘chew” 


j 


like the 7 in “jewel” 


jh like the dgeh in “hedgehog” 


fi 
{ 


like the n in “cinch” 
like the first ¢ in “‘start”’ 


th like the first ¢ in “tart” 


d 


like the d in “dart” 


dhlike the dh in “adhere” 


Nn 
t 


p 


like the 1 in “tint” 

this sound and the five following sounds are articulated like the five 
preceding sounds but with the tip of the tongue touching or extending 
slightly between the teeth 


like the p in “spin” 


phlike the p in “pin” 


b 


like the b in “bin” 


bhlike the bh in “‘abhor’’ 
m like the m in “mother” 


Mi 
r 


| 
% 


Mr 


S 
h 


like the y in “yellow” 

like the r in “drama” 

like the / in “lug” 

produced generally with just the slightest contact between the upper teeth 
and the lower lip; slightly greater than that used for English w (as in 
“wile’”’) but less than that used for English v (as in “vile’’) 

like the sh in “shove” 

produced with the tongue-tip further back than for s, but giving a similar 
sound 

like the s in “so” 

like the A in “hope” 


m anusvara, or a nasalization of the preceding vowel 


p like the p in “spin” 

h visarga, or an aspiration of a preceding vowel pronounced almost like an 
echo, like an h followed by the short form of the preceding vowel. For 
example: devah, pronounced deva(ha) 


A Note on Sanskrit Prosody 


Sanskrit syllables are generally classified as either heavy (guru) or light 
(laghu). Basically, heavy syllables are those containing a long vowel or 
diphthong, while light syllables contain short vowels. Additionally, 
syllables with short vowels are regarded as heavy when they precede a 
conjunct consonant, an anusvara, or visarga. The general rule for syllabic 
stress is that the penultimate syllable receives mild stress if it 1s heavy 
(guru), thus karaniya. If the penultimate syllable is light, the stress falls on 
the antepenultimate syllable, regardless of its prosodic weight. Thus, the 
correct pronunciation for the name of Valmiki’s poem is Ramayana. 


a Adapted from R. Goldman and S. J. Sutherland Goldman 2019: 5-9. 


Partl 
INTRODUCTION 


Introduction 


What Is the Valmiki Ramayana? 


When contemplating a reading of the Valmtki Ramayana, it might well 
occur to a reader unfamiliar with the work to ask, “What is a Ramayana, 
and who or what is Valmiki?” If one were to be told that Ramayana is the 
title of a famous and influential Sanskrit epic poem of ancient India, that 
Valmiki is the name of its author, and that the work is in many ways similar 
to epic poems like the //iad, the Odyssey, and the Aeneid, one might then 
ask, “Why don’t we refer to these latter works as ‘The Homer J/liad,’ ‘The 
Homer Odyssey,’ and ‘The Virgil Aeneid’?” And thereby hangs a tale—or 
rather, many, many versions of the same tale. 

The name Ramayana, “Rama’s Journey,” is actually a generic term that, 
over the last two and a half millennia, came to be applied, either specifically 
or generically, to the innumerable versions of the epic’s central story that 
proliferated across the vast geographical, linguistic, cultural, and religious 
range of southern Asia from antiquity to the present day. The collectivity of 
these versions in poetry, prose, song, drama, cinema, and the visual arts is 
sometimes referred to as the Rdmakatha, “The Tale of Rama.” Thus, 
although specific versions of the tale, such as those found in Sanskrit and 
many other languages, may use the term Ramdyana in their titles, many 
others do not. Indeed, the massive diffusion of texts, art, and performance 
based on the Rama story found throughout the nations of southern Asia 
makes the Ramayana, writ large, arguably one of the world’s most popular, 
influential, and widely circulated tales ever told. In this it can only be 
compared with two works that have been equally pervasive and influential, 
but far less variable and religiously adaptable—the Bible and the Qur’an. 

The oldest surviving version of the great tale of Rama, and the one that 
is doubtless the direct or indirect source of all of the hundreds and perhaps 
thousands of other versions of the story, is the monumental, mid—first 


millennium BCE epic poem in some twenty-five thousand Sanskrit couplets 
attributed to Valmiki. In several respects this poem is also, as we shall see, 
unique among all versions of the tale. 

In its own preface the text calls itself by three titles: Rama’s Journey 
(ramadyanam), The Great Tale of Sita (sitayas caritam mahat), and The 
Slaying of Paulastya (i.e., Ravana) (paulastyavadhah). The first title 
reflects the salience in the story of its hero, while the second features its 
heroine and the third its villain. In modernity, in order to distinguish this 
work from its legion of later versions, many of which are called simply 
Ramayana, scholars and others tend to name it for its author. Thus, in 
keeping with Sanskrit’s predilection for nominal compounds, the poem is 
often referred to in that language as the Valmikiramdyana, “Valmiki'’s 
Ramayana.” In English we tend to separate the two parts of the compound: 
the name of the author and the name of his work. 

Like other Ramayanas, Valmiki’s work purports to be a poetic history of 
events that took place on the Indian subcontinent and on the adjacent island 
of Lanka (popularly believed to be the modern nation of Sri Lanka). Indeed, 
along with its reputation as a great literary composition, and like its sister 
epic, the Mahabharata, it is regarded by numerous Indian commentators, as 
well as by the Indian literary critical tradition and many pious Hindus today, 
as belonging to the genre of itihasa, “historical narrative.” Also like the 
Mahabharata, but unlike most other versions of the Rama story, Valmiki’s 
epic is believed to be the work of a divinely gifted rsi, “seer,” who was 
endowed with an infallible and omniscient vision enabling him to witness 
directly all the events recounted in his poem. Thus, his version of the tale is 
widely regarded as the first and most authentic and unfalsifiable historical 
account of the life of its hero, Rama, and all the other characters—human, 
simian, avian, divine, and demonic—with whom his career intersects. 

A unique characteristic of Valmiki’s Ramayana is that it is almost 
universally revered in the Indian literary tradition as the veritable fons et 
origo of the entire genre of kavya, “poetry,” or what we would call belles 
lettres: texts whose purpose, among others, is to stimulate our aesthetic 
sensibilities. Thus, the work is widely revered as the Adikdvya, “The First 
Poem,” from which all later poetry derives, while its author is venerated as 
the Adikavi, “The First Poet.” Indeed, the poem’s tale of the life of its hero, 
Rama, has come down to us with a prologue in the form of a meta-narrative 


about exactly how Valmiki came to learn the story of Rama and how he 
was inspired to craft it into a massive musical and poetic history. In that 
prologue, we read that Lord Brahma, the creator divinity himself, inspired 
the sage to compose the tale of Rama in metrical verse, “to delight the 
heart.” In other words, in addition to its other merits, Valmtki’s magnum 
opus is a grand entertainment filled with emotional scenes, romantic idylls, 
heroic warriors, beautiful princesses, monstrous villains, comical monkeys, 
and cataclysmic battles. And so, along with the innumerable subsequent 
retellings it has inspired throughout the countries and cultures of southern 
Asia, the work has both delighted and edified its audiences for millennia. 

But the work is not merely a literary account of a legendary hero’s life 
and struggles. It also functions on two other critical levels, the devotional 
and the ethical. We learn at the very outset of the poem that, despite 
appearances, its protagonist is no ordinary human. Together with his three 
brothers, Bharata, Laksmana, and Satrughna, he is, in fact, an incarnation of 
one of the supreme divinities of Hinduism, Lord Visnu, who takes on 
various earthly forms over the long, recurring cycles of cosmic time when 
the righteous and righteousness (dharma) itself are imperiled at the hands of 
some mighty, demonic being or beings who are too powerful for even the 
lesser gods to resist. Thus, the warrior prince and righteous monarch Rama 
is regarded as one of the principal avataras, “incarnations,” of the Supreme 
Being and therefore an object of veneration, worship, and devotion for 
hundreds of millions of Hindus worldwide from deep antiquity to the 
present day. In this way, Valmiki’s epic poem is one of the earliest sacred 
texts of the Vaisnava tradition of Hinduism and stands at the head of all the 
many Hindu versions of the Ramayana.' Although it has sometimes been 
superseded in the affection of many of Rama’s bhaktas, “devotees,” by 
later, regional versions of the epic, Valmiki’s Ramdyana remains a central 
scripture for some schools of Vaisnavism to this day, and most Hindus 
revere both the poem and the poet. Indeed, the day traditionally regarded as 
Valmiki’s birthday is a “restricted,” or optional, holiday on the Hindu 
calendar. 

The epic narrative is constructed as a kind of morality play, an 
illustrative guide to righteous behavior, in the face of the most dire 
challenges and ethical dilemmas. At the same time, it is a grand cautionary 
tale of the downfall of the unrighteous, no matter how mighty they may be. 


Thus, the work, along with its role as a historical and literary text, functions 
as both a guide to moral and religious conduct (dharmasdstra) and a 
political treatise on the proper exercise of kingship and governance 
(nitisastra). It fulfills these roles through the creation of (in some cases 
literally) towering figures whose characters and actions represent positive 
and negative exemplars for its audiences to emulate or to shun. In this way, 
the epic hero Rama serves as the model for the ideal son, the ideal husband, 
the ideal warrior, and the ideal king. Thus, not only is he a god come to 
earth, but he is the ideal man. Other central figures serve similarly in their 
specific roles. The heroine, Sita, is the ideal wife, a pativrata, a woman 
perfectly devoted to her husband for better or for worse. Laksmana is the 
ideal younger brother, utterly faithful to his elder, Rama. The monkey-hero 
Hanuman emerges as the very paragon of selfless devotion to one’s lord. 
Then there is the anomalous figure of Vibhisana, the virtuous rdksasa 
brother of the epic’s villain, who abandons his family and his people to take 
refuge and ally himself with Rama. 

On the “dark side,” as it were, there is the monstrous, ten-headed 
raksasa king, Ravana, a ruthless conquistador who terrorizes all creatures, 
even the gods themselves. Ravana is a defiler of all sacred rites and a 
prolific sexual predator who rapes and abducts women throughout the three 
worlds until he meets his downfall at Rama’s hands. There is also Ravana’s 
sinister and terrifying son, the sorcerer-warrior Ravani Indrajit, who, 
through his powers of illusion and magical rites, can make himself both 
invisible and invincible. Ravana’s colossal younger brother is_ the 
horrifying, if almost comically grotesque, Kumbhakarna, who must be 
aroused from his perpetual sleep to wreak havoc on Rama’s army of 
semidivine monkeys (vdnaras). 

In opposing these sets of figures, the righteous and the unrighteous, the 
epic narrative establishes itself as a major episode in the grand and never- 
ending struggle between the forces of dharma, “good or righteousness,” 
and the forces of adharma, “evil or unrighteousness,” for control of the 
universe—a struggle that, as noted earlier, occasionally necessitates the 
divine intervention of the Supreme Being to resolve it in favor of dharma. 
In the end, once Rama has been victorious in his battle with Ravana and his 
evil minions, recovered his abducted wife, and established himself on his 
ancestral throne, he inaugurates a millennia-long utopian kingdom, the so- 


called Ramardajya, “Kingdom of Rama,” which lives on in the political 
imagination of India to this day. This morality play, reenacted annually 
across much of India in the Ramlila, “The Play of Rama,” a rather more 
cheerful popular celebration than the European Passion Play it parallels, 
continues to entertain and edify hundreds of millions who worship Rama 
and Sita (Sitaram). At the drama’s conclusion, vast crowds of devotees and 
onlookers celebrate as a giant effigy of the demonic Ravana, packed with 
fireworks, is set ablaze for a glorious celebration of the triumph of good 
over evil. 


Valmiki’s Epic: The Text 


The original Princeton University Press translation of the Valmiki 
Ramayana (PVR), which forms the basis of the present volume, is based, 
with a number of revisions and emendations, on the seven-volume critical 
edition of the poem produced by the scholars of the Ramayana Department 
of the Oriental Institute of Baroda, India, between 1960 and 1975 under the 
general editorship of a series of distinguished experts in the field of Sanskrit 
epic studies.? But before we delve into the translation, it will perhaps be 
helpful for the reader to understand exactly what the critical edition is, how 
it relates to the many other published editions (and their corresponding 
translations) of the poem, and something of the textual history of this 
remarkable work. 

The poem’s upodghata, “prologue,” which presents an account of its 
creation and early performance, describes it as having been composed by 
the sage Valmiki, who subsequently taught it to two of his disciples, the 
twin bards Lava and Kusa, who turn out actually to be Rama’s long-lost 
children. They have been living, unbeknownst to their father, in exile with 
their banished mother, Sita, in the sage’s ashram. The brothers literally take 
their show on the road and sing the poem, with musical accompaniment, on 
the highways and byways of India until, as the tale goes, they present it as a 
command performance at their father’s court, where they are recognized as 
his long-lost sons. 

Such is the legend. But it is not implausible that, at least in its earliest 
stages, the work was orally composed as a sort of bardic lay, transmitted 
aurally from master to disciple and performed aloud to popular audiences, 


the vast majority of whom would almost certainly have been illiterate and 
thus unable to imbibe the work in any other way even had it been available 
in written form. Nonetheless, as the celebrity of the poem spread in 
antiquity, it would surely at an early date have entered into the rich and 
emerging manuscript culture of the Indian subcontinent. And it is here that 
problems arise with regard to our efforts to understand what the text of the 
poem was like in its earliest form or forms. For one thing, orally composed 
and performed tales, as we know from much more recent examples, may 
change to greater or lesser extents in different performances by the same 
bard and in performances by different singers, either through failures of 
memory or as a result of improvisation in response to different times, 
places, occasions, and audience reactions.? 

Then, too, there are similar problems with manuscripts depending on the 
diligence and competence of the copyists. Such issues are particularly 
weighty in the case of the scribal transmission of Sanskrit texts in India 
because Sanskrit, although a highly conservative and grammatically 
regulated language for the most part, has never had a single principal script 
in which it was written, unlike, say, Greek or Latin. Thus, as the manuscript 
tradition of Valmiki’s Ramdyana developed over time, the work came to be 
copied in a wide variety of regional scripts from all parts of India, from the 
Sarada script of Kashmir to the Grantha and Malayalam scripts of the deep 
south and the scripts of many others in between. These various regional 
scripts in turn contributed to a sort of graphic game of “telephone” in which 
scribes copying a manuscript from one script into another for their local 
audiences might well make significant errors or alterations. 

As a result of these factors and the very popularity of the work itself, the 
poem has undergone numerous and complex textual changes that have 
resulted in the formation of a number of primary and secondary recensions, 
or textual variants. Basically, there are two large recensional versions— 
manuscripts from northern India in northern scripts and manuscripts from 
southern India in southern scripts—along with many manuscripts in the 
widely written and printed Devanagari script. The textual differences 
between these two large recensions are significant: in a word-for-word, 
verse-for-verse, passage-for-passage comparison between the northern and 
southern versions, only about one-third of the text is textually identical in 
the two versions. 


Even this north-south division does not fully reflect the textual variation 
of the Valmiki Ramayana. Within each major recension, there are further 
regional sub-recensions. Modern printed editions of the poem represent one 
or another of the recensions or sub-recensions. Thus, there is Gaspare 
Gorresio’s edition of the Gaudiya (Bengal) recension, Vishva Bandhu’s 
“Lahore” edition of the northwestern recension, and the numerous editions 
of the southern recensions such as the “Kumbakonam” edition and those of 
the Gujarati Printing Press, the Nirnaya Sagara Press, the Gita Press, and 
the Venkateshwara Steam Press. All existing translations of the Valmiki 
Ramayana, with the exception of ours and the subsequent one of Bibek 
Debroy, are based on one or another of the existing published editions.* For 
this reason, readers familiar with other published editions or translations 
based on them will note that, in many places, ours is different from those 
they may have read and been led to believe are the “authentic” text of the 
epic. 

Yet another factor here is the question of time and the perishability of 
manuscript media in South and Southeast Asia. Sanskrit manuscripts, 
depending on period and region, have been written on a variety of media, 
including prepared palm leaves, birch bark, and various forms of paper. 
These materials have generally had relatively short life spans in the hot and 
humid environment of monsoon Asia. Manuscripts succumb to mold, 
insects, general neglect, and even, in some cases, a form of pious 
destruction: religious texts like the Radmdyana have sometimes been 
consigned to bodies of water in the practice of visarjana, “release,” of 
sacred images, icons, or texts. 

The plethora of recensional variants and the loss of perishable 
manuscripts over time thus presents the scholar of the Ramdyana with a 
serious problem when it comes to understanding what the poem may have 
been like in its early stages. The core of the work appears to have been 
originally a product of the middle of the first millenntum BCE, but because 
of the factors just mentioned, its oldest known manuscripts are dated no 
earlier than the twelfth or thirteenth centuries CE, leaving a period of some 
seventeen centuries from which we can recover virtually no written record 
of the poem. 

This is where the critical edition of the poem comes in. Basically, what 
the scholars at the Oriental Institute of Baroda did was to select exemplars 


from the various recensions and sub-recensions and compare them in an 
attempt to determine what might be the oldest recoverable readings. Using 
established, scientific philological principles—such as privileging text that 
is common to both the north and south; giving preference to the south, 
which gives evidence of being the older of the two recensions; and, when 
there is disagreement between the two recensions, rejecting passages that 
appear in only one recension—the Baroda scholars reconstructed an 
archetype of the existing manuscripts of Valmtki’s epic.* The final product 
of such a process is, of course, a text found nowhere else, but one that is 
nevertheless a scientific attempt to approximate, we must stress, not the 
original Ramayana—a goal that is beyond the power of scholarship—but 
the archetype of the existing manuscripts, taking us perhaps to a 
reconstructed stage in the text’s history somewhere in the medieval period. 
We should note that, because of the excision of verses and passages that did 
not meet the editorial criteria of the creators of the critical edition, this text 
is somewhat shorter than the other printed editions. 


The Epic: Its Structure and Its Narrative 


As the poem has come down to us in all of its recensions and variants, it is a 
very lengthy narrative account of the life of its hero, Rama, and of those 
with whom he interacted during his long and often challenging career. This 
narrative is presented throughout in metrical Sanskrit couplets. These are 
overwhelmingly of the type known as s/oka or anustubh, verses of thirty- 
two syllables divided up into four equal padas, “metrical quarters,” 
consisting of eight syllables each. This is an enormously popular meter in 
many genres of Sanskrit text—poetic, scientific, didactic, religious, and so 
on. As in the other great Sanskrit epic, the Mahabharata, these verses are 
sometimes varied with an assortment of one or more longer poetic meters, 
often to mark more richly figurative passages or, as in many later poetic 
narratives, to mark the closure of a sarga, “chapter.” 

The poem is divided into seven discrete kandas, “books,” of varying 
length, which in turn are divided into a varying number of sargas. The 
chapters are numbered sequentially in each book starting from one, while 
each of the books has its own title, which sometimes differs in various 
recensions. The books are generally named for stages in the life of the epic 


99 


hero, for the locales in which the principal actions are set, or for those 
actions themselves. The books are: 


The Balakanda, “The Book of the Child” 

The Ayodhyakanda, “The Book of Ayodhya” 
The Aranyakanda, “The Book of the Forest” 
The Kiskindhakanda, ““The Book of Kiskindha” 
The Sundarakanda, “The Beautiful Book” 

The Yuddhakanda, “The Book of the War’’”’ 
The Uttarakdanda, “The Last Book” 


The Balakanda 


The epic’s first book begins with an upodghdata, “prologue,” which provides 
a highly compressed account of the epic narrative and tells how its author 
came to compose the poem and, in the process, create the very genre of 
poetry. It also describes how the work was first transmitted and performed 
and provides a brief table of its contents. According to this framing 
narrative, the sage Valmiki, while hosting a visit from the celebrated divine 
seer Narada, asks his guest if there is any truly great, heroic, and righteous 
man living in their world. After a moment’s thought, the seer responds with 
a brief, seventy-two-verse laudatory description of Rama, including the 
major events of his career and the utopian conditions that prevailed during 
his idyllic eleven-thousand-year reign. Although this concise and decidedly 
prosaic narrative makes no explicit reference to Rama’s status as an 
incarnation of Lord Visnu, it does conclude with a brief statement of the 
worldly, spiritual, and heavenly rewards that accrue to anyone who reads, 
recites, or hears the tale of the hero, an example of what is known in 
Sanskrit as a phalasruti, “fruitful hearing,” that is regularly found at the end 
of Hindu religious texts. 

Following Narada’s departure, Valmiki wanders into the woodlands to 
take his ritual bath. There, as he raptly watches a pair of mating sdadrasa 
cranes, a tribal hunter emerges from the forest and kills the male bird. In an 
access of compassion for the grieving female, the sage curses the hunter, the 
words pouring from his mouth in metrical form suitable for musical 
rendition and accompaniment. Upon his return to his ashram, he is visited 
by the creator god, Lord Brahma, who tells him that he had granted the sage 


the gifts of poetic inspiration and clairvoyance and commissions him to 
compose a great and moving poem about the life of Rama, greatly 
expanding upon the concise version of it he had heard from Narada. 
Valmiki teaches the poem to his disciples, the twin sons of Rama and Sita, 
and the boys, acting as bards, sing it on the highways and byways of the 
region until, at last, they perform it before their father, King Rama, who 
recognizes them as his long-lost sons and heirs. 

The epic story proper begins in the fifth sarga of the kanda. It tells us of 
the mighty and prosperous kingdom of Kosala, whose king, the wise and 
powerful Dasaratha, rules from the beautiful and impregnable city of 
Ayodhya. The king possesses all that a man could desire except a son and 
heir. On the advice of his ministers, and with the somewhat obscure 
intervention of the legendary sage Rsyasrnga, the king performs a pair of 
sacrifices, as a consequence of which four splendid sons are born to him by 
his three principal wives. These sons, Rama, Bharata, Laksmana, and 
Satrughna, we are given to understand, are infused with varying portions of 
the essence of the Supreme Lord Visnu, who, in response to a plea from the 
gods, has agreed to be born as a man in order to destroy a violent and 
otherwise invincible demon, the powerful king of the raksasas, Ravana. To 
assist him in this vital mission, the vedic gods also incarnate themselves in 
the form of immensely powerful monkeys, gifted with human speech and 
able to take on any form at will. The mighty ten-headed raksasa has long 
been oppressing and assaulting the gods and holy sages with impunity, for, 
by virtue of a boon that he has received through his austerities from Lord 
Brahma, he is invulnerable to all supernatural beings. This last point is 
critical to our understanding of Valmiki’s version of the Rama story and it 
is why, unlike in many later, more floridly devotional versions of the tale, 
Visnu must not only take on the appearance of a man to accomplish his 
mission but also remain essentially ignorant of his own true, divine nature, 
so as not to violate Brahma’s boon. 

DaSaratha’s sons pass a pleasant and uneventful childhood, which the 
poet glosses over in a few brief couplets. There we learn that the four 
brothers basically divide themselves into two pairs, the foremost being 
Rama and Laksmana, with Bharata and Satrughna forming a somewhat 
secondary pair. In each pair, the older brother is dominant while the 
younger functions largely as a sort of esquire, as it were, to his elder. 


One day, however, when the princes are still mere adolescents, the 
powerful and irascible sage Visvamitra arrives at court and asks the king to 
lend him his eldest and favorite son, Rama, for the task of destroying a pair 
of demons, the raksasas Marica and Subahu, who have been harassing his 
ashram and disrupting his vedic sacrifices. With great reluctance, and only 
out of fear of the sage’s curse, the doting king permits Rama to go. Then, 
accompanied by the sage and his inseparable companion, his younger 
brother Laksmana, the prince sets out for the sage’s ashram. On their 
journey, Rama is told—in response to his questions—a number of stories 
from Indian mythology that are associated with the sites through which the 
party passes. At one point, on the orders of the sage, Rama somewhat 
hesitantly kills a terrifying raksasa woman (raksasi) named Tataka and, as 
a reward for his valor, receives from the sage a set of supernatural weapon- 
spells. At last the princes reach the hermitage of Visvamitra, where, with his 
newly acquired weapons, Rama puts an end to the sages’ harassment by the 
raksasas, killing one and hurling the other, stunned, to a great distance. 

But it turns out that Visvamitra has another plan in mind for his protégé. 
Rather than returning directly to Ayodhya, he takes the brothers along with 
him to the city of Mithila, where Janaka, the king of the country of Videha, 
is said to be in possession of a massive and mighty bow that had once 
belonged to the great god Lord Siva. No earthly prince has ever been able to 
wield or even lift this divine weapon, and the king has set this feat as the 
bride-price for the hand of his beautiful foster daughter, Sita, the daughter 
of the earth goddess. After arriving at Mithila, Rama easily lifts the bow 
and breaks it with a thunderous crash. Marriages are then arranged between 
the sons of Dasaratha and the daughters and nieces of Janaka. Prior to the 
ceremonies, the text provides a fifteen-chapter, well-known mini-saga of the 
early career of ViSvamitra, his rivalry with the sage Vasistha, and his 
accomplishment, through long and fierce austerities, of the all-but- 
impossible feat of transforming himself from a kshatriya king into a 
brahman-seer. 

The weddings are celebrated at Mithila with great festivity, and the 
wedding party returns to Ayodhya. On the way, Rama meets and faces 
down the fierce warrior-brahman, Rama Jamadagnya (Parasurama), the 
legendary nemesis of the warrior class who, like Rama himself, is regarded 
as an avatara of Lord Visnu. At last the brothers and their brides settle in 


Ayodhya, where they live in peace and contentment. The kanda thus serves 
as a sort of bildungsroman of the epic hero, outlining his education into 
traditional lore, his initiation into the secrets of supernatural weaponry, his 
boyhood feats, and his marriage. 


The Ayodhyakanda 


The second book of the epic is set, as the name suggests, mostly in the city 
of Ayodhya. Here we find that, in the absence of Prince Bharata, who is 
away on a visit to his maternal family, DaSaratha has decided to retire from 
the kingship and consecrate Rama as prince regent in his stead. The 
announcement of Rama’s impending consecration is greeted with general 
rejoicing, and elaborate preparations for the ceremony are begun. On the 
eve of the auspicious event, however, Kaikeyi, the middlemost of the king’s 
three wives and his favorite, is roused to a fit of jealousy and resentment by 
her maidservant, Manthara, under whose guidance she claims two boons 
that the king had once granted her long ago but never fulfilled. In his 
infatuation for the beautiful Kaikey1, and constrained by his rigid devotion 
to his given word, the king, although heartbroken, accedes to her demands 
and orders Rama exiled to the wilderness for fourteen years while allowing 
the succession to pass from him to Kaikeyi’s son, Bharata. 

Despite the rebellious rage of his loyal brother Laksmana, Rama, 
exhibiting the stoicism, adherence to righteousness, and filial devotion for 
which he is widely revered, expresses no distress upon hearing of this 
stroke of malign fate and prepares immediately to carry out his father’s 
orders. Sita resists Rama’s initial instructions to remain behind in the capital 
and vows to follow him into hardship and exile. Rama gives away all of his 
personal wealth and, donning the garb of a forest ascetic, departs for the 
wilderness, accompanied only by his faithful wife, Sita, and his devoted 
brother, Laksmana. The entire population of the city is consumed with grief 
for the exiled prince, and the king, his cherished hopes for R&ama’s 
consecration shattered and his beloved son banished by his own hand, dies 
of a broken heart. 

Messengers are dispatched to summon Bharata back from his lengthy 
stay at the court of his uncle in Rajagrha. But the prince indignantly refuses 
to profit by the scheming of Manthara and his mother. He rejects the throne 


and instead proceeds with a grand entourage to the forest in an effort to 
persuade Rama to return and rule. But Rama, determined to carry out the 
order of his father to the letter, refuses to return before the end of the 
fourteen-year period set for his exile. The brothers reach an impasse that is 
resolved only when Bharata agrees to govern as regent in Rama’s name. In 
token of Rama’s sovereignty, Bharata takes his brother’s sandals to set on 
the throne in his stead. He vows to remain outside the capital until Rama’s 
return and to serve as regent from a village near the capital. Rama, Sita, and 
Laksmana then abandon their pleasant mountaintop dwelling as being too 
close to the city and move south into the wild and raksasa-infested 
Dandaka forest. 

The Ayodhyakdanda is noteworthy in a number of respects. For one thing, 
it raises ethical questions about the actions of the old king DaSaratha. For, 
although he is portrayed as the model of a righteous king, it appears that, as 
hinted at in the opening of the book and, in fact, confirmed near its end by 
Rama himself, the king had once promised the royal succession to 
Kaikeyi’s son as a prenuptial agreement. Moreover, it shows the king as 
subordinating his royal duty to his infatuation for the beautiful junior queen 
in his efforts to placate her even before she mentions the matter of his two 
unfulfilled boons. In this way, it constructs the old king as a kind of foil for 
Rama and helps us understand the hard choices the latter will later make in 
service of his ideal of righteous kingship. In addition, the book gives us a 
certain insight into how the author understood the gendered politics of the 
royal women’s quarters as Manthara explains to the naive and malleable 
Kaikeyt how her status as the king’s favorite will come to haunt her should 
her rival Kausalya become queen mother upon the consecration of Rama. 


The Aranyakanda 


The epic’s third book recounts the dramatic events that occur during the 
long years of Rama’s exile in the forest (aranya). The prince and his two 
companions have now pushed on into the Dandaka forest, a wilderness 
peopled only by pious ascetics and fierce raksasas. The former appeal to 
Rama to protect them from the depredations of the latter, and he promises to 
do so. Near the beginning of the book, Sita is briefly carried off by a 


raksasa called Viradha in an episode that prefigures her later abduction by 
Ravana, the central event of the book and the pivotal episode of the epic. 

While the three are dwelling peacefully in the lovely woodlands of 
Pancavati, they are visited by a rdksasa woman, Sirpanakha, the sister of 
the raksasa lord, Ravana. She attempts to seduce first Rama and then 
Laksmana, but failing in this, she tries to kill Sita. The raksasa woman is 
stopped by Laksmana, who, acting on his elder’s orders, mutilates her. She 
runs shrieking to one of her kinsmen, the powerful raksasa Khara, who 
sends a small punitive expedition of fourteen fierce rdksasas against the 
princes. When Rama annihilates them, Khara himself comes at the head of 
a large army of fourteen thousand terrible raksasas, but the hero once more 
exterminates his attackers. When these tidings come to the ears of Ravana, 
he resolves to destroy Rama by carrying off Sita. Enlisting the aid of the 
rdksasa Marica, the raksasa whom Rama had stunned during the 
Badlakanda battle at ViSvamitra’s ashram, the demon king comes to the 
Pancavati forest. There Marica, using the rdksasas’ power of shape- 
shifting, assumes the form of a beautiful golden deer, in order to captivate 
Sita’s fancy and lure Rama far off into the woods in an effort to catch it for 
her. Finally, struck by Rama’s arrow, the dying rdksasa imitates Rama’s 
voice and cries out as if in peril. At Sita’s panicky urging, Laksmana, 
disobeying Rama’s strict orders to guard her, leaves her alone and follows 
him into the woods. 

In the brothers’ absence, Ravana, assuming the guise of a pious brahman 
mendicant, approaches Sita and, after some increasingly inappropriate 
sexual comments, carries her off by force. Dasaratha’s old friend, the 
vulture Jatayus, attempts to save her, but after a fierce aerial battle, he falls, 
mortally wounded. Sita is carried off to Ravana’s island fortress of Lanka 
where she is kept under a heavy guard of fierce and bloodthirsty raksasa 
women. 

Meanwhile, upon discovering the loss of Sita, Rama laments wildly and, 
maddened by grief, wanders through the forest, vainly searching for her and 
threatening the plants and animals if they do not return her to him. At 
length, pacified by Laksmana, and, after meeting several beings who have 
been cursed to become rdksasas, he is directed to the monkey prince 
Sugriva at Lake Pampa. This brings the Aranyakanda to a close. 


In addition to its narrative centrality, the Aranyakdnda, like the 
Kiskindhakanda that follows it, has a number of passages of great poetic 
beauty in which the seasonal changes in the forest are described. Further, as 
has been noted by several scholars, it differs sharply from the preceding 
book in leaving the relatively realistic world of political intrigue in 
Ayodhya for an enchanted forest of talking birds, flying monkeys, and 
fearsome rdksasas with magical powers. 


The Kiskindhakanda 


The fourth book of the epic is set largely in and around the monkey 
(vanara) citadel of Kiskindha and continues the somewhat fairy-tale-like 
atmosphere of the preceding book. Searching in the forest for Sita, Rama 
and Laksmana meet the son of the wind god, Hanuman, the greatest of 
monkey heroes and an adherent of Sugriva, the banished pretender to the 
throne of Kiskindha. Upon meeting Rama, Sugriva tells him a curious tale 
of his rivalry and conflict with his elder brother, the monkey king Valin, 
and his own banishment by the latter. He and Rama conclude a pact 
according to which the latter is to help the former kill the more powerful 
Valin and take both his throne and his queen. In return for this, Sugriva 
agrees to aid Rama in his search for the abducted princess. 

Accordingly, Rama shoots Valin from ambush while the latter is 
engaged in hand-to-hand combat with Sugriva. Finally, after much delay, 
procrastination, and threats from Rama and Laksmana, Sugriva musters his 
monkey warriors and sends them out in the four directions to scour the earth 
in search of Sita. The southern expedition, under the leadership of V4lin’s 
son, Angada, and Hanuman, has several strange adventures, including a 
sojourn in an enchanted underground realm. Finally, having failed in their 
quest, the southern party is ashamed and fearful of returning to Sugriva 
empty-handed. They resolve to fast to death but are rescued from this fate 
by the appearance of the aged vulture Sampati, elder brother of the slain 
vulture Jatayus, who tells them of Sita’s confinement across the sea in 
Lanka. The monkeys discuss what is to be done, and in the end, Hanuman, 
the only monkey powerful enough to leap across the ocean, volunteers to do 
so in search of the princess. 


The book has given rise to a continuing controversy within the receptive 
community of the Ramayana, in that the tradition has expressed ambivalent 
feelings about the way Rama killed Valin from ambush while the monkey 
was engaged in a hand-to-hand battle with his brother Sugriva. The issue is 
first argued out between the hero and the dying monkey in the text itself and 
continues to this day to be discussed in ephemeral texts on the epic in one 
or another of its variants and in questions during religious discourses on the 
story. It also serves to move the ethical and moral register of the narrative 
from the generally strictly dharmic, or righteous, kingdom of Kosala to the 
rather more louche world of the monkey kingdom of Kiskindha, with its 
fratricidal violence and sensual excess. 


The Sundarakanda 


The fifth book of the poem is called, for reasons that are not wholly clear, 
the Sundarakdnda, “The Beautiful Book,’® and it is centrally concerned 
with a detailed, vivid, violent, and often amusing account of Hanuman’s 
adventures in the splendid fortress city of the island Lanka. 

After a heroic and eventful leap across the ocean, Hanuman arrives on 
the shores of Lanka. There he explores the rdksasas’ city and spies on 
Ravana. The poet’s descriptions of the city and the rdksasa king are colorful 
and often finely written, as is his description of the forlorn Sita in captivity. 
Held captive in a grove of asoka trees, Sita is alternately cajoled and 
threatened by Ravana and the radksasa women who guard her. When 
Hanuman at last finds the despondent princess, he comforts her, giving her 
Rama’s signet ring, which Rama had bestowed upon him to serve as a token 
of his bona fides. He offers to carry Sita back to Rama, but she refuses, 
reluctant to allow herself to be willingly touched by a male other than her 
husband, and argues that Rama must come himself to avenge the insult of 
her abduction. 

Hanuman then wreaks havoc in Lanka, destroying groves and buildings 
and killing many servants and soldiers of the king. At last, he allows 
himself to be captured by Indrajit, Ravana’s fearsome son, and is brought 
before Ravana. After an interview during which he reviles the king, he is 
condemned and his tail is set afire. But the monkey escapes his bonds and, 
leaping from rooftop to rooftop, sets fire to the city with his tail, ensuring 


that the conflagration spares both him and Sita. Finally, the mighty monkey 
leaps back to the mainland and rejoins his companions. Together they make 
their way back to Kiskindha, drunkenly raiding on the way a grove 
belonging to Sugriva. Hanuman reports his adventures and the success of 
his mission to Rama and Sugriva. 

The Sundarakdnda is considered by many to be the bija, “seed’”—or, as 
we might say, the heart—of the epic poem. This is probably because it is in 
this book that the tragic trajectory of the narrative begins to reverse itself 
with Hanuman’s discovery of the abducted heroine and her renewed hope of 
rescue and reunion with her husband. Thus, ritualized formal recitations 
(parayana) of the complete text of the Valmiki Ramayana are traditionally 
begun with this book and not the first one, the Balakanda. In some Hindu 
communities for which the work is a central scripture, the book is used as a 
prognosticative text, somewhat in the manner of the J Ching, and its 
recitation is believed to help in the solution of many worldly problems. For 
this reason, the book is often printed and sold separately from the epic as a 
whole, like the Bhagavadgita of the Mahabharata. 


The Yuddhakanda 


As its name suggests, the sixth book of the poem, the Yuddhakdanda, “The 
Book of War,” is chiefly concerned with the war that takes place before the 
walls of Lanka between the forces of Rama, his monkey allies, and a few 
defector rdksasas on one side, and the rdksasa hordes of Ravana on the 
other. The book contains elaborate descriptions of the monkey (vdnara) 
forces and many detailed accounts of both single combats and mass melees 
between the various leading warriors and their troops. As a result, it is the 
longest of the poem’s seven kdndas and nearly twice the size of the next- 
longest. 

Having received Hanuman’s report on Sita and the military defenses of 
Lanka, Rama and Laksmana march with their simian allies to the southern 
coast of India. There they are joined by Ravana’s renegade brother 
Vibhisana, who, repelled by his brother’s outrageous abduction of Sita and 
unable to reason with him, has defected, with a handful of retainers, to the 
side of his enemies. He is accepted as an ally by Rama and provides him 
with vital intelligence and assistance throughout the war. 


Under the direction of their engineer Nala, the son of the divine 
architect, Visvakarman, the monkeys construct a bridge across the ocean by 
means of which the princes and their army cross over to Lanka and lay 
siege to the city. A protracted and bloody, though far from realistic, series of 
battles rage, with the advantage shifting from one side to the other. After an 
initial encounter with Rama, Ravana is humiliatingly dismissed by his foe 
and withdraws from the battlefield for a time. He then dispatches, one after 
another, his foremost warriors, each of whom is killed in turn by Rama or 
his allies. Noteworthy among these are his gargantuan and narcoleptic 
brother Kumbhakarna and his terrifying son Ravani Indrajit, who is both a 
mighty warrior and a fearsome sorcerer. Finally, all his champions slain, 
Ravana rides forth to battle and, after a mighty and prolonged duel, Rama 
finally kills him. Rama then installs Vibhisana on the throne of Lanka and 
sends for Sita. But Rama initially expresses no joy in recovering her. 
Instead, he abuses her verbally and refuses to take her back on the grounds 
that she has lived in the house of another man. Only when the princess is 
proved innocent of any unfaithfulness by submitting herself to a public 
ordeal by fire does the prince accept her. 

At last, his enemy slain, his wife recovered, and his fourteen years of 
exile passed, Rama returns home in Vibhisana’s flying palace, the Puspaka. 
Upon his return to Ayodhya, Rama relieves Bharata, who had been 
administering the kingdom as an ascetic during his absence, and celebrates 
his long-delayed royal consecration, inaugurating a millennia-long utopian 
reign, the famous Ramardjya. In many later influential versions of the 
Ramayana, the tale ends here, leaving it with a “happily ever after” ending. 
But this is far from the case in Valmiki’s poem. 


The Uttarakanda 


The seventh and final book of Valmiki’s Ramdyana, entitled simply the 
Uttarakanda, “The Last Book,’® is more heterogeneous in its contents and 
controversial in its reception than any of the epic’s other six books. Of the 
nature of an extensive epilogue, it contains three general categories of 
narrative material. The first category includes legends that provide the 
background, origins, and early careers of some of the outstanding and 
endlessly fascinating characters in the epic drama whose antecedents were 


not fully described in the first six books. Interestingly, nearly the entire first 
half of the book is devoted to a lengthy account of the history and 
genealogy of the rdksasas and the early career of Ravana and, to a much 
smaller extent, to an account of the childhood deeds of Hanuman. In this 
section many of the events of the central portion of the epic story are 
explained as having had their roots in encounters and curses in the distant 
past during Ravana’s wild career of rape, conquest, and carnage. 

The bulk of this portion of the text concerns Ravana’s birth and early 
years and his many campaigns of world conquest, during which he defeats 
and assaults many kings, gods, sages, and demons and rapes and abducts 
their womenfolk. Some of the curses he incurs during his wild and violent 
rampage through the three worlds serve to explain a number of conditions 
that face him later on, during the lifetime of Rama. First, he is cursed 
prenatally by his own father to be an evildoer. Subsequently Vedavati, a 
brahman woman whom he molests, immolates herself, vowing to be reborn 
one day (as Sita) for his destruction. After he rapes a semidivine woman, 
her lover curses him to die should he ever again take a woman by force. 
Similarly, he is cursed by the collectivity of the many women he has 
abducted to meet his death on account of a woman, and he is cursed by a 
king of the lineage of the Iksvakus—whom he kills—to be himself slain by 
a future prince (Rama) of that lineage. Even the destruction of Ravana’s 
hosts by powerful, semidivine monkeys 1s explained by a curse on the part 
of Lord Siva’s attendant Nandin, who, enraged at Ravana for mocking him 
in his simian form, curses him to that effect. 

But despite his boon from Brahma and his long string of conquests, the 
narrative shows that no one is ultimately invulnerable. The biography of the 
seemingly invincible raksasa ends with two accounts of battles in which he 
emerges as the loser: he is defeated and captured first by the mighty 
thousand-armed human king Arjuna K€artavirya and then also defeated by 
the powerful monkey king Valin. These episodes, narrated by the sage 
Agastya, serve to show that even the mightiest can meet their match and to 
foreshadow Ravana’s ultimate defeat at the hands of a “mere man,” Rama. 
This is all in keeping with Valmiki’s adherence to the boon of Brahma 
according to which the rdksasa king would be invulnerable to all 
supernatural beings, but not to humans or animals. 


The second category of the Uttarakdnda’s narrative material consists of 
a series of exemplary myths and legends that are only thematically related 
to the epic story and its characters. This material is largely made up of 
cautionary tales told to or by Rama to illustrate the dire consequences that 
befall monarchs who fail to strictly uphold the duties of kingship. They are 
placed in the text at the points, as we discuss later, where Rama has become 
prey to dejection after feeling obligated by kingly duty to exile his beloved 
wife, where he is contemplating a sacrifice, and when he visits the ashram 
of the sage Agastya. These episodes also generally serve to bolster the 
poem’s reputation as a textbook on rdjadharma, “royal duty,”’—a kind of 
mirror for kings that presents its hero as the model of the ideal monarch. 

The last, and in several ways the most interesting, category of material in 
the Uttarakanda directly concerns itself with episodes from the final years 
of Rama, his wife, and his brothers. These episodes are interspersed among 
the largely cautionary tales of the second category mentioned earlier. With 
struggle, adversity, and sorrow seemingly behind him, Rama settles down 
with Sita to rule in peace, prosperity, and happiness. We see what looks to 
be the perfect end to a fairy tale or romance as Rama and his queen begin 
their long-delayed rule of their utopian kingdom—the legendary, eleven- 
thousand-year Rdadmardjya. But as it develops, there is yet trouble in 
paradise, and the joy of the hero and heroine 1s to be tragically brief. 

After dismissing his allies in the Lankan war with due honors and gifts, 
Rama, to his delight, learns that his beloved Sita is pregnant. But now it 
suddenly comes to his attention that, despite her fire ordeal in Lanka, the 
people of Ayodhya are grumbling that the king is corrupt in that, in his lust 
for the beautiful queen, he has taken back into his house a woman who has 
lived in the household of the lecherous Ravana. They fear that, since a king 
sets the moral standard for his kingdom, they too will have to put up with 
misbehavior on the part of their own wives. 

Fearing a scandal, and in strict conformity to what he sees as the stern 
duty of a sovereign, Rama, under the pretext of an excursion, banishes the 
queen despite her pregnancy and though he knows the spreading rumors 
about her are false. Abandoned in the wilderness by Laksmana, the hapless 
queen is taken in and sheltered in his ashram by none other than the poet- 
seer Valmiki. There she gives birth to twin sons, Lava and Kusa, who will 
become the sage’s disciples and the bards who will perform their master’s 


poetic creation, the Ramdyana. Rama’s separation from his beloved wife 
casts him into deep grief and depression, which are alleviated only through 
the hearing and telling of cautionary tales about the terrible fate of kings 
who neglect their royal duties. 

During Rama’s otherwise ideal reign, two anomalous but significant 
events occur. First, in a kind of mini-reprise of the central theme of the epic, 
Rama receives a delegation of sages from the region of the Yamuna River, 
who have come to complain about the depredations of a terrible and 
monstrous demon called Lavana. Rama deputes his youngest brother, 
Satrughna, who has heretofore had almost no active role in the epic, to deal 
with this assault on dharma, “righteousness.” Satrughna sets forth and, on 
his journey, stays over one night in the ashram of Valmitki—the very night 
when Sita gives birth to Lava and KuSa. He then proceeds to the Yamuna, 
where, after a fierce battle, he dispatches the monster and founds the 
prosperous city of Madhura (Mathura) in the region of Saurastra, where he 
rules as a virtuous king. After twelve years, longing to see his beloved elder 
brother, he returns to Ayodhya with his army, once more staying overnight 
at Valmitki’s ashram. During this brief visit, he and his troops hear the 
Ramayana beautifully sung by the twin bards. Although Satrughna is eager 
to remain at his brother’s side, in keeping with the tenor of the book as a 
guide for kings, Rama sternly orders him to return to his kingdom to govern 
his people righteously. 

Shortly after Satrughna’s departure, there is another troubling incident, 
this time in the capital city itself. A grieving brahman father arrives at 
Rama’s palace holding in his arms the body of his young son. This is 
particularly troubling as, according to the tradition—stated multiple times 
in the epic, and continuing to be a fundamental element of the legacy of the 
Ramdyana—the long period of Rama’s millennial reign was a true utopia. 
Thus, all classes of people strictly observed their proper societal duties, 
wives always obeyed their husbands, and there was no crime, no disease, 
and no natural disasters. One point that is stressed repeatedly is that in this 
paradisiac kingdom, no child ever predeceased its parents. In such a world, 
the fact that an unthinkable thing—the death of the brahman child—has 
occurred can only mean that some violation of the social and ritual order is 
taking place and that it is the responsibility of the king to remedy it. Rama 
must therefore find and punish the transgressor. In this he is advised by 


Narada, the same seer who first told Valmiki the story of Rama. Narada 
tells the king that somewhere in his realm a s“#dra—that is, a member of the 
lowest of the four traditional social classes of brahmanical society—is 
practicing religious austerities that are exclusively reserved (during that 
cosmic era, the Treta Yuga) for the members of the three higher social 
classes, the so-called “twice-born.” 

Rama summons and mounts the Puspaka, the flying palace he had 
received from Vibhisana, and conducts an aerial surveillance of his 
kingdom. Near the southern border he finds a man hanging from a tree by 
his feet. Questioned, the man says that he is practicing austerities with the 
aim of entering heaven in his earthly body. When he identifies himself as 
Sambika, a sadra, Rama summarily beheads him. The moment the sidra 
dies, the dead brahman child miraculously returns to life in Ayodhya. The 
gods praise Rama and shower him with heavenly blossoms. 

Rama then pays a brief visit to the ashram of the great sage Agastya, 
who had narrated the history of the raksasas, Ravana, and Hanuman earlier 
in the book. There Rama hears a series of additional cautionary tales about 
kings and kingdoms that suffered ghastly punishments for failure to live up 
to the code of royal conduct. Rama then returns to Ayodhya. Having had a 
golden image of his banished wife created to serve as her surrogate in the 
performance of the royal sacrifices, Rama performs a great asvamedha, 
“horse sacrifice.” 

During the rite, two handsome young bards appear and begin to recite 
the Ramayana. It turns out that these two, the twins Kusa and Lava, are in 
fact the sons of Rama and Sita, who have been sheltered for twelve years 
with their mother in Valmiki’s ashram. Rama sends for his beloved queen, 
intending to take her back. But despite Valmiki’s attestation of her absolute 
fidelity, Rama demands that Sita take a solemn public oath before the 
assembled populace. She complies, but declares that if she has indeed been 
faithful to her husband in word, thought, and deed, Madhavi, the earth 
goddess, her mother, should receive her. As the ground opens, the goddess 
emerges on a bejeweled throne, places her long-suffering daughter beside 
her, and vanishes into the earth. 

Consumed by an inconsolable grief, Rama performs sacrifices and rules 
for many years and sends his brothers out to conquer kingdoms for their 
sons. At last, urged by a messenger of the gods to resume his true heavenly 


form as Lord Visnu, he is forced to banish Laksmana, who abandons his 
earthly body in the Sarayii River. Rama then divides his own kingdom 
between his sons and, followed by the inhabitants of Ayodhya and most of 
his erstwhile allies, enters the waters of the Sarayii and returns to his 
heavenly abode. These events bring to a close both the book and the epic. 

There are some features of the Uttarakanda that set it apart from the 
other books of the poem. For one thing, much of the narrative focuses on 
figures other than Rama and is narrated only indirectly by Valmiki, being 
placed in the mouths of other figures such as Agastya. Scholars of the 
Ramayana have also noted that much of the text shows linguistic and 
rhetorical differences from the rest of the poem, especially books 2 through 
6, while some have even argued that the entire book is a later addition to the 
work and that the “original” poem ended with the Yuddhakdanda and the 
consecration of Rama. This is a complex issue, and we will not go into the 
details of the arguments here.!° 

The philological issue aside, there is another reason that the book has 
been the object of controversy: virtually the only two actions that Rama is 
represented as taking in the book have come to be matters of concern and 
contestation over the long history of the poem among particular segments of 
its audience, characterized by region, social class, religion, and gender. The 
first of these is the banishment of Sita despite her innocence with regard to 
any infidelity or wrongdoing; Sita’s banishment and her fire ordeal at the 
end of the Yuddhakanda have been sources of discomfort for many later 
authors writing on the Ramayana theme, and an object of outrage on the 
part of modern feminists and women’s rights groups. The second issue is 
Rama’s cold-blooded execution of the sadra ascetic Sambika, which has 
drawn veiled critique from poets and playwrights in the Ramayana tradition 
and, of course, the anger of modern Dalit rights activists and progressive 
political groups. These responses are in harmony with social and political 
pushback against the Radmdyana as a whole by such regional political 
movements as the Dravidian movement in South India, especially in Tamil 
Nadu. 

As a result of all this, many influential regional language versions of the 
Rama story simply eliminate the Uttarakanda entirely, while even some 
modern translators similarly excise the book, either on philological grounds, 
in light of the textual issues noted here, or, in the case of some Hindu 


devotees of Rama, in their discomfort with the two episodes mentioned here 
and the criticism they have engendered.!! 


The Major Characters of the Ramayana 


Unlike the vast Mahabharata with its large cast of ambivalent and 
intimately related characters, its theme of an ugly intrafamilial civil war, 
and its complex framing of moral and ethical ambiguities, the Ramdyana is 
a shorter, simpler tale constructed around a sharply defined binary of 
dharma, “good,” and adharma, “evil.” Correspondingly, its major 
characters tend to be drawn as paradigmatic examples of one or the other of 
this pair of opposites and are often clearly intended to serve as models for 
behavior that its audiences are urged either to emulate or eschew. Ignoring 
for the moment issues of social class, which we discuss later, the qualities 
of ethical and moral behavior and the culture’s prized virtues of familial 
solidarity, discipline, and control of the senses are broadly shown—with 
some notable exceptions—as possessed differentially by the three species of 
figures who collectively make up the bulk of the epic’s dramatis personae. 
These are the humans, the animals, and the demons. In this way, one might 
regard the story of the Ramayana as something like “A Tale of Three Cities: 
Ayodhya, Kiskindha, and Lanka.” Let us briefly examine the principal 
figures belonging to these species—both those who serve as exemplary of 
their kind and those who go against their supposedly innate natures. 


The Humans 

Rama 

As the title of the poem suggests, Rama is unquestionably the central and 
most compelling of the epic’s characters. With the exception of his early 
childhood, the narrative closely documents his life from birth to death. He 
is “on stage,” as it were, playing a significant role in the action of all of the 
epic’s books, with the exception of the Sundarakanda. But even there, 
much of the book’s discourse centers on him. The entire work 1s filled with 
passages praising his physical, mental, and emotional qualities; his virtually 
perfect adherence to the norms of filial piety, the warrior code 
(ksatriyadharma), and the duties of a king (rajadharma); and his 
compassion and deference to brahmans and elders. In short, with the 


exception of what are regarded in some quarters as a few ethically 
controversial episodes involving his treatment of his wife, his killing of the 
monkey king Valin, and his execution of Sambiika, Rama is held up as a 
paragon of virtue, both for Valmiki and for his audiences down to the 
present day. He is, of course, one of the principal incarnations of Lord 
Visnu, the Supreme Being, who in age after age comes to earth to rid the 
world of some enormous evil. But on the human plane—the one on which 
we, as fellow humans, are supposed to emulate him—he is chiefly admired 
for his disciplined act of self-sacrifice in cheerfully abandoning his right to 
his ancestral throne in order to preserve the truth of his father’s word. His 
forbearance and adherence to the rules of chivalry are also evident in his 
strict adherence to the rules of combat even in the face of defeat and death, 
as well as in his willingness to spare even his monstrous archenemy, should 
the latter abandon his evil ways. 

Rama is rather unusual, however, when compared with the other 
principal incarnations of Lord Visnu, most of whom appear on earth for one 
brief moment to accomplish a single critical mission, such as the rescue of 
the gods, the salvation of the earth, or the salvation of the virtuous through 
the destruction of an evil tyrant. Once they have completed their respective 
missions, they return to their primordial divine form. Among the well- 
known standard list of the ten incarnations (dasdavataras), only Krsna, the 
Buddha, and the two Ramas (Rama of the Ramdyana and Rama 
Jamadagnya, or ParaSurama) remain for very long periods on earth. Of the 
two most popular and widely worshiped incarnations, Rama and Krsna, the 
latter, having accomplished his two avataric missions of killing the demonic 
tyrant Kamsa and relieving the earth of its burden of demons and demonic 
kings—as described in the Mahabharata, the Harivamsa, and many 
puranas—treturns to his heavenly form only a few decades thereafter.!” 
Rama, on the other hand, having extracted, as it were, the /okakantaka, “the 
thorn of the world,” Ravana, then inaugurates and rules a millennia-long 
kingdom of God on earth. 
sita 
There can be no doubt that Sita, the heroine of the Ramayana, is its most 
poignant and long-suffering figure. As a consequence of her long years of 
generally uncomplaining hardship, captivity, suffering, and heartbreak, her 


journey has captivated audiences from the moment of the epic’s earliest 
circulation. Indeed, in terms of her centrality to the narrative, even when 
she 1s not the direct focus of the poet’s attention, her wrenching reversals of 
fortune and her great fortitude under terrible duress make her one of the 
literature’s most compelling figures. These are doubtless the reasons, as 
noted earlier, that the author proposed The Great Tale of Sita (sitayas 
caritam mahat) as a possible alternative title of his work. 

Rescued from a ploughed furrow (sita) as a foundling by King Janaka of 
Videha, Sita grows to be the most beautiful princess in the land, one so 
extraordinary that only the mightiest and most valorous of princes can win 
her hand through a test of superhuman strength. Of note is that Sita’s 
prehistory is mentioned only in the Uttarakanda. There we are told that she 
is the reincarnation of the pious brahman woman Vedavati, who, in the long 
ago Krta Yuga, was sexually molested by Ravana and who, to preserve her 
honor, immolated herself, vowing to be reborn as the daughter of a virtuous 
man but not from a human womb. Vedavatt is ultimately reborn in the Treta 
Yuga as Sita for the destruction of Ravana, who had violated her. 

Valmiki’s Sita is not quite as passive and submissive as she is often 
thought to be in the popular imagination. She can be strongly outspoken, as, 
for example, when she sharply criticizes Rama, who, upon being banished 
by his father, tries to persuade her to stay behind in Ayodhya, and also when 
she is treated harshly either by him or by Ravana. Nonetheless, as a result 
of her long and patient endurance of the many hardships she faces—and 
especially her widely applauded and rather fierce insistence on 
accompanying her exiled husband into fourteen years of poverty and harsh 
conditions in the forest despite Rama’s initial resistance to her doing so— 
Sita has come to be regarded as the model of ideal Indian wifely conduct, a 
pativrata, a woman completely devoted to following her husband no matter 
what fate may allot him. 


Laksmana 

One of the twin sons of King Dasaratha’s junior-most wife, Sumitra, 
Laksmana has long stood as a prime exemplar of a particular type of 
idealized behavior that is expected of a younger brother with regard to his 
elder. From childhood onward, he serves as Rama’s inseparable companion. 
In fact, it appears that his relation to his elder as a kind of esquire is 


mirrored in the relationship of his much less foregrounded twin, Satrughna, 
to the second eldest of the four brothers and co-avatdras, Bharata. Valmiki 
describes Laksmana as “a second life breath” outside Rama’s body and 
observes that without him by his side Rama could neither sleep nor eat.' 

Thus, it is virtually axiomatic that Laksmana will accompany and assist 
Rama in his long exile and in the hard-fought battles with the raksasas 
where he distinguishes himself as a formidable warrior, slaying the most 
dangerous and fearsome of their demonic foes, Ravani Indrajit, Ravana’s 
son. It is particularly noteworthy that his devoted service to Rama and Sita 
is highlighted by the southern textual tradition’s emphasis on his dogged 
refusal to gaze on the body of his sister-in-law, as demonstrated several 
times by his asseveration that during all their long years of living closely 
together he has never raised his eyes above Sita’s feet.'+ 

R&ama’s powerful emotional bond with Laksmana is made apparent in the 
epic by the depictions of his extravagant grief when he believes that his 
brother has been mortally wounded in battle. In the end, Laksmana 
sacrifices his life for the well-being of his beloved brother and the salvation 
of his family, becoming the only one of Rama’s brothers to precede him in 
returning to their common divine source, Lord Visnu. 

Laksmana also serves as a kind of emotional foil for his brother, showing 
a fiery and rebellious spirit where Rama is calm and self-controlled, and 
acting as a calming and encouraging influence on those few occasions when 
his brother gives way to rage or despair. 


Bharata 

The son of DaSaratha’s favorite, his middle wife, Kaikeyi, Bharata presents 
another aspect of the idealized younger brother. The natural rival of his 
brother and the intended beneficiary of the scheme of Kaikeyi and her maid 
Manthara to make him prince regent in place of Rama, Bharata refuses to 
accept his consecration. Instead, he implores Rama to return and rule 
despite the reluctant command of their father. When Rama denies his 
request, Bharata vows to serve only as regent in his brother’s name. He 
places Rama’s sandals on the throne as a symbol of his brother’s authority 
and lives an extremely ascetic life outside the capital during the fourteen 
years of Rama’s exile. In so doing, he serves as a model of both Rama’s 
self-sacrifice and Laksmana’s fraternal devotion. 


Satrughna 

The youngest of the four sons of Dasaratha who incarnate, to differing 
degrees, the divine essence of Lord Visnu, Satrughna has only a relatively 
minimal role in the epic drama. In his devotion to his older brother Bharata 
and in the way he serves as that brother’s emotional foil, he mirrors the 
relationship of his twin, Laksmana, to Rama. This is evident when, 
returning to Ayodhya with his brother to find his father dead and Rama 
exiled as a result of the plot of Manthara and Kaikeyi, Satrughna physically 
assaults the maidservant until Bharata orders him to desist, reminding him 
of Rama’s disapproval of such conduct. Satrughna’s only significant, 
independent action in the poem is his slaying of the demon Lavana and the 
founding of the city of Madhura, as described in the poem’s final book, the 
Uttarakdanda. 


DaSaratha 

Although Dasaratha is depicted in the opening chapters of the poem as a 
grand and righteous monarch, in its second book the aged king is shown to 
have a fatal flaw. There we see that his sexual infatuation for his beautiful 
junior queen, Kaikeyi, makes him vulnerable to her wiles, so that even 
before she mentions the famous boons he once gave her, he vows to do 
anything she wants, no matter how outrageous, in order to pacify her. Later 
in the same book, we learn from the lips of Rama himself that the king had 
actually promised the royal succession to a son of Kaikeyi as part of a 
prenuptial agreement with her father. This is a promise that he breaks in 
order to consecrate Rama while Bharata is away from the capital. 

In this way, DaSaratha serves as a foil for his ultra-righteous eldest son 
Rama, and the old king’s flaws may be seen as explaining the latter’s almost 
obsessive concern with maintaining his reputation for incorruptibility, 
which leads to his harsh treatment of Sita in the Yuddha- and Uttarakandas. 


Kausalya 

Kausalya, Dasaratha’s chief queen and Rama’s mother, is portrayed as an 
ideal maternal figure: ascetic, pious, and utterly devoted to her son and her 
husband. But as the narrative makes clear, she no longer excites the king’s 
passion, and so he devotes himself to her younger rival, with catastrophic 
results. When she learns of her son’s sudden reversal of fortune, she vows, 
against the cultural norm of the devoted wife (pativrata), to follow her 


beloved son into exile, only abandoning her plan when Rama reminds her 
of her wifely duty. 


Kaikeyl 

The story of DaSaratha’s bewitching but ultimately treacherous junior wife 
serves as one of the traditional Indian patriarchy’s cautionary tales about the 
seductive and corrupting influence of women. Initially portrayed as an 
innocent and trusting young woman delighted to learn of the impending 
consecration of her senior wife Kausalya’s son, Kaikeyi is easily persuaded 
by her cunning maidservant, Manthara, of the danger to her and her own 
son should Rama be inaugurated as prince regent. She then allows herself to 
be manipulated into using her feminine wiles, as well as some unfulfilled 
vows of her husband, to force him to order the banishment of Rama and the 
inauguration of Bharata in his stead. Although she appears to be quickly 
rehabilitated in the epic, she remains in the popular imagination a prime 
example of the shrewish wife who betrays and ultimately causes the death 
of her husband. 


The Animals 


It will be recalled that a particular feature of the Rama legend is that the 
story’s archvillain, Ravana, had received a boon of invulnerability from all 
the various races of supernatural beings. He remained, however, vulnerable 
to “lower” beings, that is to say, humans and animals. It is for this reason 
(as well as the curse of Nandin) that, during the course of his campaign 
against Ravana, Rama’s principal allies, apart from his brother Laksmana 
and Ravana’s renegade brother Vibhisana, are a vast horde of semidivine 
and partially civilized monkeys (vdnaras). 

The sometimes fairy-tale-like tenor of the poem also allows a few birds 
to enter the plot on specific occasions to assist Rama. These include the 
great vulture Jatayus, an old friend and ally of the Kosalan court who, in the 
Aranyakanda, gives his life in a vain attempt to rescue Sita from the 
clutches of Ravana and who gives Rama some information about the 
abduction; and Jatayus’s older brother, Sampati, who tells the monkeys’ 
southern search party where Ravana has taken Sita. Also, at one point in the 
Yuddhakanda, when both Rama and Laksmana have been rendered hors de 
combat through the power of Indrajit’s sinister serpent-weapons, the divine 


bird Garuda makes an appearance as a sort of avis ex machina to drive 
away the snakes, whose nemesis he is. 

But aside from the boon of Ravana and the entertainment value of 
having the sometimes fearsome and sometimes comical monkeys as Rama’s 
often erratic sidekicks, there is, it seems, a higher thematic value in the 
introduction of the alternately valorous and cowardly simians. For the 
monkey kingdom of Kiskindha represents a contrast to the predominantly 
righteous world of Ayodhya, with its supremely deferential and self- 
disciplined heroes like Rama, Bharata, and Laksmana, who always 
subordinate their personal interests and desires to their sense of duty, 
righteousness, and familial harmony. By way of contrast, in the kingdom of 
the monkeys we encounter the perhaps more realistic themes of sibling 
rivalry, fraternal violence, and sensual excess that the poet tries to keep as 
far away as possible from the scions of the solar dynasty. The monkeys also 
occasionally exhibit cowardice in battle, fleeing from formidable rdaksasa 
foes. 


Sugriva 

Sugriva is a critical figure in the epic story. Without his assistance Rama 
would have been hard-pressed to locate his abducted wife and would have 
found it virtually impossible to recruit a force capable of confronting the 
supernaturally powerful and heavily armed forces of Ravana. Nonetheless, 
as an epic hero, Sugriva is portrayed as cruel, impetuous, self-serving, 
somewhat cowardly, and something of a libertine. 

Banished by his elder and more powerful brother, the monkey king 
Valin, Sugriva is forced to cower on a secure hilltop with only a small 
coterie of loyalists. When Rama and Laksmana, searching for the abducted 
Sita, come near, he is terrified and sends his counselor Hanuman in disguise 
to see who they are and what they want. After hearing Rama’s story, 
Sugriva sees an opportunity to dispose of his feared brother and seize his 
kingdom and his wife, who was stolen from him, he claims, by Valin. He 
tells Rama a self-serving story about how he came to be exiled when, after 
falsely believing his brother dead, he took over his throne and his harem, 
only to be roughly handled and expelled when Valin returned. Sugriva 
forges a pact with Rama to the effect that if the prince will kill his mighty 
elder brother for him and place him on the throne, he will place the vast 


hordes of monkeys, whom he will then command, at Rama’s service. He 
will then order the monkeys to scour the world for the abducted Sita and to 
assist in the campaign to defeat her abductor and bring her back. To fulfill 
his part of the bargain Rama instructs Sugriva to challenge his brother to a 
single combat, during which Rama will shoot Valin from ambush. The 
brothers fight and Sugriva is beaten, but Rama, claiming that he could not 
tell the two apart, refrains from acting. He then equips Sugriva with a floral 
garland to distinguish him from his brother. As the brothers fight a second 
time, Rama mortally wounds Valin. He then engages in a debate with the 
dying monkey in an effort to justify his action. 

Because of his troops’ inability to move freely during the rainy season, 
Sugriva is unable to carry out his part of the agreement until the autumn. 
However, even when the rains have ceased and the roads are passable, he 
shows no inclination to discharge his obligation, instead immersing himself 
in the sybaritic pleasures of sex, food, and drink. Finally, his patience 
exhausted, Rama sends Laksmana to remind the monkey, under threat of 
death, to rouse himself to action and fulfill his sworn oath. Only then does 
Sugriva send out search parties and, once Sita has been located, muster the 
simian hosts for battle. We learn that the somewhat undisciplined monkey is 
also cruel: when his southern search party, thinking that they have failed, 
decide not to return to Kiskindha, they make this choice because they fear 
that their master will put them to death. During the war in Lanka, however, 
Sugriva fights valiantly and performs various heroic feats. 

Valin 

This remarkable figure cannot be fully described independently of his 
brother and mortal enemy, Sugriva. For it is only through Rama’s somewhat 
controversial killing of this king of the monkeys that he is able to secure the 
promise from Sugriva to use his control of the monkey forces, once he is 
installed on the throne of his dead brother, to scour the world to find the 
abducted princess Sita. 

But Valin has his own history that helps us to understand Rama’s 
decision to act on behalf of Sugriva without ever meeting Valin or hearing 
his side of the story of the rift between the simian brothers. That story is yet 
another example of the theme of violent or sublimated fraternal conflict and 
disinheritance of an older claimant to a throne that runs like a thread 


through both the Ramayana and the Mahabharata. In this, it not only 
echoes the deflected succession struggle between Rama and Bharata but 
foreshadows as well the parallel conflict in the royal family of the raksasas 
between Ravana and his younger brother Vibhisana, which, like the conflict 
in Kiskindha, will end only when Rama kills the elder and installs the 
younger on the throne. 

Valin is not only the elder brother and, by the normative practice of 
primogeniture, the rightful king of the monkeys. He is also, as the son of the 
king of the gods, Indra, more powerful than Sugriva, the son of Surya, the 
sun god. In fact, he is represented in the epic as one of only two individuals 
powerful enough to best Ravana himself in combat. At the end of the 
Uttarakanda’s lengthy account of the mighty rdksasa’s victorious 
campaigns against human kings, supernatural beings, and even the gods 
themselves, Rama inquires of the sage Agastya, who had been narrating this 
account, if there were no beings anywhere powerful enough to overcome 
the might of the ten-headed lord of the rdksasas. In reply, the sage tells him 
of two individuals who accomplished this all-but-impossible feat. The first 
is the legendary thousand-armed king of Mahismati, Arjuna Kartavirya, 
who bested the rdksasa in a wrestling match and made him his prisoner. 
The second is Valin, who, when Ravana attempts to take him by surprise, 
whirls around, pinions him, and, tucking the raksasa lord in his armpit, flies 
to the four oceans to perform his ritual baths. In both of these stories, the 
vanquishers of Ravana end up forging a firm friendship with him. In the 
latter case, this may explain why Rama chose to ally himself with Sugriva 
instead of the far more powerful Valin. 

When Rama finally intervenes in a battle between the monkey brothers 
and mortally wounds Valin from ambush, the dying monkey rebukes him 
for shooting him in such a fashion, and the two hold an extensive debate on 
the propriety of such an attack. This goes back and forth on different 
grounds until Valin acknowledges the authority of Rama as_ the 
representative of the royal power of Kosala and dies reconciled to the 
justice of his death. Some hint of uneasiness with the whole proceeding 
may be divined from the fact that even after the consecration of Sugriva in 
place of his slain elder, Rama sees to it that the heir apparent to the monkey 
throne is Angada, Valin’s son, and not any offspring of his successor. 


Hanuman 

Hanuman, the swift and powerful son of the wind god, is one of the 
towering figures in the Ramayana writ large, and he is an important divinity 
in his own right in Hinduism and in other related Asian religious traditions. 
For Valmiki and later authors on the Rama theme, he is the ultimate 
devotee of Rama and Sita and the exemplar of what is known in Vaisnava 
theology as dasyabhava, the emotive stance of devotional service to one’s 
chosen divinity. 

Introduced first in the Kiskindhakanda as a clever counselor of Sugriva, 
Hanuman is uniquely entrusted with Rama’s signet ring as a token of 
recognition when he is included in the southern search party under the 
leadership of Angada, Valin’s son. As the son of the wind god, he is also 
the only monkey powerful enough to leap across the vast expanse of the 
ocean to search Lanka for the abducted princess. Once there, he finds and 
comforts Sita, causes general havoc on the island, and defeats many of 
Ravana’s warriors. Finally, he allows himself to be captured by Indrayjit so 
that, when dragged in front of the raksasa king, he can rebuke him. As a 
punishment, Hanuman’s tail is set alight, but he then uses it to set fire to the 
city before returning to the mainland to report to Sugriva and Rama. 

During the war, Hanuman performs many feats of valor in battle and, 
most iconically, twice flies from Lanka to the Himalayas and back to fetch a 
mountain of healing herbs to cure and restore Rama, Laksmana, and the 
monkeys in general when they are wounded or struck down by the fearsome 
Indrajit. After the war and the consecration of Rama, he proves himself to 
be the most passionate of Rama’s devotees but is denied the privilege of 
following his lord to the heavenly realm, as he is instructed to remain in the 
world as long as the Ramayana continues to be sung among the people. As 
the epic tale remains current in its many versions until the present day, 
Hanuman is regarded as one of the Indian tradition’s group of seven 
cirajivins, “long-lived ones,” who live on from one cosmic era to another. 
In addition to the account of his feats in service of Rama, the Uttarakanda 
provides a charming account of the monkey hero’s mischievous childhood. 


The Lesser Monkeys 
Among the hundreds of millions and even billions of monkeys that the 
Ramayana tells us made up Rama’s expeditionary force, there are a number 


who, if not of the level of significance of Sugriva and Hanuman, still 
occupy specific important roles in the course of the great war. Among these 
are Prince Angada, son of Valin and the leader of the southern search party, 
who launches a solo attack on Ravana’s palace; the monkey engineer and 
architect Nala, who designs and supervises the construction of the epic’s 
famous bridge across the ocean, enabling the monkey army to cross over to 
Lanka; Jambavan, the aged king of the rksas (in later versions of the story 
he is often represented as a bear), who directs Hanuman to the Himalayas in 
search of medicinal herbs; and the simian physician Susena, who similarly 
instructs Hanuman before his second flight to the Himalayas and who 
employs the herbs to save the life of the mortally wounded Laksmana. 


The Raksasas 


As the epic action shifts from the realm of the monkeys, which, as we have 
seen, represents a moral universe more like the “natural,” observable 
condition of humanity, with its power struggles, sensual excess, violence, 
and fraternal rivalries, to the island kingdom of Lanka, we see yet another 
and, indeed, ultimate shift in and degradation of the norms of dharma, 
“righteousness,” as it is observed and practiced in Ayodhya. Lanka is the 
kingdom of the rdksasas, violent, bloodthirsty, and sexually promiscuous 
parodies of the ideals of Aryan culture and society that the epic seeks to 
preach. These are the blood-guzzling (rudhirasana), night-roaming 
(nisacara) radksasas under the tyrannical rule of their king, Ravana, who is 
the radical opposite of Rama and the trampler of all the norms and values of 
vedic-Hindu civilization. 

That said, it is noteworthy that not all of the raksasas and their female 
counterparts, the rdksasa women (rdksasis), are monolithically evil. Some 
of the womenfolk actually aid and support Sita in her terror and desolation, 
while one of the rdksasa princes comes to be revered as the epitome of 
righteousness and devotion to Rama. Even the very worst of them, Ravana 
himself, is allowed a certain amount of justification for his evil nature and, 
in the end, once dead, is given a surprisingly sympathetic send-off by his 
enemy Rama. 

One might also keep in mind that the poet portrays two rather different 
categories of rdksasas, both of which are seen as a menace to the society, 


culture, and civilization of the Aryans. On the one hand, there are what we 
might think of as the aristocratic urban elite of the race, who inhabit the 
glittering palaces and mansions of Lanka and who appear to share the 
political and even religious norms of their human foes. These include 
Ravana and his relatives as well as his ministers and his generals. On the 
other hand, the poem also shows us an even more horrific and feral type of 
solitary forest raksasa—those who haunt the wilderness, gorging 
themselves on the flesh and blood of humans and animals that cross their 
path. 


Ravana 

Ravana, the towering and monstrous antagonist of the epic hero, is, at least 
in Valmiki’s portrayal, a more interesting and complex figure than the 
crude, brutal, and lecherous villain of countless later texts and performative 
media as well as in the popular imagination. Thus, in spite of his 
overweening arrogance, lust, and sexual predation, as well as the havoc his 
aggression wreaks throughout the three worlds, he is nonetheless 
represented in the Sundarakanda as a rather glorious potentate, a passionate 
lover, a husband mourned by his many wives, and, at one point in the 
Yuddhakanda, a figure who finally comes to realize the folly of his ultimate 
transgression. But in the grand account of his career in the epic’s final book, 
the Uttarakanda, we see different aspects of the character of this monstrous 
but fascinating antihero and are given, interestingly, some insight into its 
formation. 

The very first things we learn about Ravana in this account take place 
before he is born or even conceived, and they are highly determinative of 
his character. Ravana’s mother, Kaikasi, was the child of the powerful 
raksasa ascetic Sumalin. Sumalin, uninterested in negotiating a marriage 
for his daughter, sends the innocent girl off on her own to ask the brahman 
sage Visravas, the son of the seer Pulastya and grandson of Lord Brahma 
himself, to marry her. At her father’s command, she approaches Visravas 
although he is in a state of consecration as he performs the vedic agnihotra 
rite. The poet describes the moment as “that fearsome hour (ddrund vela).” 

Visravas determines, through his supernatural mental powers, that 
Kaikasi wishes to marry him and bear his children. He consents to this but 
warns her that, since she approached him at such a fearsome hour, she will 


give birth to fearsome and cruel raksasa children. Horrified by this 
pronouncement, she pleads that such horrible sons would not be worthy of a 
descendant of Lord Brahma, Visravas’s grandfather. The sage partially 
relents, promising that her youngest son alone, Vibhisana, will be righteous 
and worthy of his noble lineage. Thus, in due time, Kaikasi gives birth to 
three sons, Ravana, Kumbhakarna, and the righteous Vibhisana, as well as a 
daughter, Sirpanakha. The birth of her eldest, Ravana, is accompanied by 
dire omens, as recounted later by Agastya: 


After some time, Rama, the young girl, who had been addressed in 
this fashion, gave birth to a horrendous and very fearsome child, who 
had the form of a raksasa. He had ten heads, huge fangs, and he 
looked like a heap of black collyrrum. He had coppery lips, twenty 
arms, huge mouths, and hair that glowed like fire. The moment he 
was born, jackals, their mouths emitting flames, and other 
carnivorous beasts circled in a clockwise direction. The god rained 
down blood, and the clouds made a harsh rumbling. The sun vanished 
from the sky, and great meteors crashed to the ground.» 


The episode is a curious and disturbing one in which an innocent error of 
timing on the part of a young girl has hideous consequences for her yet-to- 
be-conceived children, imposed by their own father. Thus, according to the 
tale, Ravana is hardly to be held wholly accountable for his evil nature, 
which stems largely from his mother’s minor and _ unintentional 
transgression and his father’s horrible and excessively cruel overreaction to 
it. Moreover, Ravana’s parental difficulties do not end with his father’s 
prenatal curse. Although he is cursed to be born with an inherently evil 
nature, it is his mother who, in her greed and ambition, goads him into a 
state of bitter envy and ultimately hostility toward his glorious elder half 
brother, Kubera, the god of wealth. In a fit of sibling rivalry, Ravana vows 
to equal or surpass Kubera in power and glory, and it is this mission that 
sets him on his course of fearsome asceticism so that he can acquire the 
boons that will enable him to conquer and terrorize the triple world, starting 
with Kubera himself. 

Ravana’s aggressiveness and martial exploits are legendary, and he does 
not hesitate to challenge any representative of masculine power and 
authority, whether a king, a god, a great serpent, a demon, or even supreme 


deities such as Lord Siva. And it even makes little difference to him if they 
are his kinsmen: he defeats and slays Kubera, and in the mad frenzy of 
battle he kills his brother-in-law, the danava Vidyujjihva, the husband of his 
sister, Sirpanakha. Neither does he hesitate to molest, seduce, abduct, and 
rape any woman he encounters. True to his cannibalistic raksasa nature, he 
also does not scruple to devour a messenger and a group of great seers who 
have assembled for a holy sacrifice. 

There is no space here to list all of Ravana’s many battles, rapes, and evil 
deeds. But the epic is sometimes at odds with itself in its accounts of his 
abductions of women. For example, in the Sundarakdnda, when the poet 
describes the beautiful women of the rdksasa’s harem, he says that none of 
them had been taken against their will but had been won over by his virtues 
and had never previously belonged to another man. Yet in the Uttarakanda, 
he is represented as having brutally ripped his women, wailing and crying, 
from their husbands, brothers, and fathers. They then collectively curse him 
to ultimately die on account of a woman as requital for his depredations. 

Yet despite Ravana’s lengthy career of murder, rape, and mayhem and 
his brutal abduction of the epic hero’s beloved wife, Rama treats him 
remarkably gently. Not only does he offer to spare the raksasa if he returns 
Sita willingly, but during their first encounter in battle the righteous prince, 
seeing that his foe is tiring, merely shoots off his diadem and dismisses him 
from the battlefield to rest up for the next encounter. Finally, once he has 
slain Ravana, Rama orders Vibhisana to give him full funerary honors 
according to the vedic cremation ritual, praises him as a great warrior, and 
declares an almost fraternal regard for him. 

It is also worth noting that, although the fearsome king of the rdksasas is 
generally regarded as a figure inimical to and dominant over all other 
powerful beings in the three worlds and ultimately vulnerable to the 
Supreme Divinity, Visnu, alone, the Uttarakdnda records three occasions on 
which he is outmatched by a superior rival with whom he then forges a 
friendly alliance. The first and best known of these occurs when Ravana, 
flying across the Himalayas, finds the motion of his vehicle arrested as he 
tries to pass over a grove where Lord Siva is dallying with his wife. 
Enraged, the raksasa tries, in his unparalleled strength, to uproot the entire 
mountain. Siva, however, is amused at the raksasa’s presumption and 
playfully presses down on the summit with his toe, crushing his mighty 


arms and causing him to utter a tremendous roar of pain. Pleased with the 
demon’s strength and daring, and in commemoration of his mighty cry that 
reverberated throughout the universe, the god confers upon him the name 
Ravana, “He Who Makes the Worlds Reverberate with His Cries,” thus 
replacing, for all practical purposes, the rdksasa’s birth-name DasSagriva, 
“Ten-necked.” This episode, along with a single reference later in the book 
to Ravana’s worship of a golden /inga, is probably the inspiration for the 
tradition—not explicitly mentioned by Valmiki—that Ravana was a 
devotee of Siva. 

Ravana also meets his match in the persons of the monkey king Valin 
and the Haihaya monarch Arjuna Kartavirya, both of whom best him in 
wrestling matches and take him prisoner. Both episodes end with Ravana 
forming alliances with his new friends. In the former case, this may explain 
why Rama forms an alliance with Sugriva rather than with Valin, his more 
powerful brother and Ravana’s friend and ally. 


Vibhisana 

The only virtuous child of Kaikast, Ravana’s youngest brother, Vibhisana, 
is one of the relatively few, but important, examples in the literature of a 
figure who is supposed to be evil, even demonic, by nature, but who turns 
out to be a paragon of virtue through first taking refuge (saranam) with and 
then devoting himself to one or another of the forms of Visnu, the Supreme 
Divinity. In this the raksasa ranks as an equal to the famous asura devotee, 
Prahlada, who worshiped the Lord at the time of the Man-Lion (Narasimha) 
avatara. Unable to tolerate his brother’s evil ways and particularly his 
abduction and imprisonment of Sita, Vibhisana has the courage to speak 
truth to power in rebuking Ravana. This provokes a furious response: the 
rdaksasa king expels him from the court. 

Vibhisana then flies with four retainers across the sea to the southern 
shore of India, where Rama and his army are encamped. He takes refuge 
(Saranam) at Rama’s feet, becoming, up until the present day, a 
paradigmatic example of salvation through this act. Once accepted, he 
renders many vital services to Rama in the battle through his understanding 
of the military strength and defenses of Lanka, and especially through his 
innate ability to see through the many illusory devices and tricks of the 
raksasas. Rama consecrates him as the king of the raksasas, even before 


defeating and killing Ravana, and the grateful raksasa grants him the use of 
his flying palace, the Puspaka. In the end, like that other great devotee of 
Rama, Hanuman, Vibhisana is denied permission to follow his Lord into the 
heavenly world, as Rama orders him to remain on earth to govern the 
unruly rdksasas. In this way, Vibhisana, like the great monkey, joins the 
select group of the seven immortals of Indian legend, the cirajivins, “long- 
lived ones.” 

Vibhisana’s character, however, is not without a touch of ambivalence. 
Although he is highly regarded for his righteousness and courage in going 
over to Rama’s side in the war, he also earns a certain degree of censure in 
the Indian cultural context—which places a high premium on clan and 
family loyalty—tfor his betrayal of his own elder brother, no matter how evil 
he may have been. Thus, even in modernity, he is sometimes used as 
metaphor for a traitor to his own family, as in the Bengali saying “ghore 
sotru bibhison,” “[he is] an enemy in the house, a Vibhisana’’). 


Kumbhakarna 

Ravana’s gargantuan brother Kumbhakarna is an example of Valmiki’s 
spectacular linking of the terrifying and comedic in a single character. He is 
so catastrophically voracious that the gods fear that, should he succeed in 
gaining additional powers through a boon for his austerities, he might 
literally devour the entire world. To avert this calamity, they trick him by 
getting the goddess of speech, Sarasvati, to enter the giant’s mouth, seize 
control of his vocal organs, and choose a boon for him. She chooses 
perpetual sleep, a boon the Creator happily confers. 

During the war, when almost all of Ravana’s champions have been slain, 
the raksasa king is forced to awaken the sleeping giant. His awakening is 
described in a grotesque and comically hyperbolic scene representing the 
extraordinary violence required to rouse the monster and the absurd amount 
of food and drink required to get him up and going. Once awake, he reports 
to his brother Ravana for his orders and, rather surprisingly, lectures him on 
statecraft, righteousness, and the folly of his ways. This elicits Ravana’s 
only admission in the poem that it was a fatal error to abduct Sita and to 
refuse Rama’s demand for her return. Nonetheless, as a dutiful brother, 
Kumbhakarna marches off to war and wreaks enormous havoc on the 
monkey army before being cut to pieces by Rama’s arrows. Even in his 


death he is massively destructive, his severed head and body, in the poet’s 
hyperbolic description, causing enormous damage as they fall. 


Indrajit 

The most powerful and terrifying of Ravana’s allies—and indeed, his 
ultimate recourse other than his own immense martial power—is his son 
Meghanada Ravani, who 1s often referred to by his nom de guerre, Indrajit, 
“Conqueror of Indra.” This is a figure who combines the skill and strength 
of a superb warrior with the magical powers of a sorcerer. Indeed, when a 
group of seers and sages arrives to congratulate Rama on his consecration, 
they remark that they regarded Indrajit as a more fearsome adversary than 
his father. Deriving his powers both from boons and from weapons granted 
him by Brahma and through a series of dark parodies of the vedic sacrifice, 
he is able to capture Hanuman, bind Rama and Laksmana in the deadly 
coils of his serpent-weapons, and invisibly strike down the heroic brothers 
and their entire army from a flying chariot. It is only when Laksmana is 
able to interrupt the dark ritual that grants Indrajit his powers that the prince 
can finally dispatch him after a lengthy and horrific duel. 

This extraordinary figure, sinister though he is, has to a certain extent 
captured the imagination of India, where the name Indrajit is often 
conferred by parents on their sons and who was made the wronged and 
tragic hero of his own epic poem by the nineteenth-century Bengali poet 
and playwright Michael Madhusudana Dutt in his epic poem the Meghnad 
Badh Kavya, “The Killing of Meghanada.” 


The Minor Raksasas 

Aside from the towering figure of Ravana and some of his principal 
kinsmen, generals, and ministers, a number of other rdksasas play various 
roles in the epic story from outside the Lankan court. One group constitutes 
a sort of military outpost of the raksasa kingdom in the Dandaka forest of 
the Indian peninsula. It is these raksasa forces, led by Ravana’s relatives 
Khara, Diisana, and Trisiras, that directly harass the holy forest sages, 
whom Rama has vowed to protect. And it is they and their hosts who, 
seeking to avenge the mutilation of Sirpanakha, are slaughtered by Rama. 
One noteworthy figure is Marica. Along with his brother Subahu, Marica 
harasses the ashram of Visvamitra in the Balakanda, thus providing the 
rationale for Visvamitra’s fateful journey to Ayodhya. His life is spared by 


Rama when his brother is slain, but he returns to the narrative in the 
Aranyakanda. There, under the threat of death from his master Ravana, he 
is compelled to take on the form of the famous golden deer to lure first 
Rama and then Laksmana away from their forest home, only to be finally 
slain by the former. 

In addition to these figures, there is also a class of grotesque, solitary 
raksasas who haunt the forest, gorging on game and even humans. Some of 
these are represented not as true raksasas by birth but rather as celestial 
beings who, laboring under curses, inhabit their degraded forms until they 
are released through death at Rama’s hands and return to their respective 
celestial forms. These rdksasas, encountered in the Aranyakanda, include 
the monstrous Viradha, who for a brief moment seizes and tries to run off 
with Sita, in a foreshadowing of her abduction by Ravana; and the 
deformed Kabandha, who, before his death, directs Rama to the monkey 
prince Sugriva for assistance in locating and recovering his stolen wife. The 
poem’s final book, the Uttarakanda, shows us another example of the 
solitary raksasa in the terrifying Lavana, who is slain by Satrughna. 


The Raksasa Women 

Like their menfolk, the raksasa women (raksasis) show a marked diversity 
of character among themselves. Rama’s first test of valor is his task of 
killing the monstrous forest raksasa woman Tataka, who blocks the path of 
Visvamitra and his young protégés. Like the other forest raksasas, she, born 
a beautiful yaksa woman, had been transformed into a hideous monster 
through a curse. The text makes no mention, however, of her having been 
liberated from the curse by death at Rama’s hands. 

The raksasa women of Lanka, like their male counterparts, appear to fall 
into two categories: the courtly and beautiful ladies of Ravana’s 
antahpuram, the inner apartments where the palace women’s quarters are 
located, and the grotesque working women who serve mainly as the 
wardresses of Sita during her captivity in Ravana’s asoka grove. It should 
be noted here that many of Ravana’s wives and consorts appear not to be 
rdksasa women. Several times they are described as the most beautiful 
women of all the worlds—human, demonic, and divine—whom Ravana had 
abducted from their homes and families. He also has a lawful wife, his chief 
queen, the beautiful Mandodari, who is an asura princess, duly given in 


marriage by her father, the great supernatural demon architect Maya. She 
exhibits both jealousy over and compassion for Sita and, on one occasion, 
diverts her husband from his continuing harassment of his captive. Upon 
the death of her husband, Mandodari delivers a moving lament (vi/apa) in 
which she posthumously chides him for his fatal infatuation with Sita and 
his evil act in abducting her. 

Then there is the rdksasa king’s sister, the princess Sirpanakha, who, as 
already noted, plays a very significant role in the epic story, as her 
mutilation and complaint to Ravana serve as the motive for her brother’s 
animus toward Rama and his infatuation with Sita. Stirpanakha is a central 
and popular figure in many versions of the Ramayana: sometimes she 1s 
depicted as a beautiful woman and sometimes—as in Valmiki’s version—as 
a hideous hag. As with Ravana, the Uttarakanda provides some of her 
personal history, shedding light on her sexually aggressive behavior. For 
one thing, like Ravana and Kumbhakarna, Sirpanakha is also a victim of 
the prenatal curse of their father, Visravas. But less widely known is the fact 
that she was twice victimized. She was once a happily married woman, but 
during a battle with the Kalakeya ddnavas, Ravana, in the fog of war, 
accidently killed her husband, the danava Vidyujjihva, in a sort of “friendly 
fire” incident. In compensation for having made her a widow, Ravana sends 
her off to the Dandaka forest under the care of Khara to enjoy herself, doing 
as she pleases without constraint. Thus, it is there, wandering about in the 
region, that she comes across the sylvan home of Rama, Sita, and Laksmana 
and, after the fashion of the sexually unconstrained rdaksasas, attempts to 
seduce Rama, with the well-known tragic results. 

The rank-and-file raksasa women—commoners, if you will—are the 
women appointed to guard Sita and try to wear her down by alternately 
cajoling and menacing her. They are generally represented as a group of 
ghastly, misshapen hags with the heads and limbs of various animals. They 
threaten to dismember and devour the long-suffering princess and to hold a 
wild, drunken feast on her disjecta membra. Nonetheless, some of them, 
acting against type, are kind and compassionate toward Sita. Thus, the 
rdksasa woman Sarama secretly takes Sita’s part and exposes to her the 
falsehood of the terrible illusions that Ravana and his minions conjure up in 
order to demoralize her. She even agrees to spy on Ravana’s meetings with 
his counselors for Sita. Then, too, and most famously, the elderly raksasa 


woman Trijata defends Sita from the menacing of her peers and reports to 
them all a prophetic dream she has had in which she sees the triumph of 
Rama and the downfall of Ravana. 

Finally, one of the noteworthy characteristics of Valmiki’s rendition of 
the Rama story is the compassion and humanity of the work’s hero and 
heroine toward the raksasa men and women who have grievously wronged 
them. Following the death of Ravana, Rama dispatches Hanuman to inform 
Sita of her liberation. The monkey hero asks her for permission to brutally 
slaughter all the ghastly raksasa women who have been tormenting her. But 
Sita refuses, first blaming her suffering on her own fate, then arguing that 
people of superior character never requite evil with evil, and, remarkably, 
that one ought not punish those who, like the raksasa women, were merely 
following their master’s orders. Finally, she notes that no one is completely 
innocent and that one should not act out against those who are merely 
following their own nature, in this case that of the constitutionally savage 
raksasas. In this response, Sita shows herself to share the compassionate 
and nonvengeful character of Rama, who refuses to permit Laksmana to 
exterminate the rdksasas in violation of the rules of combat and insists on a 
proper vedic funeral ceremony for his fallen foe. 


Valmiki’s World: The Ramayana in Its Histories 


What was the world in which the Valmiki Ramayana took shape? And what 
was the nature of the society in which the immortal poet imagined his hero 
to have lived? These are rather different questions. To try to answer them 
we have to keep in mind two rather different ideas of history that we may 
term the “etic” and the “emic,” that is to say, an idea of history from an 
outside perspective such as is generally adopted by modern historians, 
archaeologists, and philologists, and an idea of history that is traditional and 
conforms to concepts developed within the ambient culture of the text itself. 

First let us examine the etic perspective. Contemporary scholarship 
generally agrees, with some variations, that the earliest (and now no longer 
recoverable) form of the Valmiki Ramayana was a product of the period 
between the second and third quarters of the first millennium before the 
Common Era. This pre-imperial period of ancient Indian history is a 
fascinating one in that it witnessed the rise and textualization of a number 


of religious and philosophical schools, systems, and movements, several of 
which remain powerful forces in Indian, Asian, and world civilizations 
down to the present day. Noteworthy among these are the late vedic texts, 
particularly the upanisads and non-vedic texts such as the Sanskrit epics, 
which form some of the most seminal works of the emerging schools of 
Hindu religion and philosophy. This period also witnessed the rise and 
development of both the Buddhist and Jain religious movements and the 
composition of the early canonical texts of both. 

On the religious historical level then, the epics straddle two major 
movements in the development of Hinduism, particularly the schools and 
movements that identify themselves as Vaisnava. These schools practice 
various forms of worship of one or more manifestations of the vedic 
divinity Visnu. It is during this period that Visnu began to develop into one 
of the three major divinities of the Hindu pantheon, who later came to be 
portrayed collectively as the more or less ecumenical Trimurti, a triad of 
gods, with specific roles in the history of the universe. These are Brahma, 
the Creator; Visnu, the Preserver; and Siva, the Destroyer. In fact, although 
both of the Sanskrit epic poems of this period, the Ramdyana and the 
Mahabharata—the latter of which includes the highly venerated episode 
known as the Bhagavadgita—are filled with myths and stories about 
Brahma and Siva, they are essentially the oldest known Vaisnava works, 
centered as they are on the deeds of the two great avataras, “incarnations,” 
of Visnu, namely Rama and Krsna, respectively. 

From the point of view of political history, the critical period of the 
emergence of these texts, vedic and non-vedic, is sometimes referred to by 
historians as the “janapada period.”!* The term janapada—literally, “the 
place of a people’—trefers to a series of early state formations that 
characterized the middle of the first millennium BCE in which the various 
chieftains of the vedic Aryan clans, originally pastoral or semipastoral 
nomads, began to settle in regional territories along the river valleys of the 
subcontinent. These, it appears, were relatively ill-defined proto-states that 
vied with their neighbors for land, river access, and wealth, the latter being 
preeminently still defined in terms of livestock, particularly cattle, the 
interregional raiding of which was a central activity of these warrior chiefs. 

As these early pastoralist chiefs and their clan followers came to rely 
increasingly on sedentary agriculture, the wealth and power of some of their 


state formations began to increase at the expense of others. The emerging 
hereditary monarchs were now often aggrandized with titles like Maharaja, 
“Great King,” Rajadhiraja, “King of Kings,” and even, as they conquered 
and absorbed weaker neighbors, Samrat and Cakravartin, “Universal 
Emperor.” But in addition to the increasing military might their wealth 
commanded, they also depended on the spiritual power accorded them by 
their brahman ministers, advisers, and ritualists, particularly their purohitas, 
“household priests.” These spiritual guides conducted on their patrons’ 
behalf the great public royal sacrificial performances (yvajnas) that not only 
served to validate their tenure of the kingship but, through such rites as the 
asvamedha and the rdjasuya, ritually legitimated, indeed mandated, the 
subjugation of their surrounding rival kingdoms. 

Perhaps equally important to achieving and maintaining the grandeur 
and power of the kings were the court sutas, “bards,” and bandins, 
“panegyrists,” the royal bards whose duties included waking the monarch 
each morning with songs of praise about his greatness and about the 
nobility and heroic deeds of his royal forebears. These bardic accounts thus 
constructed royal lineages (vamsas) that stretched back through generations 
of noble warrior kings and even to the celestial divinities themselves. 

Of the various janapadas (and a few contemporary “republics’”’) of this 
period that are mentioned in the epics and in the Buddhist and Jain canons, 
two have been immortalized through the formation, spread, and success of 
the extended bardic poems that, no doubt, originated in the legend- and 
praise-songs of the early kings and their heroic ancestors. One of these took 
shape in Kuruksetra, a region near the Yamuna River, whose capital, 
Hastinapura, was situated near the modern capital of India, New Delhi. This 
was the ancestral seat of the kings of the vedic clan known as the Kurus, 
Pauravas, or Bharatas. Like other lineages, these kings kept alive the glory 
of their predecessors by using a wide variety of clan names derived from 
various outstanding forebears. They traced their lineage ultimately back to 
the vedic moon god Soma or Candra and are thus referred to collectively as 
the Somavamsa or Candravamsa, “Lunar Dynasty.” Their clan history, 
collected, edited, and revised through the centuries, became the Bharata, 
“The Tale of the Bharatas,” and later was expanded to extraordinary length 
and virtually encyclopedic contents as the Mahabharata, “The Great 
Bharata,’ an epic so capacious that it incorporated virtually all of the 


legendary and mythological narratives known to its authors and redactors as 
well as much spiritual and philosophic material. One of its narratives is a 
condensed, but still quite extensive, version of the Ramayana known as the 
Ramopakhyana, “The Secondary Narrative of Rama,” which is recounted to 
its hero, Yudhisthira, in the epic’s third book (Aranyakaparvan). 

Some 330 miles to the southeast of Hastinapura lies the modern 
pilgrimage town of Ayodhya, which, it is believed, was the capital city of 
the janapada of Kosala, a once-powerful regional kingdom until it was 
finally defeated and annexed by King AjataSatru of the emerging state of 
Magadha early in the fifth century BCE. The city and state were ruled in 
antiquity by a succession of kings who, like the Bharatas, traced their 
lineage back through a long line of eponymous sage-kings such as Iksvaku 
and Raghu, all the way back to another celestial divinity, in this case the 
important vedic sun god, Surya. Thus, in contrast to the lunar line of the 
Kurus, the ruling House of Kosala—also known as the Raghus, Raghavas, 
Iksvakus, and Aiksvakas—is called the Stiryavamsa, “Solar Dynasty.” This 
lineage, into which Rama and his brothers were born, evidently enjoyed a 
great deal of prestige even beyond the tradition of the Ramdyana. The 
Buddhist tradition holds that the historical Buddha, Siddhartha Gautama, 
was himself born as a prince in an offshoot branch of the Iksvakus, while 
Jain authors composed a number of their own versions of the epic tale in 
which Rama figures as one of the Vasudevas—the recurring Jain heroes of 
each age who confront a pernicious foe, the Prativasudeva, “Counter 
Vasudeva,” who, in the case of the Rama tale is, of course, Ravana. 

But the tools of the modern historian of ancient India in the form of 
archaeology, paleography, royal edicts, travelers’ accounts, and the like, do 
not reach much further back in time than the late janapada period, while the 
reigns of the legendary epic rulers, such as the Mahabharata’s Yudhisthira 
and the Ramayana’s Rama, if, indeed, these are actually historical figures, 
would have taken place at an earlier period largely beyond the reach of such 
tools. 

Thus, the historiographical evidence for the existence of these figures 
and for the succession struggles and wars in which they are represented as 
having taken part consists in essence of some passages in the very ancient 
vedic literature, later puranic accounts, vamsdavalis, “dynastic lists,” and, of 
course, the epic poems themselves. So, for the modern etic historian, the 


problem of the historicity of the figures and the events narrated in the 
Ramayana is to try to determine how much, if any, of the epic narrative is 
actually historical. The problem is acute in light of both the lack of reliable 
documentation and external support and the propensity of the epic poets to 
represent their stories as episodes in a never-ending cosmic conflict 
between the gods and the asuras, which is sometimes projected downward 
from the heavenly realm to actual earthly kingdoms in real, historical time. 
The issue then sometimes comes down to the attempt to view the texts as 
accounts of actual people and events made more dramatic and exciting 
through the interpolation of extraordinary, supernatural figures and 
phenomena and through the framing of the narratives as religious tracts. 
Such efforts of interpolation and framing can be understood as a means to 
proselytize and edify the epics’ audiences by casting the works as accounts 
of the Supreme Divinity’s periodic struggle with and triumph over the 
forces of adharma, “evil or unrighteousness,” and as texts designed to 
exemplify and inculcate, hegemonically, certain normative models of 
behavior for their audiences. For the modern historian, it comes down to 
how, if at all, it is possible to separate the supernatural, the hyperbolic, and 
the frankly mythological elements of these tales from whatever historical 
core they may possess. In this way, reading the Ramdyana and the 
Mahabharata as history is much like reading the Old Testament as a history 
of the Jewish people in antiquity. 

This brings us to the question of the emic reading of the epics as history. 
How have traditional and pious readers of the epics understood their 
historicity? To answer this question, and to understand the answer in its 
proper context, it is necessary to know something about traditional Hindu 
ideas about time and about what constitutes an authentic basis for writing 
history. 

Unlike modern historians, scientists, and followers of the Judeo- 
Christian-Islamic religions, who proceed from an unquestioned premise that 
time is linear, running from the Creation (or “Big Bang”) to the End of 
Days (or “Big Crunch”), the three major surviving indigenous religious 
systems of ancient India, Hinduism, Buddhism, and Jainism, teach, each 
according to its own unique system, that universal time is cyclical and has 
neither an absolute beginning nor a final end. The Hindu version of this 
belief holds that time is beginningless and endless and is measured out in 


huge, recurrent cosmic cycles called kalpas, which are divided up in turn 
into lengthy periods known as mahdyugas, “great cosmic eras.” Each 
mahayuga 1s divided up into four sequential periods of time, yugas, “cosmic 
eras,” which are characterized by diminishing length, diminishing dharma, 
“righteousness,” and a diminishing quality of life. 

Thus, for the Hindu tradition, historical events such as those narrated in 
the Ramayana and Mahabharata took place and continue to take place in 
specific yugas, as these periods recur with the returning cycles of the 
mahayugas. Virtually all Hindu sources regard our current era as the fourth 
and worst of these four eras, the so-called Kali Yuga. Different texts and 
different teachers assign different lengths to the individual yugas, but a 
common calculation found in the purdnas is that the Kali Yuga lasts for 
432,000 solar years, while each of the three preceding eras in a given 
mahayuga adds that number of years to the one that follows it, so that, 
collectively, a mahdyuga would last 4,320,000 years—a very long cycle 
indeed. 

This chronology has significant implications for an understanding of 
how traditional audiences of the epics saw the placement of the tales and 
their characters in human history, as well as some of the differences 
between them. For although we might think of the events of the two epics 
as having taken place in roughly the same undifferentiated late vedic—early 
janapada period, the Hindu tradition places them in completely different 
cosmic eras and their heroes and events an astronomical number of years 
and a whole moral dimension apart. According to this tradition, the events 
narrated in the Ramdyana are said to have taken place in the Treta Yuga, the 
second of the recurring cycle of four yugas, while the events of the 
Mahabharata, according to most calculations, occurred at the very tail end 
of the third era, the Dvapara Yuga, and thus on the eve of our own age, the 
degenerate Kali Yuga. Such an emic reckoning therefore places the life of 
Rama, the events narrated in the Ramayana, and the composition of the 
poem by Valmiki, a contemporary of the epic hero and, in fact, an actor in 
the epic drama, at a minimum of some 850,000 years ago—a vastly distant 
point in time from us, and a time long, long before even the ancient events 
recounted in the Mahabharata. 

This chronological placement of the two epic stories and_ their 
contemporary narrators is also integrated with the Vaisnava theory of the 


avataras of Lord Visnu. For the principal divine incarnations depicted in 
the poems, Rama and Krsna, respectively, are worshiped as the seventh and 
eighth earthly manifestations of the Lord, who, according to the 
Bhagavadgita, takes birth in each yuga—as needed—in order to protect the 
virtuous and destroy the evildoers who oppress them.'’ It also serves, to 
some extent, to explain the generally higher moral tone—that is, the 
basically deontological ethics of Rama and the central heroes of the 
Ramayana when compared with the more consequentialist and even 
devious behavior of Krsna and the Pandavas in the Mahabharata. Perhaps it 
also accounts for the more hyperbolic characters and events in the former 
epic, such as its ten-headed, twenty-armed antagonist, its flying, shape- 
shifting, talking monkeys, and its gargantuan ogres. It may even explain the 
different time frames in which the two poems operate. Thus, Krsna and the 
Pandava heroes of the Mahabharata depart the earthly plane only some 
thirty-six years after their victory in the great Bharata War, while Rama is 
said to have ruled his kingdom for no less than eleven thousand years 
before he accedes to the request of the gods to abandon his earthly 
incarnation. 

Since, as far as we can determine, the epic poets did not have the 
research tools that are considered essential to modern historians, and as 
many of the events they narrate took place far from them in both time and 
space, how then does the traditional view account for its belief in the 
authenticity of their accounts? The self-representations of both poems as 
historically accurate accounts are based on two claims. The first of these is 
that each of the legendary authors of the works is shown to be a 
contemporary of its epic heroes and, in fact, a participant-observer of many 
of the events in each work’s central narrative. Both are brahmans, and in 
keeping with a well-established cultural trope, they are understood, as 
members of this social class, to be paragons of infallible truthfulness. Thus, 
the poems’ audiences are assured that whatever events the poets recorded 
must have occurred exactly as they witnessed them. But there is more here 
at issue than the simple veracity of the epic poets as percipient witnesses. 
After all, the poet Valmiki is represented as having been essentially 
ignorant of the character and career of Rama until he is told the story by 
Narada. So, in fact, he has no direct personal knowledge of most of the 
events described in the epic until Sita is abandoned near his ashram. 


The second claim concerns the unique spin, as it were, that the Indian 
tradition places on a theme found in other religious cultures, such as those 
of Judaism, Christianity, Islam, and Buddhism. This is the claim that 
foundational texts are inerrant because they are the literal word of an 
omniscient God, or a fully inspired or enlightened human. Borrowing from 
the well-established tradition of the vedas that those texts, the corpus 
known as sruti, “what was heard,” are primordial and inerrant and that they 
were directly revealed to the ancient seers known collectively as rsis or 
kavis, the itihasas, “epic histories,” claim that same exalted status for their 
authors. In other words, Valmiki and Vyasa, the poets of the Ramayana and 
Mahabharata, respectively, are not merely accurate reporters of the events 
they witnessed with their own eyes. They are, like the vedic seers 
themselves, gifted with a special, heightened form of vision, a divyacaksus, 
“divine vision,” that enables them to perceive and recall everything that 
took place in the lives of all of the epic characters—past, present, and even 
future—including their inner thoughts and private conversations. In this 
way, the authors of the itihadsas function much like the omniscient narrators 
of the modern genre of the historical novel. Here, for example, is what the 
creator divinity, Brahma, tells Valmiki when conferring the gift of 
clairvoyance upon him in the prologue of the Ramayana: 


You must tell the world the story of the righteous, virtuous, wise, and 
steadfast Rama, just as you heard it from Narada, the full story, public 
and private, of that wise man. For all that befell wise Rama, Saumitri, 
the rdksasas, and Vaidehi, whether in public or private, will be 
revealed to you, even those events of which you are ignorant. No 
utterance of yours in this poem shall be false. Now compose the holy 
story of Rama fashioned into slokas to delight the heart.!® 


On occasion, the epic poets themselves will introduce specific and 
minute details into their narratives that appear to lend an aura of facticity to 
the events they are reporting. An interesting example of this can be found in 
the Mahabharata’s Santiparvan where Yudhisthira, grieving over the 
Bharata War’s massive slaughter of virtually the entire warrior class, gives 
an unusually precise enumeration of its total casualties. Including, one 
supposes, the deaths of the major elite warriors on both sides, he counts the 
overall losses at 1,660,020,000 dead and 24,165 missing, probably more 


than the entire population of the earth at the time the epic was composed.!? 
Valmiki gives similarly detailed information and enumerations in his poem. 
In effect, then, these authors—or historian-poets, if you will—are 
represented as able to avoid the entire issue so central to the work of 
modern academic historians: the location, use, and authentication of their 
sources. Instead, through their paranormal perception, their direct and 
unfalsifiable access to all of the complex events they report, and their divine 
inspiration, they were seen as able to render their knowledge into quasi- 
musical verse so as to attract, entertain, and enlighten broad audiences. 
Their works were then able to convey to these audiences a combination of 
authoritative history and an education in social, political, and spiritual 
dharma. It is this that, regardless of the major textual variations among the 
different recensions of these great works and the vast degree of variability 
in their numerous retellings, has invested the poems with their particular 
aura of unimpeachable authority and, in effect, sanctity, as records of the 
Supreme Lord Visnu’s direct interventions in human history in the form of 
his principal avataras, “incarnations,” Rama and Krsna. And it is, no doubt, 
this extraordinary combination of a form of history that is reflective of 
nationalist sentiment with stirring narratives of love and war, discourses on 
moral and philosophical thought, charming poetry, idealization of 
normative social structures, and soteriological theology that has enabled 
these ancient works to continue to arouse strong passions even to this day. 
In this connection, we should note that the Rdmdyana and _ the 
Mahabharata both stand at an interesting and important juncture in the 
religious history of Hinduism. Although they are arguably the first works to 
look forward to the emerging and ultimately dominant forms of Hindu 
belief and practice—namely, devotion to and temple worship of a chosen or 
family divinity (istadevata)—the world in which the poets place themselves 
and their casts of characters is virtually entirely that of the soon-to-be- 
archaic cult of ritual sacrifice (vajfia) to the various members of the vedic 
pantheon. So, although the principal epic avataras, Rama and Krsna, are on 
several occasions lauded as earthly manifestations of the Supreme Being, 
their divinity is sometimes occluded and is not always recognized by all of 
their fellow epic characters. Indeed, as noted earlier, the divinity of 
Valmiki’s Rama in particular is supposed to be obscured to all, himself 
included, for most of the epic narrative, so that when he has finally 


achieved his mission as an avatara in killing the evil Ravana and the gods 
descend from heaven to praise him, he expresses ignorance of his true 
nature, observing that he has always thought of himself as a mere man. 

Because of this context, the world of the epics is heavily dominated by 
vedic priests and ritual participants as well as the often-overlapping 
category of ascetic forest hermits and yogins. It is a world in which it is 
universally believed that such individuals, whether through their ritual 
practices (vajna) or their lengthy practice of extreme austerities (tapas), 
acquire enormous supernatural powers that make them objects of both 
reverence and fear on the part of kings and even the gods themselves, as 
they can, and frequently do, unleash these powers in the form of wonderful 
blessings and terrible curses. The Ramayana offers many examples—from 
the poem’s very beginning, when King DaSaratha reluctantly agrees to have 
Rama accompany Visvamitra to his ashram only when threatened by the 
sage with a devastating curse, to the work’s very end, when Laksmana 
violates an order of Rama at great personal cost in order to avert a similarly 
catastrophic curse on the part of yet another irascible sage, Durvasas. 

The Aryan society of the epics was ordered along the system, first 
alluded to in the vedas, of the four social classes (varnas), a hierarchical 
classification with the priestly class (brahmanas) at the top, followed in 
descending order by the ruling warrior class (Asatrivas), the mercantile and 
agricultural class (vaisyas), and, lastly, the worker class (sédras), which 
was dedicated to the service of the three higher social classes. With the 
exception of the nonhuman species—animals, gods, demons, and other 
supernatural beings—and one or two tribal groups that feature prominently 
in the narrative, the text focuses primarily on the two highest classes, the 
aristocracy and members of the priestly class. It is this latter class that 
serves the kings with their spiritual guidance and ritual services and yet, as 
noted earlier, possesses the power to threaten and coerce their royal patrons. 
Thus, many of the cautionary tales for kings that are recounted in the epic, 
particularly in its final book, show the dire fate that awaits even the most 
powerful monarchs if they offend or neglect brahman sages. As is 
normative in the ancient Indian tradition, membership in a specific social 
class is conferred by one’s birth and is generally regarded as immutable 
within the bounds of a given lifetime, with only a few exceptions. One 
example is found in the Balakanda’s saga of the career of ViSvamitra, one 


of the only accounts in the literature of a king elevating himself to the lofty 
status of a brahman-seer through extraordinary perseverance in a centuries- 
long course of the most severe asceticism. But the very same saga gives us 
an example of the opposite social trajectory: a king, Trisanku, is cursed by 
his guru’s sons to lose his royal status and be transformed into a candala, 
the lowest and most degraded of outcastes. 

Humans who fall outside the varna system are mentioned only 
occasionally. Besides King Trisanku, these include, notably, Queen 
Kaikeyt’s scheming maidservant Manthara, who manipulates her mistress 
into bringing about the exile of Rama. These figures are generally held in 
considerably low esteem. Even Rama’s loyal subjects, shown in the 
Ayodhyakanda to be willing to follow their hero into exile and, in the 
Uttarakanda, to the heavenly world, are portrayed in the latter book as 
fickle scandalmongers as they criticize the newly consecrated king as 
lustful and corrupt. The only significant exceptions to this seeming disdain 
for commoners are to be found in the representations of the tribal chief 
Guha, a friend and ally of the Kosalan royal house who, with his forest 
tribesmen, shelters Rama as he goes into exile and who also later assists 
Bharata during his mission to try to bring his brother back to rule the 
kingdom; and Sabari, the servant woman of ambiguous social status who 
graciously welcomes Rama and Laksmana to her departed brahman 
master’s deserted ashram. The one member of the lowly sudra class 
specifically identified as such in the work, the hapless, aspiring ascetic 
Sambika, is summarily executed for his temerity in practicing religious 
penances reserved for the three higher social classes. 


The Legacy of the Valmiki Ramayana 
It would be difficult to overestimate the pervasion and influence of the 
Valmiki Ramayana and its innumerable later representations in the literary, 
religious, artistic, cinematic, and folkloric life of the cultures and 
civilizations of South and Southeast Asia. These not only span countries, 
languages, religions, and media but have saturated the region’s cultural 
imagination, from the most rarified philosophical works, such as the 
esoteric vedantic treatise the Yogavasistha-maharamayana and the epic 
poem—cum-—grammatical treatise the Rdvanavadha (also known as the 


Bhattikavya), to some of the most popular cultural levels one might 
imagine. Take, for example, a recent TV commercial for Domino’s Pizza in 
which, during a staged performance of the Ramayana, as the actor playing 
Ravana carries off the struggling Sita, a Domino’s delivery man enters the 
auditorium, at which point the raksasa king drops the princess and goes for 
the pizza. Or consider a cartoon that appeared a few years ago in the 
Mumbai edition of the venerable Times of India that lampooned the lawsuit 
of a business executive whose wife had refused to accompany him when he 
was transferred to a posting in the remote Andaman Islands. Standing 
before a judge, the husband, in an effort to compel his wife to follow him 
on the model of Sita, addresses the bench: “Please, Your Honour, can’t she 
at least follow me on Twitter?” 

In many ways the influence of this ancient, seminal work of Indian 
literature has only increased over time until, in modernity, it has come to 
have an unparalleled impact, along with its many subsequent versions, on 
Hindu religion and religiously driven Indian politics. This impact derives 
from a number of elements in the epic narrative, of which two are 
particularly salient. One is the text’s repeated reference to the legendary 
millennia-long utopian period of Rama’s reign, the so-called Ramardjya. As 
in many societies confronted by the stresses of the modern world, these 
references create a form of cultural nostalgia, a longing for and a harking 
back to a lost paradise imagined as recoverable, and conjure a perfect 
society that many Hindus believe to have existed before the stresses and 
humiliations of invasion, Islamic rule, British colonization, and 
globalization. 

The concept was popularized in the early decades of the twentieth 
century by Mahatma Gandhi, who envisioned an independent India as a 
simple, village-based society with equality and justice for all Indian 
citizens. He tried to engage popular sentiment in such a vision by calling up 
the imagined social harmony implicit in the term Ramardjya, whether or 
not it existed in historical fact, as a kingdom of God (in both the Hindu and 
Muslim conceptions of divinity) on earth. Thus, in a 1929 edition of his 
weekly Young India, Gandhi wrote: 


By RAMARAJYA I do not mean Hindu Raj. I mean by Ramarayya 
Divine Raj, the Kingdom of God. For me Rama and Rahim are one 


and the same deity. I acknowledge no other God but the one God of 
truth and righteousness. Whether Rama of my imagination ever lived 
or not on this earth, the ancient ideal of Ramarajya is undoubtedly one 
of true democracy in which the meanest citizen could be sure of swift 
justice without an elaborate and costly procedure. Even the dog is 
described by the poet to have received justice under Ramarajya.”° 


Yet despite Gandhi’s ecumenical vision, another central element of the 
Rama epic is the creation of a powerful, masculine warrior hero, an 
incarnation of the Hindu deity Lord Visnu, whose mission was to defend 
vedic-Hindu religion, culture, and society by ridding the earth of alien, 
demonic forces. With the rise of modern Hindu nationalism—around the 
same time that Gandhi was writing about an idealized and harmonious 
intercommunal Indian polity—some political actors began to focus on the 
idea that India’s Muslims (as well as the later Christian colonialists and 
converts) were a hostile, invasive other in the midst of an otherwise purely 
dharmic Hindu society. In this view, the Ramardjya came to be seen as a 
restoration of an original Hindu rdastra, “state,” put in place by a divine king 
who had accomplished the mission of purging the land of evil, exogenous 
forces. 

In more recent years, this trend has often tended, in the words of 
firebrand Hindu nationalists, to homologize the country’s large community 
of non-Hindus, most particularly Muslims, with the rdksasas of the epic 
story. This juxtaposition has become more pronounced since the 1990s with 
the flaring up of the long-simmering communal dispute over a mosque in 
modern-day Ayodhya, which is believed by many Hindus to have been built 
on the ruins of a temple standing on the actual birthplace of Lord Rama. 
The demolition of this mosque, the so-called Babri Masjid, by Hindu 
activists in 1992 led to violent riots across the country in which some two 
thousand people, mostly Muslims, are thought to have died. 

The demand to build—or in the Hindu view, rebuild—a Rama temple on 
the site has continued to roil India’s religious and political life since then, 
and it became one of the mobilizing factors in the ascent to power, both at 
the state and federal levels, of the strongly Hindu nationalist Bharatiya 
Janata Party (BJP), which currently rules India. This trend was originally 
especially strong in the northern Hindi-speaking states where devotion to 


Lord R&am—as he is portrayed in the massively popular sixteenth-century 
Old Hindi (Avadhi) version of the Ramdyana, the Ramcaritmanas of the 
poet-saint Tulsidas—is particularly widespread and powerful. But as the 
2018 elections have shown, the vision has spread more widely to the east 
and south of the country. Just recently, in 2020, the Indian Supreme Court 
ruled that the long-desired construction of the Rama temple could proceed, 
and during the summer of 2021 the prime minister ritually laid the 
foundation’s silver bricks for the construction. 

It is this religious and political centrality of the Valmiki Ramdyana, and 
its many later versions in India and throughout southern Asia, that has made 
and continues to keep the great tale a living presence in the hearts and 
minds of some billion and a half people around the world today. In reading, 
viewing, and listening to versions of the sage’s monumental epic, we not 
only find an uplifting and entertaining story but gain critical insight into one 
of the world’s oldest and most fascinating civilizations. 


‘It should be noted that the immense popularity and influence of the Ramayana has extended to 
virtually all the religious cultures of Asia, many of which do not subscribe to the avatara theory of 
the Vaisnava Hindus. So, in the many Jain versions of the tale, Rama is regarded as a virtuous Jain 
layman; for the Buddhists of South and Southeast Asia, he is a bodhisattva, a future Buddha; and for 
the peoples of the Malay-Indonesian world, he is portrayed as an ideal Islamic prince. 

* Throughout the translation, despite our admiration for and gratitude to the editors and scholars 
who produced the Baroda critical edition for their monumental achievement, we, as translators, have 
occasionally found ourselves in disagreement with some of their specific choices. In these cases, we 
have emended the critical text in accordance with our own readings of the manuscript evidence. 
These emendations are particularly noticeable in the seventh book of the epic, the Uttarakanda. 
There, in keeping with our reading of what we believe to be compelling manuscript evidence, we 
have inserted two relatively lengthy passages that were relegated to the appendices of the volume by 
the editor of this volume. These passages are to be found at PVR 7: 348-359 and 421-424. All these 
emendations are marked as such in the present edition. Readers interested in our rationale for these 
emendations can consult the introductions and notes to the relevant passages in the various volumes 
of the PVR. 

* For the classic study of oral epic composition and transmission, see Lord 2000. 

* Debroy 2017. 

> For those who may be interested in the principles adopted by the editors of the critical edition, 
see the first volume of Bhatt 1960: xxxiv. Further information can be found in the introductions to 
each volume of the series. 

° In the Mahabharata, these sections are called adhydyas. 

’ Manuscripts of the northern recension generally entitle the sixth book the Lankdkdanda, “The 
Book of Lanka.” 

® For a discussion of the name of this book, see PVR 5: 75-78. 


’ For a discussion of the name of this book, see PVR 7: 88*20 and note (p. 1179). 

'° Those interested in this issue should consult PVR 7: 54-81. 

'' For a full discussion of these issues, see our extensive introduction to the book at PVR 7: 74— 
113. 

' According to the Mahabharata, Krsna abandoned his earthly form just thirty-six years after the 
end of the Bharata War, the management of which constituted the second of his major avataric 
missions. His incarnation ends immediately after the internecine slaughter of the Vrsnis and 
Andhakas in Dvaraka. See the Mausalaparvan of the Mahabharata. The chronology is given in the 
first adhyaya of the Mausalaparvan (MBh 16.1.1). Unless otherwise noted, all references are to the 
Mahabharata: Critical Edition (1933-1970). 

! VR 1.17.17. 

'* PVR 4: 213, notes to 4.6.19; R. Goldman 1980: 168; and PVR 7: 885, insert passage following 
notes to 7.17.14. 

'S PVR 7.9.21—24. 

'° On the janapada period, see Thapar 2002: 137-56. 

'’ Bhagavadgita 4.8-9. 

"VR 1.2.31-34 (PRV 1: 129). 

'° MBh 11.26.9-10. 

dasayutanam ayutam sahasrani ca vimsatih / 

kotyah sastis ca sat caiva ye smin rajamrdhe hatah // 
alaksyanam tu viranam sahasrani ca caturdasa / 
dasa canyani rdjendra satam sastis ca panca ca // 


*° Gandhi 1929: 305. 


About the Translation 


The translation of the critical edition of the poem presented here is, with 
considerable new editing and revision, the one produced by a consortium of 
Sanskrit scholars over the course of several decades and originally 
published as the flagship publication of its Princeton Library of Asian 
Translations by Princeton University Press between 1984 and 2017. Under 
the general editorship of Professor Robert Goldman, the associate 
editorship of Dr. Sally Sutherland Goldman, and the assistant editorship of 
Dr. Kristi Wiley, the individual books of the epic, listed by their dates of 
publication, were translated, introduced, and annotated serially as follows: 


Badlakanda: By Robert P. Goldman and collaboratively annotated with 
Sally J. Sutherland (1984) 

Ayodhyakanda and Aranyakanda: By Sheldon I. Pollock (1986 and 
1991) 

Kiskindhakanda: By Rosalind Lefeber (1994) 

Sundarakanda: By Robert P. Goldman and Sally J. Sutherland 
Goldman (1996) 

Yuddhakanda: By Robert P. Goldman, Sally J. Sutherland Goldman, 
and Barend A. van Nooten (2009) 

Uttarakanda: By Robert P. Goldman and Sally J. Sutherland 
Goldman (2017) 


All translations, and especially those from a work belonging to antiquity 
and composed in a linguistic and cultural idiom quite different from that of 
those into which they are rendered, are necessarily creative works made up 
of a series of judgments, decisions, opinions, compromises, and, no doubt, 
prejudices on the part of their translators. Given its long and complex 
textual history, as discussed in the introduction, and its role as a seminal 
work for a diverse religious community, this is especially true in the case of 
the Valmiki Ramayana. 


The elaborate notes and lengthy introductions that accompany each of 
the seven volumes of the original Princeton Valmiki Ramayana (PVR) have 
exhaustively explored the many difficulties the text presents, the extensive 
commentaries on it by its traditional scholiasts, the numerous modern 
scholarly works it has inspired, and the many translations of its various 
recensions in various languages. There our decisions as to how to translate 
every problematic issue in the text have been fully discussed in comparison 
with the work of earlier commentators, scholars, and translators. The 
original Princeton translation, and particularly its dense and technical 
annotation, was intended in large measure for a scholarly audience with 
some degree of competence in Sanskrit. The present volume, on the other 
hand, is intended for those who wish to read a scholarly and readable 
translation of the critically established text of the poem in a fairly high 
register of contemporary literary prose with a minimum of distraction in the 
form of notes and comments. We urge readers who may wish to look more 
deeply into the issues involved in understanding and appreciating this 
magnificent poem to consult the introductions and notes to the original 
seven volumes and look into some of the works in our list of suggested 
readings that follows this introduction. We should note, however, that as a 
result of the revision of the original translation intended to make it more 
accessible for general and classroom readership, some notes in the earlier 
work will not correspond to the wording of the current version. 

One technical note should be kept in mind. The Sanskrit epic poems, like 
many metrical works in the language, are frequently printed in separate 
verses, which are commonly followed by their sequential numbers within a 
sarga, “chapter,” or other section. In most manuscripts and printed editions, 
each sarga is followed by a colophon, added by the scribes and/or editors, 
indicating its number, signifying that it is at an end, and sometimes 
identifying its topic. To assist readers of the original translation who could 
read Sanskrit and wished to follow our rendering closely, the work was 
published in the same verse-by-verse format. However, to conserve space 
and enable the reader perhaps to get a better sense of the movement of the 
narrative, the present translation is printed in a continuous, paragraph-by- 
paragraph format, with the verse numbers indicated at the start of each 
paragraph. 


Over the more than three decades during which this massive translation 
project proceeded, our thinking about various strategies of translation and 
issues of consistency among all the seven volumes has naturally evolved. 
Also, while the original version, with its dense and massive annotation, was 
intended in large measure for a scholarly audience already familiar with the 
norms of early Indian culture, literature, and society, the present volume is 
directed more toward a college-age and general audience with less exposure 
to such matters. In the absence of the annotation, this change of intended 
readership involved strategies for making clear in the translation itself the 
identity of the huge cast of divine, human, and animal characters mentioned 
in the great poem. They are identified in the original by a potentially 
confusing plethora of alternative names, including epithets indicating their 
genealogy or through kennings referring to some aspect of their appearance, 
accouterments, accomplishments, or history. Rather than rob the text of its 
variety in this respect by using the same, most common, or most widely 
familiar name for each character, we have adopted, for the most part, a 
somewhat hybrid approach: we juxtapose that name with a translation of the 
epithet in question. So, for example, the great monkey divinity Hanuman, 
although often identified in the text by that name, is also frequently referred 
to by epithets referring to his parentage. Thus, he may be called Maruti, 
Marutatmaja, or Vayusunu, all of which mean “son of the wind god.” 
Similarly, the powerful vedic wind god, Vayu, Hanuman’s father, is 
frequently referred to by the epithet Pavana, literally, “the purifier.” So, 
when as is often the case, Hanuman is identified by the epithet Pavanasuta, 
“the son of Pavana,” we have generally translated it as “Hanuman, the son 
of Pavana the wind god.” On the other hand, as the constantly mentioned 
vedic fire god Agni is frequently referred to simply as Pavaka, which also 
means “the purifier,” and we did not wish to confuse this figure with Vayu, 
we have rendered this term normally as “Agni, the purifier.” In this way we 
have used such expressions as “the sun, maker of day,” and “the sun, 
bringer of light,” for the kennings divakara, literally, “day maker,” and 
bhaskara, literally, “light maker,’ respectively. Genealogical and 
geographical epithets that are not nominal compounds, such as Janaki, 
“daughter of Janaka,” and Vaideht, “lady of Mithila,” both epithets of Sita, 
are allowed to stand by themselves, but we have translated compound 
names such as Janakatmaja, “daughter of Janaka.” It has not been 


practicable to make such identifications for all of the epic’s innumerable 
characters in the running translation; however, the reader can resort to the 
glossary of important names for the identification of characters that may not 
be clear from the translation alone. 

Sanskrit is remarkable among all the world’s languages for both its 
extreme polysemy, in which one word may have many different meanings, 
and the degree to which a large number of very different words can serve as 
synonyms. In the first case, the translator has to be guided by the specific 
context in order to determine the precise sense of a commonly used word. 
One example is the seminal and pervasive Indic term dharma, which can 
mean religion, duty, inherent nature, law, righteousness, character, and 
insignia, among others. For the most part we render it generically as 
“righteousness” but use other terms for it in different contexts. Another 
example that occurs at many places in the epic is the political term 
yuvaraja, literally, “young king.” Depending on the particularities of the 
narrative, yuvardja may refer either to an heir-apparent designated by a 
ruling monarch to succeed him upon his death or to a prince regent who 
rules a kingdom in place of a retired, but still living, king. Similarly, the 
ubiquitous term astra, “that which is thrown or shot,” can refer, depending 
on the precise context, to an arrow, a dart, any missile, or, commonly, a 
supernatural spell that is employed to invoke the power of a supernatural 
agency, such as a divinity, into a missile or even an ordinary object. 

Where many words have the same referent, we have tried to capture the 
diversity and texture of the original by providing the most common term for 
the target meaning in English, enhanced by a descriptive term reflecting the 
etymological sense of the word used. A good example 1s the text’s diverse 
terminology for monkeys, creatures that occupy a central role in the epic 
story. The poet uses two common and basic terms for his simian characters, 
kapi and vanara, which we have rendered simply as “monkey.” But he also 
uses a wide variety of descriptors and kennings to refer to monkeys in 
general and to specific species in particular. Our practice has been, again, to 
render the descriptive term along with the word “monkey,” whether it 
appears in the text separately or not. Thus, we translate plavaga, “going by 
leaps,’ as “leaping monkey,” vanaukas, “forest-dwelling,” as “forest- 
dwelling monkey,” hari, “tawny,” as “tawny monkey,” and so on. The last 
of these terms is particularly common in the text and refers, we believe, to 


the ubiquitous Rhesus macaque (Macaca mulatta), which is a common 
presence and even a menace throughout both urban and rural India. There 
does, however, seem to be a species differentiation suggested by the term 
rksa, which is often paired with other terms for “monkey.” Here we have 
taken the liberty of rendering this term as “apes” in its general, nonscientific 
sense to refer to both monkeys and true apes. Later versions of the Rama 
story understand the term rksa to refer to bears rather than monkeys. We 
believe that the term actually refers to the so-called Hanuman langur 
(Semnopithecus entellus). This langur and the Rhesus macaque (Macaca 
mulatta) are the most common species of monkey in India. There are no 
true apes native to all but the extreme northeast of the Indian subcontinent. 
Sometimes an individual Sanskrit word has a broad range of meanings, 
and a given object might have a very large range of words that refer to it. 
And thus, in many cases, it is not really possible to map one Sanskrit word 
onto one specific English term. Therefore, we have simply made a series of 
“executive decisions” as to how to identify objects, particularly in the 
spheres of realia and natural history. A striking example here is the epic’s 
extensive lexicon for types of weapons. The epic mentions some fourteen 
types of arrows alone, for each of which we have had to find an English 
equivalent based, where possible, on the lexica, the etymology of the name, 
or the interpretation(s) of the various commentators consulted in preparing 
the translation. But the text also has several names for types of long, sharp 
throwing and piercing weapons, for which English has such names as 
“spear,” “lance,” “javelin,” “pike,” and so forth. It is difficult to distinguish 
these from one another in trying to map, imperfectly, the Sanskrit terms 
onto English ones. As a result, we have simply decided to choose a 
reasonable English term for each Sanskrit lexeme and stick to that 
consistently throughout the revised translation. For clarification we have 
provided a glossary of the names for the epic’s huge lexicon of terms for 
weapons at the end of the volume. The vast number of plants and animals 
found throughout the Ramdyana are often hard to identify and may not 
necessarily represent those of similar names found today. To aid the reader 
who is interested in identifying these, an extensive glossary of flora and 
fauna has been posted online and may be accessed at https://press.princeton 
.edu/books/paperback/978069 1206868/the-ramayana-of-valmiki. 
Additionally, because of the revisions and editing of the original translation, 


the reader should know that in a number of cases its annotation will not 
necessarily correspond to the translation presented in this volume. 

For the rest we have striven throughout to render the sometimes complex 
Sanskrit syntax and the poem’s unfamiliar cultural frame into literal but 
clear and readable contemporary literary prose. It is our hope that you, the 
reader, will find the epic easy to follow, enjoyable, and educational, and that 
it will open up for you one of the greatest and most influential literary, 
religious, and cultural works ever composed. 


Part Il 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 


Chapter 1 
The Balakanda 


Sarga 1 

[1-5] Valmiki, the ascetic, questioned the eloquent Narada, bull among 
sages, always devoted to asceticism and study of the sacred texts. “Is there a 
man in the world today who is truly virtuous? Who is there who is mighty 
and yet knows both what is right and how to act upon it? Who always 
speaks the truth and holds firmly to his vows? Who exemplifies proper 
conduct and is benevolent to all creatures? Who is learned, capable, and a 
pleasure to behold? Who is self-controlled, having subdued his anger? Who 
is both judicious and free from envy? Who, when his fury is aroused in 
battle, is feared even by the gods? This is what I want to hear, for my desire 
to know is very strong. Great seer, you must know of such a man.” 

[6-11] When Narada, who was familiar with all the three worlds, heard 
Valmiki’s words, he was delighted. “Listen,” he replied and spoke these 
words: “The many virtues you have named are hard to find. Let me think a 
moment, sage, before I speak. Hear now of a man who has them all. His 
name is Rama and he was born in the House of Iksvaku. All men know of 
him, for he is self-controlled, mighty, radiant, steadfast, and masterful. He is 
wise and grounded in proper conduct. Eloquent and majestic, he annihilates 
his enemies. His shoulders are broad and his arms mighty. His neck is like a 
conch shell and his jaws are powerful. His chest is vast, and a subduer of 
his enemies, he wields a huge bow. His collarbone is set deep in muscle, his 
arms reach down to his knees, and his head is finely made. His brow is 
noble and his gait full of grace. His proportions are perfect and his limbs 
well formed and symmetrical. Dark is his complexion and he is valorous. 
His chest is fully fleshed; he has large eyes. He is splendid and marked with 
all auspicious signs. 

[12-15] “He knows the ways of righteousness and is always true to his 
word. The welfare of his subjects is his constant concern. He is renowned, 
learned, pure, disciplined, and contemplative. He is the protector of all 


living things and the guardian of righteousness. Versed in the essence of the 
vedas and their ancillary sciences, he is expert in the science of arms. He is 
versed in the essence of every sastra, learned in traditional lore, and highly 
intelligent. All the people love him, for he is good, cheerful, and clever. He 
is the constant resort of good men, as is the ocean of rivers. For he is noble 
and equable in all circumstances and always a pleasure to behold. 

[16-24] “The delight of his mother, Kausalya, he is gifted with every 
virtue. For he is as deep as the ocean and as unyielding as the Himalayas. 
He is as mighty as Visnu, but as pleasant to behold as the moon. In his 
wrath he resembles the fire at the end of time, yet he rivals the earth in 
forbearance. In charity he is the equal of Kubera, giver of wealth, and in 
truthfulness like a second Dharma, the god of righteousness. Moved by 
affection for him, Dasaratha, lord of the earth, wished to appoint this Rama, 
his beloved eldest son, as prince regent. For he was truly valorous, 
possessed all these virtues, and was gifted with other excellent virtues. 
Seeing the preparations for the consecration, the king’s wife, Queen 
Kaikeyi, who had long before been granted a boon, now asked for it. She 
demanded that Rama be exiled and that Bharata be consecrated in his place. 
Because he was a man true to his word, King Dasaratha was caught in the 
snare of his own righteousness and had to exile his dear son Rama. Keeping 
the promise, the hero entered the forest, because of the command implicit in 
a father’s word and in order to please Kaikeyt. Out of love for him, his 
beloved and obedient brother Laksmana, the delight of Sumitra, followed 
him as he set forth. And his wife, Sita, the best of women, possessed of 
every grace, followed Rama as Rohini does the hare-marked moon. 

[25—27] “He was followed far on his way by his father, Dasaratha, and 
the people of the city. But at the town of Srigavera on the banks of the 
Ganges he dismissed his charioteer. Wandering from wood to wood, they 
crossed great rivers until, on the instructions of Bharadvaja, they came to 
Mount Citrakita. There the three of them built a pleasant dwelling. 
Delighting in the forest and resembling celestial gandharvas, they lived 
there happily. 

[28-32] “When Rama had gone to Mount Citrakitta, King DaSaratha was 
stricken with grief for his son and loudly lamenting him, went to heaven. 
After he died, the brahmans, led by Vasistha, urged Bharata to become king, 
but that mighty man did not desire kingship. Instead, the hero went to the 


forest to beg for grace at Rama’s feet. But Bharata’s elder brother only gave 
his sandals as a token of his sovereignty and repeatedly urged Bharata to 
return. Unable to accomplish his desire, Bharata touched Rama’s feet and 
ruled the kingdom from the village of Nandigrama in expectation of Rama’s 
return. But Rama, seeing that the people of the city had come there, entered 
the Dandaka forest with single-minded resolution. 

[33-38] “He killed the rdksasa Viradha and met Sarabhaiiga, Sutiksna, 
Agastya, and Agastya’s brother. On the advice of Agastya, and with the 
greatest pleasure, he accepted Indra’s bow as well as a sword and two 
quivers, whose arrows were inexhaustible. While Rama was living in the 
forest with the woodland creatures, all the seers came to see him about 
killing the asuras and raksasas. While dwelling there, he disfigured the 
raksasa woman Sirpanakha, who lived in Janasthana and could take any 
form at will. Then Rama slew in battle all the radksasas who had been sent 
against him on the strength of Sirpanakha’s report—Khara, Trigiras, and 
the raksasa Disana, as well as all of their followers. Fourteen thousand 
raksasas were slain. 

[39-42] “Then Ravana, hearing of the slaughter of his kinsmen, went 
mad with rage and chose a rdksasa named Ma§rica to assist him. Marica 
tried to dissuade Ravana many times, saying, ‘Ravana, you would do well 
not to meddle with this mighty man.’ But Ravana, who was driven by his 
fate, paid no heed to Marica’s words and went with him to Rama’s ashram. 
With the help of that master of illusion, he lured both sons of the king far 
away. Then, having slain the vulture Jatayus, he carried off Rama’s wife. 

[43-47] “Finding the vulture dying and hearing that Maithili had been 
abducted, Raghava was consumed with grief. Beside himself with grief, he 
lamented loudly. In sorrow, he cremated the vulture Jataéyus. Then, 
searching the forest for Sita, he met a radksasa named Kabandha, deformed 
and dreadful to behold. The great-armed man killed and cremated him so 
that he went to heaven. But Kabandha had first told him, ‘Raghava, you 
must go to the ascetic woman Sabari, for she is cunning in all ways of 
righteousness and lives accordingly.’ And so, the powerful destroyer of his 
foes came to Sabari. Rama, the son of Dasgaratha, was duly honored by 
Sabari. Then, on the shores of Lake Pampa, he met the monkey Hanuman. 

[48-53] “Acting on Hanuman’s advice, mighty Rama met Sugriva and 
told him all that had happened. Sensing that he had found a friend, the 


sorrowful king of the monkeys told Rama the whole story of his feud. And 
the monkey told him also of Valin’s might. Rama vowed to kill Valin, but 
Sugriva remained doubtful of Raghava’s strength. So, to reassure him, 
Raghava kicked the great corpse of Dundubhi ten whole leagues with his 
big toe. Furthermore, with a single mighty arrow, he pierced seven sdla 
trees, a hill, and even the underworld Rasatala, thus inspiring confidence. 
The great monkey was confident, and, his mind at ease, he went with Rama 
to the cave Kiskindha. 

[54-57] “Then the foremost among the tawny monkeys, Sugriva, yellow 
as gold, gave a great roar. At that roar, the lord of the tawny monkeys, 
Valin, came forth. Raghava then killed Valin in battle at the request of 
Sugriva and made Sugriva king in his place. Eager to find Janaka’s 
daughter, that bull among monkeys assembled all the monkeys and sent 
them out in all directions. On the advice of the vulture Sampati, mighty 
Hanuman leapt over the salt sea, a hundred leagues in breadth. 

[58-62] “Reaching the city of Lanka, which was ruled by Ravana, he 
saw Sita brooding in a grove of asoka trees. He gave her a token of 
recognition and told her all that had happened. Then, once he had 
comforted Vaidehi, he smashed the gate. He killed five generals of the army 
and seven ministers’ sons as well. Then, after crushing the hero Aksa, he 
was captured. Knowing that he could free himself from their divine weapon 
by means of a boon he had received from Grandfather Brahma, the hero 
suffered the raksasas to bind him as they would. The great monkey then 
burned the city of Lanka, sparing Sita Maithill, and returned to tell the good 
news to Rama. 

[63-66] “Approaching great Rama, the immeasurable monkey walked 
reverently around him and told him just what had happened, saying, ‘I have 
found Sita.” Rama then went with Sugriva to the seashore, where he made 
the ocean tremble with arrows blazing like the sun. The ocean, lord of 
rivers, revealed himself, and, following the ocean’s advice, Rama had Nala 
build a bridge. By this means he went to the city of Lanka, and, having 
killed Ravana in battle, he consecrated Vibhisana as lord of the rdksasas in 
Lanka. 

[67—70] “The three worlds, including all that moves and 1s fixed, and the 
hosts of gods and seers were delighted by that mighty feat of great Rama. 
All the gods were thoroughly delighted and worshiped Rama. Having 


accomplished what he had to do, he was freed from anxiety and rejoiced. 
He received boons from the gods and revived the fallen monkeys. Then, 
mounting the flying palace Puspaka, he went to Nandigrama. In 
Nandigrama the blameless man and his brothers put off the knotted hair of 
ascetics. Thus did Rama regain Sita and recover his kingdom. 

[71-76] “His people are pleased and joyful, contented, well fed, and 
righteous. They are also free from physical and mental afflictions and from 
the danger of famine. Nowhere in his realm do men experience the death of 
a son. Women are never widowed and remain always faithful to their 
husbands. Just as in the Krta Yuga, there is no danger whatever of fire or 
wind, and no creatures are lost in floods. He performs hundreds of 
asvamedhas involving vast quantities of gold. And in accordance with 
custom, he donates tens and hundreds of millions of cows to the learned. 
Raghava is establishing hundreds of royal lines and has set the four social 
classes each to its own work in the world. When he has ruled the kingdom 
for eleven thousand years, Rama will go to the Brahmaloka. 

[77-79] “Whoever reads this history of Rama, which is purifying, 
destructive of sin, holy, and the equal of the vedas, is freed from all sins. A 
man who reads this Ramayana story, which leads to long life, will, after 
death, rejoice in heaven together with his sons, grandsons, and attendants. A 
brahman who reads it becomes eloquent, a kshatriya becomes a lord of the 
earth, a vaisya acquires profit from his goods, and even a sudra achieves 
greatness.” 


Sarga 2 

[1-4] When the great and eloquent sage had heard Narada’s words, the 
righteous man and his disciples did him great honor. After the divine seer 
Narada had been duly honored by the sage, he took his leave and, receiving 
it, flew off into the sky. Once Narada had departed for the world of the 
gods, the sage went, after a while, to the bank of the Tamasa River, not far 
from the Jahnavi, the Ganges. Upon reaching the Tamasa riverbank, the 
great sage spied a bathing spot that was free from mud and spoke to the 
disciple who stood beside him. 

[S—8] “Bharadvaja, look at this lovely bathing place so free from mud. 
Its waters are as lucid as the mind of a good man. Set down the water jar, 
dear boy, and give me my barkcloth robe, for I will bathe here at this 


excellent bathing spot of the Tamasa.” Addressed in this fashion by the 
great Valmika, Bharadvaja, ever attentive to his guru, gave him his 
barkcloth robe. Taking the barkcloth from his disciple’s hands, he walked 
about, his senses tightly controlled, looking all about him at the vast forest. 

[9-14] Nearby, that holy man spied an inseparable pair of sweet-voiced 
kraunca birds wandering about. But even as he watched, a Nisada hunter, 
filled with malice and intent on mischief, struck down the male of the pair. 
Seeing him struck down and writhing on the ground, his body covered with 
blood, his mate uttered a piteous cry. And the pious seer, seeing the bird 
struck down in this fashion by the Nisada, was filled with pity. Then, in the 
intensity of this feeling of compassion, the brahman thought, “This is 
unrighteous.” Hearing the Araufica hen wailing, he uttered these words: 
“Since, Nisada, you killed one of this pair of Arauncas, distracted at the 
height of passion, you shall not live for very long.” 

[15-18] And even as he was speaking in this fashion and looking on, this 
thought arose in his heart, “Stricken with grief for this bird, what is this I 
have uttered?” But upon reflection, that wise and thoughtful man came to a 
conclusion. Then that bull among sages spoke these words to his disciple: 
“Fixed in metrical quarters, each with a like number of syllables, and fit for 
the accompaniment of stringed and percussion instruments, the utterance 
that I produced in this access of soka, ‘grief,’ shall be called sloka, ‘poetry,’ 
and nothing else.” And his delighted disciple memorized that unsurpassed 
utterance even as the sage was making it, so that his guru was pleased with 
him. 

[19-21] Then, after taking his ritual bath according to precept at the 
bathing spot, the sage, still pondering this matter, went back to his ashram. 
His disciple, the obedient and learned Bharadvaja, took up his guru’s 
brimming water pot and followed behind him. The sage, who knew the 
ways of righteousness, entered his ashram with his disciple, seated himself, 
and began to discuss various other matters while still lost in profound 
thought. 

[22-24] Then the mighty four-faced Brahma himself, the creator of the 
worlds, came to see the bull among sages. Seeing him, Valmiki rose quickly 
and without a word. He stood, subdued and greatly wonder struck, his 
hands cupped in reverence. Then he worshiped the god, offering water for 
his feet, the guest-offering, a seat, and hymns of praise. When he had made 


the prescribed prostration before him, he asked after his continuing well- 
being. 

[25—28] Once the holy lord was seated in a place of honor, he motioned 
the great seer Valmiki also to a seat. But even though the grandfather of the 
worlds himself sat there before him, Valmiki, his mind once more harking 
back to what had happened, lapsed again into profound thought: “That 
wicked man, his mind possessed by malice, did a terrible thing in killing 
such a sweet-voiced Araunca bird for no reason.” Grieving once more for 
the kraunca hen, given over wholly to his grief and lost in his inner thought, 
he sang the verse again right there before the god. 

[29-36] Smiling, Brahma spoke to the bull among sages: “This is a sloka 
that you have composed. You needn’t be perplexed about this. Brahman, it 
was by my will alone that you produced this elegant speech. Greatest of 
seers, you must now compose the entire history of Rama. You must tell the 
world the story of the righteous, virtuous, wise, and steadfast Rama, just as 
you heard it from Narada, the full story, public and private, of that wise 
man. For all that befell wise Rama, Saumitri, the rdksasas, and Vaidehi, 
whether in public or private, will be revealed to you, even those events of 
which you are ignorant. No utterance of yours in this poem shall be false. 
Now compose the holy story of Rama fashioned into s/okas to delight the 
heart. As long as the mountains and rivers shall endure upon the earth, so 
long will the story of the Ramayana be told among the people. And as long 
as the story of Rama you compose is told, so long will you live on in my 
worlds above and below.” 

[37-41] When the holy Lord Brahma had spoken in this fashion, he 
vanished on the spot, and the sage Valmiki and his disciples were filled 
with wonder. Then all his disciples chanted that s/oka again. Delighted and 
filled with wonder, they said over and over again: “The soka, ‘grief,’ that 
the great seer sang out in four metrical quarters, all equal in syllables, has, 
by virtue of its being repeated after him, become s/oka, ‘poetry.’ Then the 
contemplative Valmiki conceived this idea: “Let me compose an entire 
poem, called the Ramdyana, in verses such as these.” And thus, with 
enormous insight, did the renowned sage compose this poem that adds to 
the glory of the glorious Rama, with hundreds of s/okas equal in syllables, 
their words noble in sound and meaning, delighting the heart. 


Sarga 3 
[1—2] And so it came about that the righteous man, having learned the entire 
substance of that story, wise Rama’s tale—so exemplary of righteousness— 
sought to make it public. First, the sage sipped water in the prescribed 
fashion. Then, seated on darbha grass with the tips pointed east and 
cupping his hands reverently, he sought through profound meditation the 
means of access to this tale: 

[3-29] Rama’s birth; his great strength and kindliness to all; the people’s 
love for him; his forbearance, gentleness, and truthful nature; the various 
other marvelous stories told on the journey with Visvamitra; Janaki’s 
wedding and the breaking of the bow; the dispute between the two Ramas 
and the virtues of Dasarathi; Rama’s consecration and Kaikeyi’s wicked 
nature; the interruption of the consecration and the banishment of Rama; the 
king’s grief and lamentation and his departure for the next world; the 
dejection of the common people and their abandonment; the conversation 
with the Nisada chief and the return of the charioteer; the crossing of the 
Ganges and the meeting with Bharadvaja; the arrival at Mount Citraktta on 
the instructions of Bharadvaja; the building of and dwelling in a hut and the 
coming of Bharata; the propitiation of Rama and the funerary libations for 
his father; the consecration of the wonderful sandals and the dwelling in 
Nandigrama; the journey to the Dandaka forest and the meeting with 
Sutiksna; the encounter with Anasitya and her presentation of the ointment; 
the conversation with Sirpanakha and her disfigurement; the slaying of 
Khara and Trisiras and the setting out of Ravana; the destruction of Marica 
and the abduction of Vaidehi; the lamentation of Raghava and the death of 
the vulture king; the encounter with Kabandha and arrival at Lake Pampa; 
the encounters with Sabari and Hanuman and the lamentations of great 
Raghava at Lake Pampa; the journey to Rsyamiika and the meeting with 
Sugriva; the engendering of confidence, the alliance, and the battle between 
Valin and Sugriva; the slaying of Valin and the installation of Sugriva; the 
lamentation of Tara; the agreement; and the settling in for the rainy season; 
the anger of the lion of the Raghavas; the marshaling of the troops; their 
being dispatched in all directions; and the description of the earth; the 
giving of the ring; the discovery of Rksa’s cave; the fast until death; and the 
encounter with Sampati; the ascent of the mountain and the leap over the 
ocean; the entry into Lanka by night and the solitary deliberations; the 


arrival at the drinking ground; the view of the women’s quarters; the arrival 
at the asoka grove and the meeting with Sita; the giving of the token of 
recognition and Sita’s speech; the threats of the raksasa women and the 
dream-vision of Trijata; Sita’s giving of the jewel and the breaking of the 
trees; the flight of the raksasa women and the slaughter of the servants; the 
capture of Vayu’s son Hanuman and the wailing at the burning of Lanka; 
the return leap; and the seizure of the honey wine; the consolation of 
Raghava and the presentation of the jewel; the encounter with the ocean and 
the construction of Nala’s bridge; the crossing of the ocean and the siege of 
Lanka by night; the alliance with Vibhisana and his revelation of the means 
of destruction; the death of Kumbhakarna and the slaying of Meghanada; 
the destruction of Ravana and the recovery of Sita in the enemy’s citadel; 
the consecration of Vibhisana and the acquisition of the flying palace 
Puspaka; the journey to Ayodhya and the meeting with Bharata; the 
celebration of Rama’s consecration and his dismissal of all his troops; his 
pleasing the kingdom and his sending away Vaidehi—all of this did the 
holy seer Valmiki render into poetry including, in the latter portion of his 
poem, even those events that had not yet befallen Rama on earth. 


Sarga 4 

[1-5] It was after Rama had regained his kingdom that the holy and self- 
controlled seer Valmiki composed this entire history in such wonderful 
words. When the wise master had completed it, including the sections 
dealing with the future and final events, he thought, “Who should perform 
it?” And, as the great contemplative seer was pondering this, Kusa and 
Lava, in the guise of sages, came and touched his feet. He looked at the two 
glorious brothers, Kusa and Lava, who lived in his ashram, for they were 
sons of the king, familiar with the ways of righteousness, and endowed with 
sweet voices. Perceiving that they were well grounded in the vedas and had 
excellent memories, he accepted them as students of vedic exegesis. 

[6-10] A man who always fulfilled his vows, he taught them the whole 
of this poem, the Ramayana, which is the great tale of Sita and the slaying 
of Paulastya. It is sweet both when recited and when sung in the three 
tempos to the seven notes of the scale, and it is eminently suitable for the 
accompaniment of both stringed and percussion instruments. The two 
disciples sang the poem, which is replete with all the poetic sentiments: the 


humorous, the erotic, the piteous, the wrathful, the heroic, the terrifying, the 
loathsome, and the rest. The brothers, beautiful as gandharvas, had 
beautiful voices and were well versed in the gandharvas’ musical art. They 
were expert in both articulation and modulation. Gifted with beauty and 
auspicious marks, they spoke with sweet voices. They looked like twin 
reflections of the same image, R&ama’s body. 

[11-12] This unsurpassed tale is exemplary of righteousness, and so the 
two blameless sons of the king learned the entire poem by heart. And when 
they had done so, the two great and gifted men, who understood its essence 
and were marked by every auspicious sign, sang it as they had been 
instructed, with single-minded concentration before assemblies of seers, 
twice-born brahmans, and virtuous men. 

[13—20] Now on one occasion the two sang the poem in the presence of 
some pure-minded seers who were seated in an assembly. When the sages 
heard it, their eyes were clouded with tears and filled with the greatest 
wonder, they all said to the two, “Excellent, excellent!” All the sages, glad 
at heart and loving righteousness, praised Kusa and Lava as they sang, for 
they were worthy of praise: “Ah, the sweetness of the singing and 
especially the poetry! Even though this all took place so long ago, it is as 
though it were happening before our very eyes.” Then the two of them 
together, entering fully into the emotion of the story, sang it with the full 
range of notes, sweetly and with feeling. Praised in this fashion by those 
great seers, who were themselves to be extolled for their asceticism, they 
sang more sweetly still and with still greater feeling. One sage there, 
delighted, gave them a water jar. Another, a man of great renown, gave 
them a barkcloth mantle. This wondrous tale that the sage told and that he 
completed in perfect sequence is the great source of inspiration for poets. 

[21-27] Now it happened that on one occasion, the elder brother of 
Bharata saw there those two singers who were being praised everywhere on 
the roads and royal highways. And Rama, the destroyer of his enemies, 
brought the brothers, Kusa and Lava, to his own dwelling, where he 
honored them, for they were worthy of honor. Then Lord Rama, chastiser of 
his foes, seated on a heavenly throne of gold with his ministers and brothers 
sitting nearby, looked at the two beautiful youths with their lutes and spoke 
to Laksmana, Satrughna, and Bharata: “Let us listen to this tale, whose 
words and meaning alike are wonderful, as it is sweetly sung by these two 


godlike men. For although these two sages, KuSa and Lava, are great 
ascetics, they bear all the marks of kings. Moreover, it is said that the 
profound tale they tell is highly beneficial, even for me. Listen to it.” Then, 
at a word from Rama, the two of them began to sing in the full perfection of 
the marga mode. And right there in the assembly, even Rama, in his desire 
to experience it fully, gradually permitted his mind to become enthralled. 


Sarga 5 

[1-4] This great tale, known as the Ramayana, concerns itself with the 
dynasty of those great and victorious kings, the Iksvakus, descendants of 
Prajapati, lord of creatures, and those to whom this whole earth first of all 
belonged. Among them was Sagara, who caused the ocean to be dug and 
who had sixty thousand sons to form his entourage when he went abroad. I 
will recite it from the beginning in its entirety, omitting nothing. It is in 
keeping with the goals of righteousness, profit, and pleasure, and should be 
listened to with faith. 

[S—9| There is a great, happy, and prosperous country called Kosala, 
situated on the banks of the Sarayt River and rich in abundance of wealth 
and grain. There was situated the world-famous city of Ayodhya, a city built 
by Manu himself, lord of men. It was a great and majestic city, twelve 
leagues long and three wide, with well-ordered avenues. It was adorned 
with a great and well-ordered royal highway, always strewn with loose 
blossoms and constantly sprinkled with water. King Dasaratha, who had 
expanded a realm already great, dwelt in that city like the lord of the gods 
in heaven. 

[10—19] It was provided with doors and gates, and its markets had well- 
ordered interiors. It contained every implement and weapon and was the 
resort of every artisan. It was majestic, unequaled in splendor, and thronged 
with bards and rhapsodists. It had pennants on its tall towers and bristled 
with hundreds of hundred-slayers. It was a great city filled with troupes of 
actresses everywhere, dotted with parks and mango groves, and girdled by 
ramparts. It was a fortress with a deep moat impossible to cross, was 
unassailable by its enemies, and was filled with horses, elephants, cows, 
camels, and donkeys. Filled with crowds of neighboring kings come to pay 
tribute, it was likewise adorned with merchants of many different lands. It 
was splendid with hills and palaces fashioned of jewels. Bristling with its 


rooftop turrets, it resembled Indra’s Amaravatt. Colorful, laid out like a 
chessboard, and crowded with hosts of the most beautiful women, it was 
filled with every kind of jewel and adorned with palatial buildings. Situated 
on level ground, its houses were built in close proximity to one another, 
without the slightest gap between them. It held plentiful stores of sa/i rice, 
and its water was like the juice of sugar cane. Loudly resounding with 
drums and stringed instruments—dundubhis, mrdangas, \utes, and panavas 
—1it was truly unsurpassed on earth. The outer walls of its dwellings were 
well constructed, and it was filled with good men. Indeed, it was like a 
palace in the sky that perfected beings had gained through austerities. 

[20—23] King DaSaratha had populated the entire city with thousands of 
great chariot-warriors, both skillful and dexterous—men who would never 
loose their arrows upon a foe who was isolated from his comrades, the sole 
support of his family, in hiding, or in flight, but who slew with their sharp 
weapons, or even the strength of their bare hands, lions, tigers, and boars, 
bellowing with rage in the forest. But the king also peopled the city with 
great brahmans who tended the sacred fires and had mastered the vedas 
with their six ancillary sciences—men who were devoted to truth and gave 
away thousands in charity—and with prominent seers, like the great seers 
themselves. 


Sarga 6 

[1-5] Dwelling in that city of Ayodhya, King Dasaratha ruled the earth, just 
as powerful Manu once ruled the world. He knew the vedas and was lord 
and master of everything. Powerful and gifted with foresight, he was loved 
by the people of both town and countryside. That master chariot-warrior of 
the Iksvakus performed sacrifices and was devoted to righteousness. He 
was renowned in the three worlds as a masterful man and a royal seer like 
one of the great seers. He was mighty and had slain his enemies, yet he had 
also conquered his senses and had many friends. In wealth and accumulated 
property, he was the equal of Sakra or Vaisravana, lord of wealth. True to 
his vows and ever cultivating the three goals of life, he ruled that splendid 
city as Indra rules Amaravatt. 

[6—11] In that great city men were happy, righteous, and deeply learned. 
They were truthful and not covetous, for each man was content with his 
own property. In that most excellent city there was no householder who did 


not have significant property, who had not accomplished his goals, or who 
was not possessed of cattle, horses, wealth, and grain. Nowhere in Ayodhya 
could one find a lecher, a miser, a cruel or unlearned man, or an agnostic. 
All the men and women conducted themselves in accordance with 
righteousness and were self-controlled and joyful. In disposition and 
conduct they were as pure as the great seers themselves. No one lacked 
earrings, diadem, and necklace. No one was deprived of pleasures. There 
was no one who was dirty or whose body lacked for ointments or perfume. 
There was no one who had unclean food or was ungenerous. There was 
nobody who did not wear an armlet and a golden breastplate. No one was 
lacking in either rings or self-control. 

[12-18] Nor was there in Ayodhya a single brahman who did not kindle 
the sacred fires, sacrifice, and donate thousands in charity. Nor was there 
anyone who indulged in mixing of the social classes. The brahmans had 
subdued their senses and were always devoted to their proper occupation. 
They were given over to charity and study and were restrained in accepting 
gifts. There were no agnostics and no liars. There was no one who was not 
deeply learned. No one was envious, incompetent, or ignorant. No one was 
unhappy, fickle, or troubled. In Ayodhya, one could not find a man or a 
woman lacking in grace or beauty, or anyone who was not devoted to the 
king. The men of all the social classes, of which the foremost, that of the 
brahmans, makes the fourth, worshiped both gods and guests. They were 
long-lived, practicing truth and righteousness. The kshatriyas accepted the 
brahmans as their superiors, and the vaisyas were subservient to the 
kshatriyas. The sidras, devoted to their proper duty, served the other three 
classes. In short, the city was as well governed by that lord of the Iksvakus 
as it had been long ago by the wise Manu, foremost of men. 

[19-24] Like a cave filled with lions, it was full of fiery warriors, skilled, 
unyielding, and accomplished in their art. It was full of the finest horses, 
bred in the regions of Bahlika, Vanayu, Kamboja, and the great river, the 
equals of Hari’s steed. It was filled with exceedingly powerful rutting 
elephants, like mountains, born in the Vindhya hills and the Himalayas. The 
city was always full of bull elephants, looking like mountains and always in 
rut; elephants of the bhadramandra, bhadramrga, and mrgamandra breeds, 
descended from the cosmic elephants Afjana and Vamana. Indeed, its 
name, Ayodhya—the unassailable—was truly meaningful, even two leagues 


beyond its gates. Thus did the lord of the earth, Sakra’s equal, rule that 
auspicious and aptly named city crowded with thousands of men, 
resplendent with wonderful buildings, its gates fitted with firm bolts. 


Sarga 7 

[1-5] That hero had eight renowned ministers, incorruptible and 
unswervingly devoted to affairs of state. They were Dhrsti, Jayanta, Vijaya, 
Siddhartha, Arthasadhaka, Asoka, Mantrapala, and Sumantra, who made 
the eighth. He had also two principal sacrificial priests, the foremost of 
seers, Vasistha and Vamadeva, as well as other counselors. Great and 
majestic, learned in the sdastras, and steadfast in courage, they were 
renowned, diligent, and as good as their word. They had acquired power, 
forbearance, and fame, and always spoke with a smile. They would never 
utter a false word, whether from anger or for the sake of pleasure or profit. 

[6-10] Nothing took place, either in their own realm or abroad, that they 
didn’t know about by means of secret agents, whether it was already 
accomplished, actually taking place, or even merely contemplated. Adept at 
their duties, they were tested in loyalty so that, if the occasion demanded, 
they would punish even their own sons. They were busy increasing the 
treasury and maintaining the army and would not harm even a hostile man, 
if he had done no wrong. Heroic, unflagging in energy, they put into 
practice the science of statecraft. They were the constant protectors of all 
honest inhabitants of the realm. They filled the treasury without injury to 
the brahmans and kshatriyas and meted out strict punishment only after 
considering the relative gravity of a man’s offense. 

[11-17] When all those honest and like-minded men sat in judgment, 
there was not a single man in the city or the kingdom who dared to bear 
false witness. There was no such thing as a wicked man there, or a man who 
made love to another man’s wife. That splendid city and, indeed, the whole 
country were at peace. The ministers’ garments were fine, their ornaments 
beautiful, and their conduct impeccable. With the eye of statecraft, they 
were vigilant on behalf of the welfare of the lord of men. Sensible only of 
the virtues of their master, they were famed for their courage. They were 
known everywhere, even in foreign lands, for their resoluteness of mind. 
Blessed with ministers such as these, possessed of such virtues, blameless 
King Dasaratha ruled the earth. Ever watchful through his secret agents, 


pleasing his subjects in accordance with righteousness, he found no enemy 
to be his equal, much less superior to him. Surrounded by devoted, clever, 
and capable counselors, skilled both in counsel and in strategy, the king 
achieved a blazing splendor, as does the rising sun surrounded by its 
shining rays. 


Sarga 8 

[1-6] But even though the great man knew all the ways of righteousness 
and reigned in such magnificence, he suffered for the lack of a son, for he 
had no son to carry on his dynasty. And as the great man brooded over this, 
a thought occurred to him: “Why do I not perform the asvamedha to get a 
son?” Once the wise and righteous king, in consultation with all his 
accomplished counselors, had reached the decision that he must sacrifice, 
he said this to Sumantra, the foremost among them, “Fetch my purohita and 
all my gurus at once.” Hearing that, Sumantra, who served as his charioteer, 
spoke to the king in private, “I have heard an ancient story that is told by 
the sacrificial priests. Long ago, your majesty, in the presence of the seers, 
the holy Sanatkum§ara told this tale, which has to do with your acquiring a 
son: 

[7-13] “ ‘Kasyapa has a son known as Vibhandaka. The latter will have 
a son famed as RSyasrnga. Raised entirely in the forest, a sage dwelling 
only in the woods, that lord among brahmans will know nothing other than 
constant obedience to his father. That great man’s chastity will be 
destroyed, and that event, your majesty, will become famous among the 
people and will long be talked about by brahmans. But still, there will be a 
time when he shall live only by serving the sacred fire and his renowned 
father. During that very time, the mighty, valorous, and famous Romapada 
will be the king of the Angas. Because of some transgression on the part of 
that king, there will be a cruel and terrible drought endangering all 
creatures. While the drought persists, the king, in distress, will assemble 
brahmans advanced in learning and will say to them: 

[14-17] “ * “You gentlemen are learned in the ways of righteousness and 
understand the ways of the world. Prescribe some penance such that I might 
find expiation.” And those brahmans, masters of the veda, will say to the 
protector of the earth, “Your majesty, you must by some means or other 
bring Vibhandaka’s son here. And, protector of the earth, once you have had 


Rsyasrnga brought with all due honor, you must, with due ceremony and 
unwavering mind, offer him your daughter Santa.” When the king hears 
their advice he will begin to consider, “By what means can that mighty man 
be brought here?” 

[18-23] “ ‘Then the wise king, having come to a decision in consultation 
with his counselors, will dispatch his purohita and ministers, after duly 
honoring them. But they, hearing the words of the king, will be distressed, 
and with lowered faces, they will entreat with the protector of men, “We 
dare not go. We are afraid of the seer.” But afterwards, when they have 
thought of a suitable means for accomplishing that purpose, they will say, 
“We shall bring the brahman. There will be no difficulty.” And so the king 
of Afiga will bring the seer’s son by means of prostitutes. Santa will be 
given to him, and the god will cause rain. Rsyasrnga, his son-in-law, shall 
produce sons for you.’ Thus far, have I related the tale told by 
Sanatkumara.” Dasaratha was delighted, and he replied to Sumantra, “Tell 
me exactly how RSsyasrnga was brought.” 


Sarga 9 

[1-6] Pressed by the king, Sumantra said these words: “You and your 
counselors shall hear how they brought RSyasrnga. Romapada’s purohita 
and ministers said this to him: ‘We have devised a flawless plan. RSyasrnga 
is a forest dweller devoted to austerity and study. He is wholly unacquainted 
with women and the pleasures of the senses. So we shall bring him to the 
city with pleasant objects of the senses that agitate the thoughts of men. Let 
it be arranged at once. Let beautiful, richly adorned prostitutes go there. He 
will receive them with honor, and they will infatuate him in various ways 
and bring him here.” When the king had heard this, he replied to his 
purohita, ‘So be it.’ His purohita and counselors then did just as they had 
said. 

[7—12] “Upon hearing their instructions, the finest courtesans entered the 
great forest and stayed near the ashram trying to catch a glimpse of the 
seer’s steadfast son who always stayed within it. Wholly content with just 
his father, he had never ventured outside the ashram. From the day of his 
birth, that ascetic had never seen either a man or a woman, or any other 
creature of the city or the countryside. But on one occasion, Vibhandaka’s 
son happened to come to the place where the women were and saw them. 


Wearing beautiful clothes and singing with sweet voices, all those beautiful 
young women approached the seer’s son and said these words: ‘Who are 
you? How do you live? Brahman, we wish to know. Tell us, why do you 
wander alone in this dreadful and deserted forest?’ 

[13-17] “In a sudden feeling of love for these women with their 
desirable bodies and their looks such as he had never before seen, the idea 
came to him there in the forest to tell them about his father: ‘My father is 
Vibhandaka and I am his flesh-and-blood son. My name—RSyasrnga—and 
my occupation are well known throughout the world. But you look so 
lovely. Our ashram is nearby, and there I will do you honor as custom 
demands.’ Hearing the words of the seer’s son, they all consented. Then 
they all went with him to see the ashram. When they had arrived, the seer’s 
son received them with honor, saying: ‘Here is the guest-offering; here is 
water to wash your feet, here are our roots and fruits.’ 

[18-23] “But although they had accepted his hospitality and were filled 
with longing, they were fearful of the seer and so resolved to leave quickly, 
saying: ‘We too have excellent fruits, twice-born brahman. Bless you. Take 
some and eat them now.’ Then they all embraced him joyfully, offering him 
sweets and various other good things to eat. When the mighty man tasted 
them, he thought that they were fruits that he, living always in the forest, 
had never tasted before. Then the women, telling the brahman that they had 
some religious observance to perform, took their leave. Fearful of his father, 
they departed on that pretext. But when they had all gone, the twice-born 
brahman, son of Kasyapa, became sick at heart and wandered about in 
misery. 

[24—28] “Therefore, the very next day, that mighty man came again to 
the place where he had seen those charming, richly adorned courtesans. 
When they saw the brahman coming, their hearts were delighted, and they 
all approached him and said, ‘Now you must come to our ashram, friend. 
There the welcome ceremony will be especially lavish.’ Upon hearing all of 
them utter these words that went straight to his heart, he resolved to go with 
them. Thus the women led him away. And even as they were bringing the 
great brahman there, the god suddenly brought rain, refreshing the world. 

[29-32] “The lord of men went humbly out to meet the sage who had 
come to his kingdom bringing rain. He placed his head on the ground 
before him, and, his thoughts focused, he offered him a propitiatory gift as 


custom demanded. He then begged for the favor of the great brahman, 
saying: ‘Please do not be angry, brahman.’ Then the king entered the 
women’s quarters, and, having given him his daughter Santa according to 
precept, with tranquil heart, he attained happiness. And that is how the 
mighty Réyagriga came to dwell there with his wife, Santa, gratified with 
every desirable thing.” 


Sarga 10 

[1-7] “Now listen further, lord of kings, to my helpful story, just as that 
wise descendant of the gods related it. ‘There will be born in the House of 
Iksvaku a righteous king named Dasaratha, majestic and true to his vows. 
This king will form an alliance with the king of Anga, to whom will be born 
an illustrious maiden named Santa. The king of Afiga will have a son 
known as Romapada, and the renowned King DasSaratha will approach him 
and say: “I have no children, righteous man. Let Santa’s husband, with your 
permission, undertake a sacrifice for me in order to perpetuate my family’s 
lineage.””’ When that wise man hears the king’s request and turns it over in 
his mind, he will lend him Santa’s husband who can give him sons. The 
king will receive that brahman, and, free from anxiety, he will undertake his 
sacrifice with a glad heart. 

[8-11] “ ‘Eager to sacrifice, King DaSaratha, lord of men, who knows 
the ways of righteousness, will fold his hands in supplication and will beg 
Rsyasrmnga, that best of twice-born brahmans, to perform his sacrifice and 
grant him sons and heaven. And the lord of the people will obtain his desire 
from that foremost of twice-born brahmans. He will have four sons, 
measureless in valor and famed in all the worlds to perpetuate his line.’ 
Thus did the son of the gods, the holy Lord Sanatkumara, tell the tale long 
ago in the age of the gods. 

[12-21] “Now, great king, you must go yourself, tiger among men, with 
troops and mounts, to bring Rsyasrnga with great honor.” When the king 
had heard his charioteer’s words and secured the permission of Vasistha, he 
set out with his wives and ministers to where that twice-born brahman 
lived. Slowly traversing forests and rivers, he came to the country where 
that bull among sages dwelt. Arriving there, he immediately saw the seer’s 
son, that best of twice-born brahmans, shining like fire, near Romapada. 
Then, according to custom and with a glad heart, King Romapada paid 


King Dasaratha special honor, because of their alliance. Romapada told the 
seer’s wise son about their alliance and kinship. Then Rsyasrnga did honor 
to Dasaratha. Thus, duly honored by King Romapada, King Dasaratha, bull 
among men, stayed with him for seven or eight days and then said this to 
him, “Your majesty, lord of the people, let your daughter Santa come to my 
city with her husband, for a great ceremony is at hand.” The king promised 
that the wise man would go, saying, “So be it.” He then said these words to 
the brahman, “Please go there with your wife.” The seer’s son consented in 
turn, saying, “So be it,” to the king. And so, taking his leave of the king, he 
set out with his wife. 

[22-29] Dasaratha and the mighty Romapada cupped their hands 
reverently to one another, and, having embraced each other affectionately, 
they rejoiced. Once he had taken leave of his friend, the delight of the 
Raghus set out, after dispatching swift messengers to the people of his city, 
saying, “Let the entire city be decorated at once.” Hearing that the king was 
returning, the people of the city were delighted and carried out all that the 
king had commanded. Preceded by that bull among twice-born brahmans, 
the king entered his beautifully decorated city to the sound of conches and 
drums. When the people of the city saw the twice-born brahman being 
ushered in and honored by the lord of men whose deeds were like those of 
Indra, they were all delighted. The king had Rsyasrnga enter the women’s 
quarters after doing him honor in the manner prescribed in the sdastras. 
Then, by virtue of his having brought him, he regarded himself as one who 
had already accomplished his purpose. All the women watched the large- 
eyed Santa arrive in this fashion with her husband, and because of their love 
for her, they reyoiced. Honored by them and especially by the king, she was 
delighted and dwelt there with the brahman for some time. 


Sarga 11 
[1-6] After some time, when spring had come, ravishing the heart, the king 
set his mind on performing the sacrifice. With bowed head he propitiated 
the brahman Rsyasrnga, splendid as a god, and begged him to perform the 
sacrifice for the continuation of his dynasty. Treated with such respect, the 
latter said to the king, “Very well. You may gather all the necessary articles 
and release the horse.” The king then spoke these words to Sumantra, the 
foremost of counselors: “Sumantra, summon sacrificial priests learned in 


the vedas at once.” Swift-stepping Sumantra left quickly to assemble all the 
brahmans who were masters of the veda. He called Suyajiia, Vamadeva, 
and Jabali, as well as Kasyapa, the purohita Vasistha, and other prominent 
twice-born brahmans. 

[7-12] Righteous King Dasaratha honored them and spoke gentle words 
in keeping with both righteousness and sound policy: “Sorely lamenting the 
lack of a son, I take no joy in anything. For that reason, I have resolved to 
perform the asvamedha. I wish to perform that sacrifice according to the 
rites prescribed in the ritual texts so that, through the power of the seer’s 
son, I may obtain my heart’s desire.” Then all the brahmans, led by 
Vasistha, approved those words that had issued from the mouth of the king, 
crying, “Excellent!” Making Rsyasrnga their spokesman, they further 
addressed the lord of men, “You may gather all the necessary articles and 
release the horse. Since you have made this righteous resolution in order to 
obtain a son, you shall surely get four sons immeasurable in valor.” 

[13-21] When the king heard those words of the twice-born brahmans, 
he was delighted and in his joy said these auspicious words to his ministers: 
“At the behest of my gurus, gather all the necessary articles at once. Also 
release the horse, to be guarded by strong men and attended by our 
preceptor. Have the sacrificial ground laid out on the northern bank of the 
Sarayu and let the propitiatory rites be performed in due order and 
according to precept. This sacrifice may be performed by every guardian of 
the earth provided that in the performance of this, the greatest of rites, there 
occurs no serious error. For learned brahman-rdksasas ceaselessly search 
for any flaw in it. Whoever performs this sacrifice without following all the 
injunctions perishes instantly. You are skilled in ritual performances. 
Therefore, let the preliminary rites be performed in such a way that this 
sacrifice of mine is completed according to precept.” Saying, “So be it,” all 
his counselors approved these words of the best of kings and then did as he 
had commanded. Then all the brahmans praised that bull among kings who 
knew the ways of righteousness and, taking their leave, departed as they 
had come. When the twice-born brahmans had gone, the splendid lord of 
men dismissed his counselors and entered his private chambers. 


Sarga 12 


[1-7] When a full year had elapsed and spring had come once more, 
Dasaratha ceremonially greeted and honored Vasistha, according to custom, 
and, desiring progeny, spoke this respectful speech to that best of brahmans: 
“Brahman, bull among sages, please perform the sacrifice for me, as you 
said you would. Please arrange it so that there shall be no impediment to 
any of the elements of the sacrifice. You are my dear friend and supreme 
guru. Once the sacrifice is begun, responsibility for it is to be borne by you 
alone.” The eminent twice-born brahman replied, “So be it,” and told the 
king: “I will do all that you have requested.” Then he spoke to experienced 
brahmans, well versed in the operations of the sacrifice, and to righteous 
men, well versed and experienced in the art of construction. He spoke also 
to reliable artisans, carpenters, excavators, astrologers, artists, dancers, 
actors, and deeply learned men who were honest and well versed in the 
sastras, saying: 

[8—15] “Gentlemen, you must begin work for the sacrifice in accordance 
with the king’s command. Bring many thousands of bricks at once. Let 
royal dwellings, complete with all amenities, be constructed for the kings 
and hundreds of fine houses for the brahmans. They must be very well built 
and stocked with every sort of food and drink. You must also build spacious 
dwellings for the city folk stocked with good things to eat and furnished 
with everything one could desire. Even the country folk must be given fine 
food in accordance with custom, and not contemptuously, but with respect. 
Everything is to be done in such a way that all classes of society are treated 
well and shown respect. No disrespect is to be shown anyone, even though 
you may be under the influence of lust or anger. Those men who are 
artisans engaged in work pertaining to the sacrifice are to be shown special 
respect according to their rank. You gentlemen, your hearts softened by 
love, must act so that everything is well arranged and nothing omitted.” 
Then all of them came together and replied to Vasistha, saying: 

[16—20] “We shall do just as you have said. Nothing whatever shall be 
omitted.” Vasistha then summoned Sumantra and said: “Invite all the 
righteous kings of the earth, as well as thousands of brahmans, kshatriyas, 
vaisyas, and sidras. Assemble men from all lands here and do them honor. 
You are—personally and with great respect—to escort Janaka, that truly 
valorous hero, the illustrious ruler of Mithila; for he is well versed both in 
the vedas and in every sastra. Knowing him to be our ancient kinsman, | 


mention him first. But you must also personally escort the friendly and 
godlike lord of Kasi, who always speaks kindly and whose conduct is 
impeccable. 

[21-26] “Also bring the father-in-law of our lion among kings, the aged 
and exceedingly righteous king of the Kekayas and his son. Showing the 
utmost respect, bring Romapada, the king of Anga, the illustrious and 
renowned friend of our lion among kings. Bring all the eastern kings, and 
the kings of Sindhu-Sauvira and Saurastra, as well as the southern lords of 
men. And whichever of the other kings on the earth may be friendly to us, 
bring them at once, along with their followers and kinsmen.” Upon hearing 
those words of Vasistha, Sumantra made haste and dispatched good men to 
bring the kings. Then righteous Sumantra, following the sage’s orders, set 
forth himself in haste to assemble the lords of the earth. 

[27-29] Meanwhile, all the reliable workmen reported to wise Vasistha 
that everything had been made ready for the sacrifice. The eminent twice- 
born brahman was pleased and addressed them once more: “Nothing is to 
be given to anyone with disrespect or contempt. A thing offered with 
disrespect destroys the giver. Of this there can be no doubt.” For several 
days and nights, the rulers of the earth arrived, bringing many fine gifts for 
King Dasaratha. 

[30-34] At last, Vasistha, greatly pleased, said this to the king: “Tiger 
among men, the kings have arrived, at your command. I myself have 
honored all these excellent kings, each according to his merit. Meanwhile, 
your majesty, our painstaking workmen have completed all the preparations 
for the sacrifice. Your majesty, go forth to sacrifice at the sacrificial ground 
so near at hand, for it is now completely furnished with all the desirable 
things that have been brought.” And so, acting on the advice of both 
Vasistha and Rsyasrmga, the lord of the world went forth on an auspicious 
day and under an auspicious constellation. Then all the eminent brahmans, 
led by Vasistha, placed Rsyasrnga at their head and began the sacrificial 
rite. 


Sarga 13 
[1-6] When a full year had elapsed and the horse had been brought back, 
the royal sacrifice was begun on the northern bank of the Sarayt River. Led 
by Rsyasrnga, those bulls among twice-born brahmans performed the 


asvamedha, greatest of rites, for the great king. The sacrificial priests, 
masters of the vedas, performed the rite according to precept. Following the 
vedic prescriptions, they undertook it in the correct manner, according to 
the sdstras. After they had performed the preliminary offerings, the 
pravargya and the upasad, according to the sastras, the brahmans carried 
out all the additional rites according to precept laid down in those texts. 
Completing their preliminary worship, all those bulls among sages were 
filled with joy. They then performed, according to the ritual injunctions, the 
rites beginning with the morning pressing. Nothing in those rites was 
omitted or improperly offered, and every rite was accompanied by the 
appropriate vedic recitation; indeed, they performed them perfectly. 

[7-12] During that period there was not a single brahman to be found 
who was fatigued, hungry, ignorant, or lacking a hundred attendants. 
Brahmans and their dependents were fed continually. Ascetics were fed, and 
SO were wandering mendicants. The aged and the sick were fed, and so 
were the women and children. And although they ate continually, they 
never felt jaded. “Give! Give food and all kinds of garments.” So the 
servants were ordered, and so they did, again and again. Day after day one 
could see there, like mountains, heap upon heap of perfectly prepared food. 
The bulls among twice-born brahmans praised it, and Raghava heard them 
say, “The food is properly prepared and delicious. Ah, bless you, we have 
had enough.” 

[13-16] Richly ornamented serving men waited upon the brahmans, 
while others, with earrings of sparkling jewels, assisted them. In the 
intervals between the various rites, learned and eloquent brahmans, desirous 
of defeating one another, engaged in numerous philosophical debates. Day 
after day, skilled twice-born brahmans, following instructions, performed, 
in accordance with the ritual texts, all the rites that make up the sacrifice. 
Every one of the twice-born brahmans who officiated for the king was 
grounded in the six ancillary sciences, practiced in penitential vows, deeply 
learned, and skilled in disputation. 

[17—23] When the sacrificial posts were erected, there were six of bilva 
wood, six of khadira wood, and in conjunction with those of bilva wood, a 
like number of parnin wood. There was the prescribed post of slesmataka 
wood and posts of devadaru wood. Of the latter, two were prescribed, set so 
as to be just grasped by the sacrificer with his arms spread wide. Those 


men, learned in the sdstras and skilled in sacrifice, had fashioned all of 
them, and so that the sacrifice would be beautiful, they adorned them with 
gold. Finely made by artisans, firm, octagonal, and smooth, they were all 
set in place according to the ritual injunctions. Covered with fine hangings 
and adorned with flowers and perfume, they were as splendid as the 
constellation of the Seven Seers shining in the sky. The bricks were made in 
the prescribed manner and in accordance with the prescribed measurements. 
The fire altar was built up by twice-born brahmans skilled in the science of 
ritual calculation. Those skilled brahmans built up the fire altar of that lion 
among kings into the shape of a golden-winged eagle with eighteen layers, 
three times the usual height. 

[24-31] The prescribed victims—snakes, birds, the horse, and aquatic 
animals—were bound at the place of immolation; each was dedicated to a 
specific divinity, as is set forth in the ritual texts. The sacrificial priests then 
bound them all to the posts in the manner set forth in the sastras. Three 
hundred beasts in addition to DaSaratha’s jewel of a horse were bound there 
to the sacrificial posts. Kausalya walked reverently all around the horse and 
then, with the greatest joy, cut it with three knives. Her mind unwavering in 
her desire for righteousness, Kausalya passed one night with the horse. The 
priests—the hotr, the adhvaryu, and the udgdtr—saw to it that the second 
and the junior-most of the king’s wives, as well as his chief queen, were 
united with the horse. Then the sacrificial priest, who was extremely adept 
and held his senses in check, removed the fat of the horse and cooked it in 
the manner prescribed in the sdstras. At the proper time and in accordance 
with the ritual prescriptions, the lord of men then sniffed the fragrance of 
the smoking fat, thereby freeing himself from sin. Then, acting in unison, 
the sixteen brahman sacrificial priests threw the limbs of the horse into the 
fire, in accordance with the ritual injunctions. 

[32—37] In other sacrifices, the oblation is offered upon branches of the 
plaksa tree, but in the asvamedha alone the apportionment of the victim is 
made on a bed of reeds. The asvamedha is known as the Three-Day Rite, 
for both the kalpasutra and the brahmanas refer to the asvamedha as a rite 
lasting for three days. On the first day, the catustoma rite is to be 
performed. On the second day the rite called wkthya is prescribed, and after 
that the atiratra rite. On this occasion, however, they performed many 
additional rites that are prescribed in the view of some authors of sdstras. 


Thus, they performed those great rites, the jyotistoma and the dyus rites, as 
well as two atiratras—the abhijit and the visvajit—and the aptoryama. The 
king, now enabled to extend his dynasty, gave the east to the hotr, the west 
to the adhvaryu, and the south to the brahman. To the udgdatr he gave the 
north, for that was the fee set for that great rite, the asvamedha, ordained by 
self-existent Brahma long ago. 

[38-46] Then the king, that bull among men and great patron of 
sacrifices, seeing that the sacrifice had been completed in accordance with 
the ritual injunctions, gave away the entire earth to the sacrificial priests. 
But the sacrificial priests all said to the king, now cleansed of his sins: “You 
alone, sir, are capable of protecting the whole earth. We have no business 
with the earth, for we are utterly incapable of protecting it. Protector of the 
earth, we are wholly absorbed in our vedic studies. Please, sir, give us some 
appropriate compensation.” So the king gave them a million cows, a 
hundred million gold pieces, and four times that amount in silver. Then the 
sacrificial priests jointly presented these riches to the sage Rsyasrnga and 
wise Vasistha. Those eminent brahmans made an appropriate division of the 
fee and, greatly delighted, their hearts content, they all indicated their 
satisfaction to the king. And so the king, content at heart, brought to a close 
that greatest of sacrifices that, though it cleanses one of sin and leads one to 
heaven, is difficult to carry through for even a bull among kings. King 
DaSaratha then said to RSyasrnga, “You are true to your vows. Please act so 
that my line may be extended.” The eminent twice-born brahman replied to 
the king, “So be it. Your majesty, you shall have four sons to carry on your 
line.” 


Sarga 14 
[1-4] Rsyasrnga, who was learned in the vedas and gifted with insight, 
entered a trance for some time. Emerging from his trance, he made this 
reply to the protector of men: “In order to procure sons for you, I must 
perform the son-producing sacrifice. It must be done in accordance with the 
injunctions of the ritual texts and rendered efficacious by mantras set down 
in the Atharva Veda.” Then that mighty man commenced the son-producing 
sacrifice in order to produce sons. He poured the oblation into the fire 
according to the rite specified in the vedas. At that, the gods, gandharvas, 


perfected beings, and supreme seers assembled in the proper order to 
receive their shares of the offering. 

[S—11] And when the gods had gathered at the sacrificial enclosure, in 
the customary order, they spoke grave words to Brahma, creator of the 
world: “Lord, a raksasa named Ravana, who has secured your favor, is 
oppressing us all. Because of his great power, we are unable to chastise 
him. Once, long ago, lord, when you were pleased with him, you granted 
him a boon. Always respectful of that, we suffer everything that he does. He 
is evil-minded and makes the three worlds tremble in fear. He hates anyone 
greater than himself and wants to overthrow even Sakra, the king of the 
thirty gods. Unassailable and infatuated by the gift of the boon, he assaults 
seers, yaksas, gandharvas, asuras, and brahmans. The sun does not burn 
him. The wind will not blow near him. Even the ocean, with its garland of 
restless waves, dares not stir when he appears. We are terribly afraid of this 
dreadful-looking raksasa. Please, lord, devise some means of destroying 
him.” 

[12-15] When Brahma had been addressed in this fashion by all the 
gods, he reflected for a moment and then spoke: “Ah, the means for 
destroying this wicked creature has already been ordained. For, when 
asking for his boon, he used the following words, ‘May I be invulnerable to 
gandharvas, yaksas, gods, danavas, and raksasas.’ ‘So be it,’ I replied. In 
his contempt, that raksasa neglected to mention men. Therefore, he can be 
killed by a man. No other means of death is possible for him.” When the 
gods and great seers heard Brahma’s welcome words, they were all 
delighted. 

[16-21] Just then, glorious Visnu arrived, and, joining Brahma, he stood 
there in deep contemplation. All of the gods prostrated themselves and 
praised him. Then they spoke: “In our desire for the welfare of the worlds, 
we shall set a task for you, Visnu. O lord, King Dasaratha, lord of Ayodhya, 
is righteous, generous, and equal in power to the great seers. Visnu, you 
must divide yourself into four parts and be born as the sons of his three 
wives, who are like Hri, goddess of modesty, Sri, goddess of royal fortune, 
and Kirti, goddess of fame. And, Visnu, becoming a man, you must kill 
Ravana in battle, that mighty thorn in the side of the world; for he is 
invulnerable to the gods. This foolish raksasa Ravana, in the insolence of 
his power, is oppressing the gods, gandharvas, perfected beings, and great 


seers. Pluck out this thorn in the side of holy men and ascetics—this 
haughty Ravana, swollen with arrogance and might—for he is the bitter 
enemy of Indra, lord of the thirty gods, a terror to ascetics, and a source of 
lamentation.” 


Sarga 15 

[1-6] After the principal gods had set this task for Visnu Narayana, he 
courteously put a question to them, even though he knew the answer: “O 
gods, is there some means of slaying the lord of the rdksasas that I might 
adopt in order to kill that thorn in the side of the seers?” Addressed in this 
fashion, all the gods replied to the eternal Visnu: “You must take on human 
form and kill Ravana in battle. For, foe-conquering hero, he once performed 
severe and prolonged austerities whereby he won the favor of Brahma, who 
made the world and whom the world worships. The lord was so pleased 
with the raksasa that he granted him the boon of having nothing to fear 
from all the various kinds of beings except man. At the time the boon was 
granted, he left men out of his reckoning. Therefore, destroyer of foes, we 
foresee that his death must come at the hands of men.” 

[7-13] When the self-controlled Visnu had heard these words of the 
gods, he chose King Dasaratha to be his father. Now at that very moment, 
that splendid king, destroyer of his enemies, in hopes of getting a son, was 
performing a sacrifice to produce a son, for he had none. And as he 
sacrificed, there arose from the sacred fire a great being of incomparable 
radiance, enormous power, and immense might. He was black and clothed 
in red. His mouth was red, and his voice was like the sound of a war drum. 
The hair of his body, head, and beard were as glossy as that of a tawny-eyed 
lion. He bore auspicious marks and was adorned with celestial ornaments. 
His height was that of a mountain peak, and his gait that of a haughty tiger. 
His appearance was like that of the sun, maker of day, and he looked like a 
flame of blazing fire. In his arms he held, as though it were a beloved wife, 
a broad vessel fashioned of fine gold and covered with a silver lid. It 
seemed as though it were fashioned directly from creative energy itself, and 
it was filled with a celestial porridge. 

[14-18] Looking straight at King DaSaratha, he said these words: “Your 
majesty, know that I have come here as a servant of Prajapati, lord of 
creatures.” In response, the king cupped his hands in reverence and said, 


“You are welcome, lord. What may I do for you?” The servant of Prajapati 
spoke once more: “Your majesty, you have earned this today through your 
worship of the gods. Take this porridge, tiger among men. It was prepared 
by the gods and will bring you offspring, health, and wealth. Give it to 
those of your wives who are of your own station and bid them eat of it. 
They will then bear you the sons for the sake of whom you sacrifice, your 
majesty.” 

[19-22] The king was delighted, and bowing his head in token of 
acceptance, said, “So be it,” and he took the golden vessel filled with the 
food of the gods that the gods had given him. He made obeisance to that 
wonderful being, so pleasing to behold, and in the greatest delight, walked 
reverently around him. Upon receiving the porridge that the gods had 
prepared, DasSaratha was as happy as a pauper who has come into money. 
But that wonderfully radiant and splendid being, having accomplished his 
mission, vanished on the spot. 

[23—28] The apartments of DaSaratha’s wives, now lit with beams of joy, 
seemed like the sky illumined by the rays of the lovely autumnal moon. For 
the king immediately entered the women’s quarters and said to Kausalya, 
“Eat this porridge; it will give you a son.” Then the lord of men gave half 
the porridge to Kausalya. To Sumitra, the chief of men gave half of a half. 
For the sake of a son, he gave half of what remained to Kaikeyt. Finally, 
after giving it some thought, the lord of the earth gave the remaining 
portion of that ambrosial porridge to Sumitra. In this fashion did the king 
apportion the porridge individually among his wives. Those excellent wives 
of the lord of men regarded themselves as having been highly honored in 
receiving the porridge, and their hearts leapt up with joy. 


Sarga 16 
[1-6] When Visnu had gone off in preparation for his birth as the great 
king’s son, Brahma, the self-existent lord, said this to all the gods: “Create 
powerful allies able to take on any form at will to aid the hero Visnu, for he 
is true to his promise and seeks our common good. Let them be heroes and 
masters of illusion, whose swiftness shall rival that of the wind. They must 
be intelligent, well versed in statecraft, and equal in valor to Visnu himself. 
Make them indestructible, well versed in strategy, and gifted with celestial 
bodies. They must be as skilled in the use of all weapons as are the gods, 


who feed on nectar. You must father sons on the principal apsarases, 
gandharva women, the daughters of the yaksas and serpents, female apes 
and monkeys, and the women of the vidyddharas and kinnaras. Let them 
have the form of tawny monkeys, but be equal to you in valor.” 

[7-12] When they had been addressed in this fashion by the lord, they 
promised to carry out his command. Thus, they fathered sons in the form of 
monkeys. The great seers, perfected beings, vidyadharas, serpents, and 
celestial bards fathered heroic monkey sons—rangers of the forest. Many 
thousands of them were born—all valorous heroes, immeasurably strong, 
able to take on any form at will, and determined to kill ten-necked Ravana. 
Apes, monkeys, and langurs were born instantaneously, and so great was 
their strength, so enormous their bodies, that they resembled elephants or 
mountains. Each god’s son was born equal to his father in build, beauty, and 
valor. Some of them, famous for their valor, were born to the female 
langurs. Other monkeys were born to female apes and kinnara women. 

[13—20] All of them used stones for weapons and wielded trees in battle. 
Although they mostly fought with teeth and claws, they were skilled in the 
use of all weapons. They could shake the greatest mountains and could 
break down firmly rooted trees. Their strength was such that they could 
make the ocean, lord of rivers, tremble. They could tear up the earth with 
their feet and could leap even across the mighty ocean. They could hurl 
themselves into the sky and even grasp the clouds. :They could capture 
rutting elephants roaming in the forest. With the roaring of their mighty 
voices, they could cause the sky-going birds to fall down from the sky. Ten 
million such great tawny monkeys were born, leaders of troops who could 
take on any form at will. In turn, these mighty leaders of troops fathered 
still more heroic tawny monkeys. Some of them frequented the slopes of 
Mount Rksavant, while others inhabited various mountains and forests. But 
all those lords of the tawny monkeys served the two brothers, Sugriva, son 
of Siirya, and Valin, Sakra’s son. In order to assist Rama, mighty leaders of 
monkey troops filled the earth, their bodies terrible to behold, like massed 
clouds or mountains. 


Sarga 17 
[1-5] When the great man’s asvamedha was completed, the gods accepted 
their portions and departed as they had come. His state of ritual 


consecration now at an end, the king entered the city accompanied by his 
host of wives, servants, troops, and mounts. The lords of the earth, honored 
by the king according to their rank, went happily back to their own 
countries after paying homage to the bull among sages. And when they had 
departed, the majestic King Dasaratha once more entered the city, preceded 
by the most eminent of the brahmans. With all due honor, Rsyasrnga set out 
with Santa, escorted by the wise king and his attendants. 

[6-12] Kausalya gave birth to an illustrious son named Rama, the delight 
of the Iksvakus. He bore the signs of divinity, for he was one-half of Visnu. 
An immeasurably resplendent son, he glorified Kausalya as does Indra, the 
foremost of the gods and wielder of the vajra, his mother, Aditi. Kaikeyi 
bore a truly valorous son named Bharata, one-quarter of the incarnate 
Visnu, endowed with every virtue. Sumitra gave birth to two sons, 
Laksmana and Satrughna, heroes skilled in all weapons and infused with 
portions of Visnu. Four great, worthy, and virtuous sons were born to the 
king, one after the other, equal in beauty to the constellation Prosthapada. 
On the twelfth day after the births, DaSaratha held the naming ceremony. 
With great delight, Vasistha pronounced the names. The eldest and greatest 
was named Rama, and Kaikeyi’s son was called Bharata. One of Sumitra’s 
sons was called Laksmana and the other Satrughna. He saw to it that all the 
ceremonies, beginning with the birth ritual, were performed for them. 

[13-18] Of all the king’s sons it was the eldest, Rama, who, like a royal 
pennant, gave his father the greatest joy. For he was the one among the 
brothers held in most esteem, just as the self-existent Brahma is most 
esteemed among all beings. All of them were heroes, learned in the vedas 
and devoted to the welfare of the people. All were imbued with knowledge 
and endowed with virtues, but even among such men as these, it was the 
mighty Rama who was accounted truly valorous. From earliest childhood 
Laksmana, bringer of glory, was always especially fond of his eldest 
brother, Rama, delight of the world. Performing every service for him, 
glorious Laksmana was like another life breath outside his body, for without 
him, the best of men could get no sleep. Without him, he would not eat the 
savory food that was brought to him. Whenever Raghava went out hunting 
on horseback, he followed behind, guarding him with his bow. 

[19-22] Just so did Bharata love Satrughna, Laksmana’s younger 
brother, more than the breath of life itself, while Satrughna loved him just 


as much. DaSaratha took as much joy in his four illustrious and beloved 
sons as does Brahma, the Grandfather, in his sons, the gods. When the 
brothers had completed their education, had cultivated all the virtues, were 
modest, renowned, wise in the ways of the world, and gifted with foresight, 
then righteous Dasaratha, with his preceptors and kinsmen, began to give 
thought to their marriage. 

[23-31] While the great man was pondering this in the midst of his 
counselors, the great and powerful sage Visvamitra arrived. Eager to see the 
king, he said to the gatekeepers, “Announce at once that I, Kausika, the son 
of Gadhi, have come.” Hearing these words and driven by his command, 
they all ran to the royal dwelling, their minds in a flurry of agitation. 
Reaching the palace, they announced to the Iksvaku king that the seer 
Visvamitra had come. Upon hearing their words, he was delighted and, 
dropping all other concerns, went out with his purohita to receive him, as 
Vasava might for Brahma. When the king saw that ascetic, rigorous in his 
vows and blazing with an inner radiance, his face grew joyful, and he made 
the guest-offering. Receiving the king’s guest-offering as prescribed in the 
sastras, the sage asked the lord of men about his well-being and prosperity. 
The bull among sages then embraced Vasistha and the illustrious seers and 
spoke to them as is customary concerning their health. All of them were 
glad at heart and entered the king’s residence, where, duly honored, they 
seated themselves according to their rank. 

[32-39] Delighted at heart, the noble king spoke to the great sage 
Visvamitra, honoring him: “The acquisition of nectar, rain in the desert, a 
son born to a childless man by a proper wife, the recovery of something 
lost, delight in great advancement—your arrival is as welcome to me as all 
these things. Welcome, great sage. What great desire of yours may I find 
joy in granting? Righteous brahman, you are a worthy recipient. What luck 
for me that you have come! Today my birth has borne fruit, and it is clear 
that I have lived a good life. Possessed of blazing splendor, once you were 
called a royal seer. But through austerity, you gained a radiant splendor and 
reached the status of a brahman-seer. Therefore, you are doubly worthy of 
my homage. This is wonderful, brahman, and highly sanctifying for me. 
The sight of you, lord, is like a journey to a holy place of pilgrimage. Tell 
me what cherished purpose has brought you here. If you favor me, I would 
wish only to aid in the attainment of your goals. You should not hesitate 


about what you wish done, Kausika. I will carry it out fully, for you are as a 
god to me.” When the great and virtuous seer, the fame of whose virtues 
had spread far and wide, heard these words so pleasant both to heart and 
ear, so modestly spoken by that wise man, he felt the greatest delight. 


Sarga 18 

[1-5] When the mighty Visvamitra heard this wonderful and elaborate 
speech of the lion among kings, the hairs on his body bristled with delight, 
and he replied: “This is characteristic of you alone, tiger among kings, and 
of no one else on earth, for you were born in a noble House and are guided 
by Vasistha. Tiger among kings, you must be true to your promise and 
resolve to act upon the words that I have in mind. Bull among men, I am 
engaged in the performance of a ritual in order to accomplish a specific 
purpose. However, two raksasas, who can take on any form at will are 
obstructing me. Now in its final stages, when my sacrifice is all but 
completed, these raksasas, Marica and Subahu, who are powerful and well 
trained, have been drenching the altar with torrents of flesh and blood. 

[6-10] “Since my resolution to carry out this sacrifice has been 
frustrated in such a fashion, I came away in despair, all my efforts gone for 
nothing. Nor do I intend, your majesty, to unleash my wrath upon them. For 
the ritual is such that I may utter no curse while it is in progress. Therefore, 
tiger among kings, you must give me your eldest son, valorous Rama, who, 
though he still wears sidelocks, is, nonetheless, a hero. For under my 
guardianship, he will be able to kill even those obstructive rdksasas through 
his own godlike power. And you may be certain that I shall give him 
manifold blessings whereby he will attain renown throughout the three 
worlds. 

[11-14] “Those two, confronted by Rama, will by no means be able to 
withstand him, while no man other than Raghava can possibly kill them. In 
the arrogance of their strength they have both fallen into the compass of the 
noose of Kala. For, tiger among kings, they are no match for the great 
Rama. You need not be concerned for your son, your majesty. I give you my 
word. You can consider those two raksasas as already slain. I know that 
Rama is great and truly valorous, and so do the mighty Vasistha and these 
other sages, unwavering in their asceticism. 


[15-20] “Best of kings, if you wish to acquire merit and great glory that 
will endure on earth, you must give me Rama. If, Kakutstha, all your 
counselors, the chief of whom is Vasistha, give their permission, you must 
let Rama go. You should freely give me your beloved son, lotus-eyed Rama, 
for the ten nights of the sacrifice. It is up to you, Raghava. Please see to it 
that the time set for my sacrifice does not slip by. Bless you, do not give 
your mind over to grief.” When the great sage, the righteous and mighty 
Visvamitra, had uttered these words that accorded so well with both 
righteousness and statecraft, he fell silent. But when the lord of men heard 
the sage’s words, which rent his heart and mind, he was overwhelmed with 
terror and, losing his wits, tottered from his throne. 


Sarga 19 

[1-5] When that tiger among kings heard what Visvamitra had said, he lost 
consciousness for a moment. Regaining consciousness, he spoke: “My 
lotus-eyed Rama is not yet sixteen years of age. I cannot see how he can be 
fit to do battle with raksasas. But I have here a vast army of which I am the 
lord and master. With it, I will go myself to fight these night-roaming 
raksasas. My men are all brave heroes, skilled in the use of weapons. They 
are fit to fight with hosts of raksasas. Please do not take Rama. I myself, 
with bow in hand, shall guard your sacrifices in the front line of battle. I 
will fight the night-roaming rdksasas as long as I have breath in my body. 

[6-11] “Your ritual performance will be well protected and free from 
obstruction. I shall go there myself. Please do not take Rama. He is but a 
boy and not yet finished with his studies. He does not even know a strong 
foe from a weak one. He is neither strong nor skilled in the use of weapons, 
and he is not adept at fighting. Surely he is no match for raksasas, who are 
known as treacherous fighters. I cannot live even for a moment apart from 
Rama. Please, tiger among sages, do not take Rama. Or, if you still insist on 
taking Raghava, brahman strict in your vows, then take me and all four 
branches of my army with him. I am sixty thousand years old, Kausika, and 
he was fathered only with great difficulty. Please do not take Rama. For of 
all my four sons, he is my greatest delight. Please do not take Rama, my 
eldest and most righteous son. 

[12—14] “How powerful are these raksasas? Who are they? And whose 
sons are they? How big are they? Who are their protectors, bull among 


sages? And how, brahman, may Rama, my troops, or I best oppose these 
treacherous fighters, the raksasas? Tell me all of this, holy man. How am I 
to stand in battle against these evil creatures? For radksasas are justly proud 
of their strength.” 

[15-18] When Visvamitra heard these words, he replied: “There is a 
rdksasa named Ravana born in the Paulastya lineage. Having received a 
boon from Brahma, he cruelly oppresses the three worlds. He is strong and 
mighty and always attended by many rdksasas. It is said that this mighty 
lord of the raksasas, Ravana, is actually the brother of Vaisravana and the 
son of Visravas. Whenever this mighty rdksasa is not disrupting sacrifices 
himself, then two others, the powerful Marica and Subahu, do so at his 
command.” 

[19-25] When the king had been addressed in this fashion by the sage, 
he replied: “Even I cannot stand in battle before that evil creature. You 
know what is right, please be gracious to my little son. You are both god 
and guru to me, an unfortunate man. Even the gods, ddnavas, yaksas, great 
birds, and serpents are unable to withstand Ravana in battle—what then of 
men? This radksasa takes away the might of the mighty in battle. Best of 
sages, I am unable to do battle with him or with his troops, even if I am 
accompanied by my troops or my sons. Brahman, by no means will I give 
you my little son, my child, my godlike boy who knows nothing of warfare. 
It is the sons of Sunda and Upasunda who are obstructing your sacrifice, 
and they are like Kala himself in battle. No, I will not give you my little 
son. Marica and Subahu are mighty and well trained. With a host of allies, I 
myself could offer battle to only one of them.” 


Sarga 20 
[1-5] When Kausika heard these words of the lord of the earth, their 
syllables slurred through tenderness, he was enraged and made this reply: 
“First you promise something, then you want to take back the promise! This 
turnabout is unworthy of the House of the Raghavas. If you think that this is 
proper, your majesty, then I will go just as I came, and you, Kakutstha, may 
rejoice with your kinsmen as one whose word is false.”” Now when wise 
Visvamitra was seized with fury in this way, the whole earth shook and fear 
gripped the gods. Seeing that the whole world was stricken with terror, the 


great seer Vasistha, steadfast and true to his vows, said these words to the 
lord of men: 

[6-12] “You were born in the House of the Iksvakus and are majestic 
and true to your vows, like a second Dharma, the god of righteousness, 
incarnate. You must not forsake the path of righteousness. The Raghavas 
are renowned in the three worlds as righteous men. You must follow the 
tradition of your House and must not resort to unrighteousness. The 
sacrifices and good works of a man who promises to do something and fails 
to do so are wasted. Therefore, you must let Rama go. Whether he is skilled 
in weapons or not, the raksasas will not be able to withstand him if he is 
protected by the son of Kusika, like nectar by the blazing fire. For 
Visvamitra is righteousness incarnate and the mightiest of men. He is the 
wisest man in the world and the supreme source of ascetic power. 
Moreover, he is the master of all divine weapons. No other man in all the 
three worlds with their fixed and moving contents knows all this, or ever 
will—not the gods, nor any of the seers, not the asuras, the raksasas, the 
foremost of the gandharvas, the yaksas, the kinnaras, nor the great serpents. 

[13-19] “For long ago all the divine weapons, Krsasva’s righteous sons, 
were given to Kausika when he was still ruling his kingdom. The sons of 
Krsasva are the sons of the daughters of Prajapati, lord of creatures. They 
have various forms and immense power. They are radiant and bring certain 
victory. Jaya and Suprabha, the fair-waisted daughters of Daksa, gave birth 
to a hundred brightly shining weapons and divine weapon-spells. First, for 
the destruction of the armies of the asuras, Jaya bore fifty magnificent, 
immeasurably powerful sons who could take on any form at will. Then 
Suprabha gave birth to another fifty unconquerable, unassailable, and 
extremely powerful sons called the Samharas. Visvamitra, the son of 
Kusika, knows how to use these divine weapons perfectly. What is more, 
this man, so learned in the ways of righteousness, can produce new ones. 
Such is the power of the great ascetic, mighty Visvamitra. Your majesty, 
you need have no anxiety about Rama’s going.” 


Sarga 21 
[1-4] When Vasistha had spoken in this fashion, Dasaratha, with a delighted 
expression, summoned Rama and Laksmana. Their father, DaSaratha, and 
their mothers blessed their journey. Then, when Vasistha, the purohita, had 


intoned auspicious hymns of benediction, King Dasaratha kissed his dear 
son’s head and, with a contented heart, gave him into the keeping of the son 
of Kusika. Seeing that the lotus-eyed Rama had been given over to 
Visvamitra, Vayu, the wind god, blew pleasant to the touch and free from 
dust. 

[S—8] As the great man set out, there was a great shower of blossoms, a 
beating of the gods’ drums, and a great flourish of war drums and conches. 
Visvamitra went first, followed by illustrious Rama, still wearing sidelocks 
and armed with a bow. Behind him came Saumitri. Formidable, with their 
bows in hand, a pair of quivers on their backs, they resembled three-headed 
cobras. And so, illuminating the ten directions, they followed great 
Visvamitra like the twin Asvins following Grandfather Brahma. Radiant, 
armed with swords, their wrist and finger guards strapped on, they were like 
twin Kumaras born of the fire following the unimaginable god Sthanu. 

[9-13] When they had gone a league and a half along the southern bank 
of the Saray, Visvamitra called, “Rama!” and uttered these sweet words: 
“Come, dear boy, sip this water. Do not let the moment slip by. Accept this 
set of mantras called Bala and Atibala. You shall suffer neither fever nor 
fatigue, nor will your beauty ever fade. No evil raksasa shall ever overcome 
you, even should you be asleep or off guard. You shall have no equal on 
earth in strength of arms, nor will you have an equal, Rama, in all the three 
worlds. Blameless man, you shall have no equal in the world, in beauty, 
skill, wisdom, resolve, or ready response. 

[14-19] “When you have mastered this pair of spells, you shall be 
unequaled, for the Bala and Atibala are the mothers of all wisdom. Rama, 
best of men, if you recite the Bala and Atibala on the road, you shall 
experience neither hunger nor thirst. Through mastering this pair of spells, 
Raghava, your fame will be unequaled on earth. For these two potent spells 
are the daughters of Grandfather Brahma. Righteous Kakutstha, you are 
worthy to be given them. Surely many virtues will accrue to you. Of this 
there can be no doubt. These spells, which I acquired through austerities, 
will be of manifold use.” Then Rama purified himself by sipping the water 
and, with a delighted expression, received the two spells from the great 
contemplative seer. When he had received the spells, valorous Rama shone 
resplendently. Then, after the two brothers had performed for the son of 


Kusika all the duties owing to a guru, the three passed the night 
comfortably on the bank of the Sarayi. 


Sarga 22 

[1-5] When the night had turned to dawn, the great sage Visvamitra spoke 
to Kakutstha, who was lying on a bed of leaves: “Kausalya has an excellent 
child, Rama. The morning worship is at hand. Get up, tiger among men. We 
must perform the daily worship of the gods.” Hearing the seer’s noble 
words, the king’s heroic sons bathed, made the water-offering, and intoned 
the supreme prayer. After the performance of these daily rites, the two 
mighty men paid homage to Visvamitra, storehouse of asceticism, and, well 
pleased, set out on their journey. The mighty men went on, and there, at its 
lovely confluence with the Saray, they saw the celestial river Ganges, 
which goes by three paths. 

[6-8] There they came upon the site of a holy ashram belonging to seers 
of dreadful ascetic power who had been engaged in severe austerities for 
many thousands of years. When the two Raghavas saw that holy ashram, 
they were greatly pleased and spoke to great Visvamitra: “Whose holy 
ashram is this? What man dwells in it? Holy man, we wish to hear about it, 
for our curiosity 1s very great.” 

[9-13] Hearing their speech, the bull among sages smiled and said: 
“Rama, listen to the tale of him whose ashram this once was. He was the 
embodied Kandarpa, called Kama by the wise. That fool assailed the lord of 
gods, Sthanu, prior to his marriage, while he was engaged in austerities 
here, intent upon his vow. The great god, leaving with the host of Maruts, 
responded by roaring, ‘Hum!’ And, delight of the Raghus, Kama was 
burned up by his terrible eye, so that all his limbs withered from the fool’s 
body. When the great god burned him, he destroyed his entire body. In this 
way, Kama was rendered bodiless by the lord of the gods in his wrath. 

[14-16] “From that time onward, Raghava, he has been known as 
Ananga, the disembodied one, and this prosperous region is known as 
Afiga, for it was here that he lost his aga, his body. This is Siva’s holy 
ashram, and these sages, for whom the highest goal is righteousness, were 
once his disciples. Hero, there is no sin among them. Let us camp here 
tonight, handsome Rama, between the two holy rivers; tomorrow we will 
make the crossing.” 


[17-19] Then, as they stood conversing there, the sages, recognizing 
them by means of a perception heightened through asceticism, were 
delighted and experienced great joy. First, they gave the son of Kusika the 
guest-offering, water for his feet, and hospitality, and only then did they 
perform the rites of hospitality for Rama and Laksmana. Received with 
such honor, they passed the night there comfortably in Kama’s ashram, 
diverting themselves with stories. 


Sarga 23 

[1-6] In the clear dawn, the two foe-conquering heroes performed their 
daily rituals. Then, placing Visvamitra before them, they proceeded to the 
riverbank. There all the great sages, strict in their vows, sent for an 
excellent boat and spoke to Visvamitra: “Please get into the boat, sir, before 
the king’s sons. Go safely on your journey. Let there be no delay.” 
Visvamitra said, “So be it,” and, paying homage to the seers, set out with 
the two brothers to cross the river running to the sea. In midstream, Rama 
asked the bull among sages, “What is this tumultuous din of clashing 
waters?” Upon hearing Raghava’s words, so expressive of his curiosity, the 
righteous sage explained the cause of that sound. 

[7-10] “Rama, on Mount Kailasa there is a lake that Brahma produced 
from his manas, ‘mind.’ Because of this, tiger among men, it is called Lake 
Manasa. This river flows down from that lake to embrace the city of 
Ayodhya. Indeed, it rises from Brahma’s lake, and since it issues from 
saras, ‘lake,’ it is called the holy Sarayi, ‘Lake Born.’ It is this river that is 
making this incomparable roar through the turmoil of her waters as she 
rushes into the Jahnavi. Rama, focus your thoughts and do them homage.” 
And so the two righteous princes did homage to the two rivers and, 
reaching the southern bank, went on their way with quick strides. 

[11-14] But soon they came to a trackless, dreadful-looking forest, and 
Rama Aiksvaka, son of the best of kings, asked the bull among sages: 
“What a forbidding forest this is! Echoing with swarms of crickets, it is full 
of fearsome beasts of prey and harsh-voiced vultures. It is filled with all 
sorts of birds, screeching fearsome cries, as well as lions, tigers, boars, and 
elephants. It is full of dhava, asvakarna, kakubha, bilva, tinduka, pdatala, 
and badari trees. What is this dreadful forest?” 


[15-23] The great and powerful sage Visvamitra replied: “Kakutstha, my 
son, listen as I tell you to whom this dreadful forest belongs. Best of men, 
once there were two thriving regions here, Malada and Karusa, created 
through the efforts of the gods. Long ago, Rama, when thousand-eyed Indra 
killed Vrtra, he was tainted with the sin of brahmahatya, ‘killing a 
brahman,’ and overwhelmed by filth and hunger. So the gods and the seers, 
those repositories of ascetic power, bathed Indra. Cleansing him with water 
jars, they removed that taint. They then deposited the taint and hunger born 
of Mahendra’s body here, in these two regions, and so were filled with joy. 
And when Lord Indra became pure once more, freed from his taint and 
hunger, he was well pleased and conferred an unsurpassed blessing on this 
country, saying, ‘These two prosperous regions will achieve fame in the 
world as Malada, the filthy, and Karusa, the famine-ridden, because they 
bore the taint of my body.’ When the gods saw the honor that wise Sakra 
had conferred upon the region, they said, ‘Excellent, excellent’ to him, the 
chastiser of Paka. Foe-conquering hero, these two districts, Malada and 
Karusa, were prosperous for a long time, rejoicing in wealth and grain. 

[24-30] “Now, once upon a time there was a yaksa woman who 
possessed the strength of a thousand elephants and who could take on any 
form at will. Tataka they call her, bless you, and she is the wife of wise 
Sunda. The raksasa Marica, valorous as Sakra, is her son. It is this wicked 
Tataka, Raghava, who constantly lays waste to the twin regions of Malada 
and Karusa. She lives a league and a half from here, blocking our path, for 
we must pass through the forest of Tataka. You must kill this evil one, 
relying on the strength of your own arms. At my behest, make this region 
free from thorns once more. For now, Rama, no one can come to this region 
—a land made ruinous by this intolerable and terrifying yaksa woman. I 
have now told you the truth about this dreadful forest, completely ruined by 
the yaksa woman. To this very day, she keeps up her depredations.” 


Sarga 24 
[1-2] When the tiger among men had heard the unfathomable sage’s 
extraordinary speech, he responded in beautiful words: “But how, bull 
among sages, can a woman of the yaksas possess the strength of a thousand 
elephants when it is well known that these beings have but little strength?” 


[3-7] Visvamitra replied: “You shall hear how she came by her 
extraordinary strength. The strength and power of this woman are the result 
of a boon. Long ago there was a great yaksa named Suketu. He was 
powerful and virtuous, and being childless, he undertook great austerities. 
And so, Rama, Grandfather Brahma, well pleased with him, gave the yaksa 
lord a jewel of a daughter by the name of Tataka. Grandfather Brahma gave 
her the strength of a thousand elephants, but the glorious god did not give 
the yaksa a son. Now when his daughter had grown and reached the height 
of her youth and beauty, Suketu gave that illustrious woman to Sunda, the 
son of Jambha, to be his wife. 

[8—12] “After some time, the yaksa woman gave birth to an invincible 
son named Marica who, through a curse, was transformed into a rdksasa. 
After Sunda had been killed, Rama, Tataka and her son tried to attack 
Agastya, the greatest of seers. But Agastya cursed Marica, saying, ‘May 
you become a raksasa!’ And in his towering rage, he cursed Tataka as well: 
“You are now a great yaksa woman, but you shall become a repulsive man- 
eater with a hideous face. May you lose your present form and take on a 
truly dreadful one.’ Unable to endure this curse, in her mindless rage she 
ravages this lovely region, for Agastya used to live here. 

[13-19] “Therefore, Raghava, for the sake of cows and brahmans, you 
must kill this utterly dreadful and wicked yaksa woman whose valor is 
employed for evil purposes. No man but you in all the three worlds can kill 
this accursed creature, delight of the Raghus. Nor, best of men, should you 
be softhearted about killing a woman. A king’s son must act for the welfare 
of the four great social orders. This is the immemorial rule for all men 
charged with the burden of kingship. Kakutstha, you must kill this 
unrighteous creature, for there is no righteousness in her. For it is said, 
protector of men, that long ago Sakra killed Manthara, the daughter of 
Virocana, who wished to destroy the earth. And, Rama, long ago, the wife 
of Bhrgu, Kavya’s mother, firm in her vows, who wished to rid the world of 
Indra, was killed by Visnu. These and many other great and excellent men 
killed women who were set in the ways of unrighteousness.” 


Sarga 25 
[1-5] Steadfast in his vows, Raghava, son of the best of men, heard the 
sage’s manly speech. Then, cupping his hands in reverence, he spoke: “In 


Ayodhya, in the presence of my elders, my father, great Dasaratha, gave me 
this command: ‘You must do as Kausika tells you without hesitation.’ 
Because of the respect due a father’s words, because a father’s words are 
commands, I may not disregard what he said. Since I heard my father’s 
words and since it is also the command of a man learned in the vedas, I 
shall without question undertake the eminently justifiable action of killing 
Tataka. For the sake of cows and brahmans, to bring happiness to this 
region, and to please you, unfathomable sage, I stand ready to do as you 
Say.” 

[6-8] When the foe-conquering hero had spoken in this fashion, he 
grasped the middle of his bow with his fist and made a piercing noise with 
the bowstring, filling the four directions with the sound. The sound terrified 
the inhabitants of Tataka’s forest, enraging and confusing Tataka herself. 
When the rdksasa woman heard that sound, she was beside herself with 
rage. Locating its source, she ran swiftly to the place from which the sound 
had come. 

[9-12] Seeing her in such a rage, looking so hideous with her hideous 
face and grown to such an extraordinary size, Raghava said to Laksmana: 
“Laksmana, look at the fearsome and dreadful body of this yaksa woman. 
The hearts of the timid would burst at the very sight of her. Look at her. She 
seems unassailable, armed as she is with power of illusion. But I shall send 
her back without her ears and the tip of her nose. I dare not actually kill her, 
for being a woman, she is protected. My intention is merely to deprive her 
of her strength and her lair.” 

[13-22] But even as Rama was speaking in this fashion, Tataka lifted her 
arms and charged him, bellowing. As she hurled herself upon him, as swift 
and powerful as a bolt of lightning, he shot her in the chest with an arrow, 
so that she fell and died. Seeing the frightful-looking creature slain, the lord 
of the gods, and the gods as well, honored Kakutstha, crying, “Well done! 
Well done!” Thousand-eyed Indra, the smasher of citadels, was greatly 
pleased. With all the gods, who were similarly delighted, he spoke to 
Visvamitra: “Bless you, Kausika sage. All of us, Indra, and the hosts of 
Maruts are gratified by this deed. You should demonstrate your affection for 
Raghava. Brahman, you should confer upon Raghava the sons of Krsasva, 
lord of creatures, who are truly valorous and filled with power acquired 
through austerity. Since he has been so steadfast in following you, the 


king’s son is a worthy recipient for your gift, brahman. Moreover, he still 
has a great deed to do on behalf of the gods.” When the gods had spoken in 
this fashion, they all did homage to Visvamitra and, in delight, went off as 
they had come. Soon twilight came on. Then the foremost of sages, pleased 
and gratified by the slaying of Tataka, kissed Rama on the head and said: 
“We shall make camp here tonight, handsome Rama. Tomorrow at dawn we 
shall go to the site of my ashram.” 


Sarga 26 

[1-5] And then, the renowned Visvamitra, having passed the night, smiled 
as he spoke these sweet-syllabled words to Raghava: “Bless you, prince of 
great renown. I am fully satisfied with you. Since I feel such great affection 
for you, I shall give you the divine weapons. Bless you, I shall give you all 
these weapons. With them you shall forcefully subdue your enemies, 
defeating them in battle even though they be the hosts of the gods and the 
asuras together with the gandharvas and the great serpents. Raghava, I 
shall give you the great celestial Danda discus. Then, hero, I shall give you 
the Dharma discus and the Kala discus, also Visnu’s discus, which is very 
terrible, and the discus of Indra. 

[6-10] “Best of men, I shall give you the divine weapon known as the 
Vajra and the best of lances, which is Siva’s. Great-armed Raghava, I shall 
give you the divine weapons known as Brahmasiras and Aisika, as well as 
the greatest weapon of all, Brahma’s weapon. In addition, Prince Kakutstha, 
tiger among men, I shall give you two shining maces called Modaki and 
Sikhari, and I shall give you the noose of Dharma and the noose of Kala. 
And I shall give you Varuna’s noose, a weapon surpassed by none. I shall 
also give you two vajras, delight of the Raghus, Suska and Ardra. And I 
shall give you Pinakin’s weapon, the weapon belonging to Narayana, and 
the favorite weapon of Agni, which is known as Sikhara. 

[11-15] “Also, Raghava, you shall have Vayu’s weapon, which is called 
Prathama, the weapon called Hayasiras, and the one called Kraufica. 
Blameless Kakutstha, I shall give you two javelins, the terrible cudgel 
called Kankala, and the weapons known as Kapala and Kankana. All those 
weapons that the asuras bear and the great weapon of the vidyddharas 
called Nandana shall be yours. Great-armed prince, I shall give you a jewel 
of a sword, the favorite weapon of the gandharvas, which is called Manava. 


Raghava, I shall give you the weapons called Prasvapana, Prasamana, 
Saura, Darpana, Sosana, Samtapana, and Vilapana. 

[16-19] “You are the renowned son of a king, a tiger among men. 
Therefore, accept Kandarpa’s favorite weapon, the irresistible Madana, and 
the favorite weapon of the pisacas, which is called Mohana. Prince and 
tiger among men, accept also the following weapons: the Tamasa, the 
mighty Saumana, the irresistible Samvarta, and the Mausala. Great-armed 
watrior, accept the Satya weapon, the great Mayadhara, and the terrible 
weapon called Tejahprabha, which robs enemies of their power. Finally, you 
must accept Soma’s weapon, the Sisira, Tvastr’s weapon, Sudamana, 
Bhaga’s Daruna, and Manu’s Sitesu. 

[20-25] “Rama, great-armed prince, you should accept these weapons at 
once, for they are very powerful. They can take on any form at will and will 
bring you all that you desire.” The best of sages then purified himself and, 
facing the east, imparted to Rama with great pleasure the unsurpassed set of 
mantras. Even as the wise sage Visvamitra was intoning the spells, all those 
precious weapons presented themselves before Raghava. With great delight 
they all cupped their hands in reverence and spoke to Rama, “Here are your 
servants, noble Raghava.” Kakutstha touched them with his hand in token 
of acceptance and enjoined them, “You must come to me whenever I call 
you to mind.” Then mighty Rama was pleased at heart. Respectfully 
saluting Visvamitra, he set out once more on his journey. 


Sarga 27 
[1-2] As Kakutstha was setting out, after having purified himself and 
having accepted the weapons, he spoke to Visvamitra with an expression of 
delight on his face: “Since I have accepted these weapons, holy man, I have 
become invincible even to the gods. But, bull among sages, I still have need 
of spells for the recovery of the weapons.” 

[3-9] As Kakutstha was speaking in this fashion, the great sage, pure, 
steadfast, and true to his word, intoned the spells of recovery. “Satyavant, 
Satyakirti, Dhrsta, Rabhasa, Pratiharatara, Paranmukha, Avanmukha, 
Laksaksa, Visama, Drdhanabha, Sunabhaka, Dasaksa, Satavaktra, 
Daégasirsa, Satodara, Padmanabha, Mahanabha, Dundunabha, Sunabhaka, 
Jyotisa, Krsana, Nairasya, Vimala, Yaugandhara, Haridra, Daitya, 
Pramathana, Pitrya, Saumanasa, Vidhita, Makara, Karavirakara, Dhana, 


Dhanya, Kamariipa, Kamaruci, Moha, Avarana, Jrmbhaka, Sarvanabha, 
Santana, and Varana: these are the radiant sons of Krsasva, able to take on 
forms at will. Please accept them from me, Raghava; for you are a worthy 
recipient of them.” 

[10-13] Kakutstha, his heart delighted, replied, “I will indeed!” Then, 
right before Rama’s eyes, the spells took shape with radiant, celestial 
bodies, inspiring joy. Cupping their hands in reverence, they spoke sweetly 
to Rama: “We have come, tiger among men. Command us. What may we 
do for you?” The delight of the Raghus said to them: “You may go as you 
wish for now. But keep yourselves in readiness until I call you to mind. At 
such times, when there is some deed to be done, you must come to my aid.” 
“So be it,” they replied. Then, walking reverently around Rama Kakutstha, 
they took their leave of him and departed as they had come. 

[14-18] As Raghava walked on after having mastered the spells, he 
spoke these sweet and agreeable words to the great sage Visvamitra: “From 
here I can see a dense mass of trees like a dark cloud over near that 
mountain. What is it? I am very curious about it. It is lovely and quite 
charming, full of deer and adorned with all kinds of sweet-voiced birds. I 
gather from the pleasantness of this region, best of sages, that we have 
emerged from that terrifying forest. Tell me all about it, holy one. Whose 
ashram is located here? Is this the place where we shall find those sinful 
and wicked killers of brahmans?” 


Sarga 28 

[1-3] Since peerless Rama was so curious about the forest, the mighty 
Visvamitra began to explain: “This was once the ashram of the great Dwarf. 
It is known as the Ashram of the Perfected Being, for it was here that that 
great ascetic attained perfection. At that time, the famous King Bali 
Vairocana had defeated the hosts of the gods, including Indra and the Marut 
hosts, and had established his sovereignty throughout the three worlds. 

[4-8] “Then, while Bali was engaged in the performance of a sacrifice, 
the gods themselves, led by Agni, assembled here in this ashram and 
addressed Visnu. ‘O Visnu, Bali Vairocana is performing a great sacrifice. 
Our objective must be achieved before he completes this rite. He is giving 
away virtually everything he has—whatever, wherever, and however much 
it may be—to anyone who comes to him from anywhere asking for a gift. 


Through your yogic power of illusion, you must become a dwarf, Visnu, 
and accomplish a great and auspicious feat for the sake of the gods. When 
you have accomplished this task, lord of the gods, this place will, by your 
grace, be called the Ashram of the Perfected Being. Lord, please go forth 
from here.’ 

[9-14] “Then mighty Visnu, taking on the form of a dwarf, was born of 
Aditi and approached Vairocana. He begged as much land as he could 
traverse in three paces and accepted it respectfully. Then that supreme 
divinity of all the world, intent upon the welfare of all beings, traversed the 
worlds. Exerting his power, the mighty god bound Bali and gave the three 
worlds back to the great lord Sakra, making them once more subject to his 
sway. Since the Dwarf himself once dwelt here, this ashram allays all 
weariness. Now, because of my devotion to him, it has become mine. But of 
late, raksasas have been coming to this ashram to interfere with me, and it 
is here, tiger among men, that you must kill these evildoers. Let us go now, 
Rama, to the unsurpassed Ashram of the Perfected Being. For this ashram is 
as much yours as mine, my son.” 

[15-20] Catching sight of Visvamitra, all the sages who dwelt in the 
Ashram of the Perfected Being leapt up at once and did him homage. And 
when they had paid wise Visvamitra homage he deserved, they performed 
the rites of hospitality for the two princes. Then, when the two foe- 
conquering princes, delights of the Raghus, had rested for a while, they 
cupped their hands in reverence and spoke to the tiger among sages: “Bless 
you, bull among sages, you may enter a state of consecration immediately, 
if you wish. Let your words be proven true, and the Ashram of the 
Perfected Being become truly a place of perfection.” When he had been 
addressed in this fashion, the great sage, mighty Visvamitra, controlling 
himself and subduing his senses, entered a state of consecration. But the 
two princes spent the night intent upon their duty. Arising in the morning, 
they praised Visvamitra. 


Sarga 29 
[1-6] Mindful of the time and place, the two eloquent and foe-conquering 
princes then and there addressed Kausika: “Holy brahman, we want to 
know when we are supposed to ward off the two night-roaming rdksasas, 
lest we miss the proper moment.” As the Kakutstha princes were speaking 


in this fashion, impatient in their desire to fight, all the sages, delighted, 
said to them: “You two Raghavas must stand guard for six nights starting 
today. The sage is in a state of consecration and so must remain silent.” 
Upon hearing their words, the renowned princes guarded the ascetics’ forest 
for six days and nights, never sleeping. In this way, the two foe-conquering 
heroes attended upon Visvamitra, best of sages, wielding their mighty bows 
and guarding him with unwavering vigilance. 

[7-13] Then, when the time had passed and the sixth day had come, 
Rama said to Saumitri, “Be alert and vigilant.” And, just as Rama was 
saying this, impatient in his desire to fight, the altar, tended by their 
preceptor and purohitas, suddenly blazed up. And though the sacrifice was 
proceeding in accordance with the ritual precepts, to the accompaniment of 
vedic hymns, a loud and terrifying noise was heard in the sky. Suddenly, 
like clouds in the rainy season, two rdksasas, changing their shapes through 
the power of illusion and blotting out the sky, hurled themselves upon them. 
Thus did Marica, Subahu, and their ghastly followers appear, pouring down 
torrents of blood. Seeing them violently rushing on, lotus-eyed Rama turned 
to Laksmana and said, “Laksmana, watch as I scatter these evil, flesh-eating 
raksasas with the Manava weapon just as the wind scatters clouds.” 

[14-18] Then, in a towering rage, Raghava fired the noble and radiant 
Manava weapon at Marica’s breast. Struck by the great Manava weapon, he 
was hurled into the ocean’s flood a full hundred leagues away. Seeing 
Marica hurled back, writhing and unconscious, and crushed by the force of 
the Sitesu weapon, Rama spoke to Laksmana: “Laksmana, observe that, 
although Manu’s Sitesu, a weapon inseparable from righteousness, has 
stunned him and carried him away, he is not dead. But I shall kill these 
other pitiless and vicious rdksasas, for they are set in their wicked ways, 
obstructing sacrifices, and drinking blood.” 

[19-23] The delight of the Raghus then took up the immensely powerful 
Agneya weapon and fired it at Subahu’s breast. Pierced to the heart, he fell 
to earth. The noble and renowned Raghava then took up the Vayavya 
weapon and with it killed the rest of them, bringing joy to the sages. When 
the delight of the Raghus had killed all those rdaksasas who were 
obstructing the sacrifice, he was honored by the seers there, just as was 
Indra long ago on the occasion of his victory. His sacrifice at last 
completed, Visvamitra, seeing that all directions were free from those pests, 


said this to Kakutstha: “Great-armed warrior, I have accomplished my 
purpose. And you have carried out the orders of your father. Renowned 
Rama, you have made this truly an ashram of a perfected being.” 


Sarga 30 

[1-7] The heroes Rama and Laksmana, delighted to have accomplished 
their purpose, spent the night there with contentment in their hearts. Then, 
when the night had given way to bright dawn, the two of them performed 
their morning rituals and together approached Visvamitra and the other 
seers. They made obeisance to the eminent sage, who was blazing like fire, 
the purifier, and speaking sweetly, they uttered words both noble and sweet: 
“Here are your servants, tiger among sages, standing before you. Command 
us as you wish. What order shall we carry out?” When the two princes had 
spoken in this fashion, all the great seers, led by VisSvamitra, said these 
words to Rama: “Janaka, the lord of Mithila, is about to perform a sacrifice, 
the highest expression of righteousness; and we are going there, best of 
men. You should come with us, tiger among men, for you ought to see the 
wonderful jewel of a bow he has there. 

[8—12] “Long ago, at a sacrifice, best of men, the gods presented him— 
right there in the sacred enclosure—with an awesome, radiant, and 
immeasurably powerful bow. Not even the gods, gandharvas, asuras, and 
raksasas are able to string it, much less a man. Although kings and mighty 
princes, eager to test the strength of the bow, have tried, none have been 
able to string it. There, tiger among men, you shall see this bow of the great 
lord of Mithila. Moreover, Kakutstha, you shall witness his sacrifice, a 
wonder to behold. Tiger among men, the lord of Mithila begged that superb 
bow with its splendid grip from all the gods as a reward for his earlier 
sacrifice.” 

[13-18] When the foremost of sages had spoken in this fashion, he set 
out with the Kakutsthas and the host of seers, first paying his respects to the 
divinities of the forest: “Farewell to you. Since I have become perfected, I 
shall leave the Ashram of the Perfected Being for the Himalaya mountains 
on the northern shore of Jahnavi, the Ganges.” Then, after making an 
auspicious circuit of the unsurpassed Ashram of the Perfected Being, he set 
out for the north. As the foremost of sages set forth, a hundred carts full of 
his followers—all men learned in the vedas—followed him in procession. 


Even the flocks of birds and herds of deer that lived in the Ashram of the 
Perfected Being followed in the train of the great sage Visvamitra. When 
they had traveled far on the road and the sun, the maker of day, was sinking 
low, the host of sages, their minds composed, made camp on the banks of 
the river Sona. 

[19-23] Once the sun, maker of day, had set, those immeasurably mighty 
men bathed and made offerings into the fire, eater of oblations. Then they 
seated themselves, following Visvamitra’s lead. But Rama and Saumitri 
first did homage to the sages and only then sat down before wise 
Visvamitra. Then mighty Rama, filled with curiosity, questioned the great 
sage Visvamitra, tiger among sages: “Holy sage, what region is this so 
graced with lush forests? I want to know all about it. Please tell me the 
truth.” Prompted by R&ama’s words, the great ascetic, true to his vows, 
related, in the midst of the seers, the entire history of that region. 


Sarga 31 

[1-5] “One of the sons of Brahma was a great ascetic named KusSa. He, in 
turn, fathered four worthy sons on a woman of Vidarbha, and their names 
were Kusamba, Kusanabha, Adhirtarajasa, and Vasu. In his desire to see 
such radiant, vigorous, righteous, and truthful sons fulfill the duties of the 
kshatriya class, KuSa said to them, ‘My sons, you must rule kingdoms. For 
only thus will you fully discharge your duty.’ Then, when those four fine 
men, honored by all, heard these words of Kusa, they went forth and 
founded cities. Mighty Kusamba founded the city of Kausambi, while 
righteous Kusanabha established the city of Mahodaya. King Adhirtarajasa 
founded Dharmaranya, Rama, foremost of cities, and King Vasu founded 
Girivraja. 

[6—12] “Rama, this rich land belongs to great Vasu. Those five splendid 
hills surround it. This lovely river flows toward Magadha and therefore is 
known as the Sumagadhti. It is as beautiful as a garland, nestled among the 
five splendid hills. Rama, this is indeed the river Magadhi belonging to 
great Vasu. Garlanded with grain, it flows east through rich farmlands. But, 
delight of the Raghus, as for the righteous royal seer Kusanabha, he 
fathered a hundred incomparably beautiful daughters on Ghrtact. Youthful, 
beautiful, and richly ornamented, resembling lightning in the rains, they 
went one day to a park. Adorned with the most exquisite ornaments, 


singing, dancing, and playing musical instruments, they enjoyed themselves 
immensely, Raghava. Their every limb was beautiful, and indeed, there was 
no one on earth whose loveliness was like theirs. There in the park they 
looked like stars shining among the clouds. 

[13-19] “Vayu, the wind god, who dwells in everyone, seeing that they 
possessed every virtue, youth, and beauty, addressed them: ‘I desire all of 
you. You shall be my wives. Give up your mortal state and gain eternal 
life.’ But when the hundred girls heard those words of tireless Vayu, they 
replied in tones of mockery: ‘Best of gods, you move inside all creatures 
and know their various powers. How dare you then treat us with disrespect? 
Best of gods, we are the daughters of Kusanabha. Any of us could send you 
toppling from your lofty state, god though you be, did we not prefer to 
preserve the power of our austerities. Fool! May such a thing never happen! 
We shall never disregard the wishes of our truthful father and choose a 
husband for ourselves on our own account! For our father is our lord and 
our supreme divinity. That man alone will be our husband to whom our 
father gives us.’ 

[20-22] “Now, when the holy Lord Vayu heard those words, he was 
furiously angry and, entering into every one of their limbs, he twisted them. 
Twisted by Vayu, the girls entered the king’s residence, and when the king 
saw that they were so distorted, he was distraught and cried: ‘What is this? 
Speak, my daughters. Who has dared to so violate the laws of propriety? 
Who has turned all of you into hunchbacks? Though you all gesticulate 
wildly, you do not speak.’ ” 


Sarga 32 

[1-4] “When wise Kusanabha’s hundred daughters heard his words, they 
touched his feet with their heads and replied: ‘Your Majesty, Vayu, who 
lives in all creatures, wishes to ruin us by approaching us in an improper 
manner. He has no regard whatever for what is proper. But we told him: 
“We have a father, thank you, we are not free agents. Go and ask our father 
if he will give us to you.” And even as we were speaking in this fashion, we 
were all sorely afflicted by Vayu, who meant us no good and would not 
heed our words.’ 

[5-10] “When the righteous and mighty king heard the words of his 
hundred peerless daughters, he replied: ‘Daughters, you have shown 


extraordinary forbearance, which is the duty of the meek. In your unanimity 
you have shown your respect for my family. Forbearance is an adornment to 
women as well as men, and such forbearance as yours is hard to achieve, 
especially in the face of the thirty gods. And your forbearance is such, my 
daughters, that it belongs to all of you equally. Forbearance is charity; 
forbearance is sacrifice; forbearance is truth, my daughters. Forbearance is 
glory; forbearance is righteousness. The world itself is founded on 
forbearance.’ And so saying, Kakutstha, the king, equal in valor to the thirty 
gods, dismissed his daughters. Skillful in counsel, he conferred with his 
counselors about giving them away in marriage. They discussed the proper 
time and place for giving them and a suitable person to whom to give them. 

[11-14] “Now in those days, there lived a great sage named Ciulin. 
Retaining his semen and pure in his conduct, he had undertaken austerities 
as enjoined in the vedas. Bless you, a gandharva woman named Somada, 
the daughter of Urmila, was once attending upon that seer while he was 
engaged in his austerities. This extremely righteous woman dwelt there for 
some time worshiping him and wholly devoted to his service, so that this 
guru was pleased with her. So, delight of the Raghus, at an appropriate 
moment he spoke to her, saying, ‘Bless you, I am pleased with you. What 
favor may I do for you?’ 

[15-18] “When she understood that the sage was pleased, the gandharva 
woman was very happy, and since she knew how to speak well, she 
addressed him, who was similarly eloquent, in sweet words: ‘You are 
suffused with the splendor of Brahman, a mighty ascetic who has attained 
Brahman. Therefore, I desire a righteous son who shall be filled with the 
ascetic power of Brahman. Bless you, I have no husband. I am nobody’s 
wife. So, since I have approached you in the manner prescribed in the 
vedas, please give me a son.’ The brahman-seer Culin was pleased with her, 
and so he granted her an unsurpassed son known as Brahmadatta, a son 
born directly from his mind. 

[19-26] “And this Brahmadatta, who was a king, dwelt in the city of 
Kampilya in the greatest royal splendor, like the king of the gods in heaven. 
It was upon this same Brahmadatta that righteous King Kusanabha decided 
to bestow his hundred daughters. So that mighty king, lord of the earth, 
summoned Brahmadatta and with delight in his heart, gave him his hundred 
daughters. Thus, it came about, delight of the Raghus, that the lord of the 


earth, Brahmadatta, who was like the lord of the gods, took their hands in 
due order. And no sooner had he touched their hands than all the hundred 
maidens became radiant with great beauty, free from crookedness, and free 
from sorrow. Seeing that Vayu had released them, Kusanabha, lord of the 
earth, was overjoyed and rejoiced again and again. The lord of the earth 
then dismissed the newlywed king and his wives, as well as his host of 
preceptors. The gandharva woman Somada too was greatly delighted to see 
this ceremony that was so fitting for her son, and she welcomed her 
daughters-in-law as custom demanded.” 


Sarga 33 

[1—6] “When Brahmadatta had married and departed, Raghava, Kusanabha, 
who still had no son, performed the son-producing rite for the sake of 
getting one. While this sacrifice was going on, KuSa, the son of Brahma, 
highly pleased, spoke to Kusanabha, lord of the earth: ‘My son, you shall 
have a worthy and most righteous son who will be called Gadhi, and 
through him you shall gain enduring fame in the world.’ After speaking in 
this fashion to Kusanabha, lord of the earth, Kusa flew off into the sky and 
returned to the eternal Brahmaloka. Some time after this, a most righteous 
son named Gadhi was born to the wise Kusanabha. Righteous Gadhi is my 
father, Kakutstha, for I am a Kausika, delight of the Raghus, born in the 
House of KusSa. 

[7-12] “I have also an older sister, true to her vows, Raghava, and 
known as Satyavati. She was given in marriage to Rctka. Following her 
husband, she went to heaven in her earthly body. This noble Kausika 
woman was then transformed into a mighty river. A lovely goddess with 
holy waters, my sister, rises from the Himalayas and flows forth in her 
desire for the welfare of the world. Therefore, delight of the Raghus, since I 
am deeply attached to my sister Kausiki, I shall dwell happily in the vicinity 
of the Himalayas with my senses under strict control. For the holy and 
illustrious Satyavati, firmly established in truth and righteousness, and 
deeply devoted to her husband, is none other than the Kausiki, foremost of 
rivers. It was only for the sake of my sacrifice that I left her, Rama, and 
came away. And it is owing to your might alone that I was myself able to 
become a perfected being in the Ashram of the Perfected Being. 


[13-20] “This then, Rama, is the story of my family and of my birth. 
Also, since you asked me about it, great-armed man, I have related to you 
the history of this region. But half the night has passed away, Kakutstha, 
while I have been telling these stories. Bless you, go to sleep, lest this be a 
hindrance to our journey. The trees are perfectly still, delight of the Raghus, 
all beasts and birds have settled in their nests, and all directions are suffused 
with the dark of night. The twilight is slowly fading. The sky, thick with 
stars and planets, is shining with lights as though it were filled with eyes. 
And, my lord, the cool-rayed moon is rising, dispelling the darkness of the 
world and gladdening with his radiance the hearts of all its creatures, while 
here and there, the creatures of the night—dreadful hordes of yaksas and 
rdksasas hungry for flesh—are roaming.” When the great and mighty sage 
had spoken in this fashion, he paused, and all the sages applauded him, 
crying, “Excellent! Excellent!” Rama and Saumitri too were amazed by 
what they had heard. Praising the tiger among sages, they settled down to 
sleep. 


Sarga 34 

[1-6] Visvamitra passed the remainder of the night with the great seers on 
the bank of the river Sond. Then, as the night was giving way to bright 
dawn, he said: “Rama, the night has given way to dawn. It is time for the 
morning devotions. Arise, bless you, arise! Make ready to depart.” Upon 
hearing these words, Rama performed his morning rituals, and when he was 
ready to go, he said, “The limpid Sona is shallow and studded with sand 
bars. Which way shall we cross, brahman?” Questioned by Rama in this 
fashion, Visvamitra said, “I have already pointed out the path. It is the one 
by which the great seers are crossing.” Later, when half the day had passed 
and they had traveled a long way, they came to the Jahnavi, the Ganges, 
most excellent of rivers and constant resort of sages. 

[7-11] When they saw her holy waters, thronged with hamsas and 
sarasa cranes, all the sages and the two Raghavas were delighted. They 
made camp on her bank, bathed, and made offerings of water to the gods 
and their departed ancestors as is prescribed in the ritual texts. They then 
performed the agnihotra rite and ate of the oblation that was like nectar. 
Then, their hearts delighted, they sat down on the holy shore of the Jahnavt, 
surrounding the great ViSvamitra on every side. With a glad heart, Rama 


spoke to Visvamitra, “Holy man, I wish to learn about the Ganges, the river 
that goes by three paths. How does she traverse the three worlds to come at 
last to the ocean, lord of rivers and streams?” Prompted by Rama’s words, 
the great sage ViSvamitra began to tell of the origin and greatness of the 
Ganges. 

[12-17] “There is a lordly mountain, a vast mine of metals, called 
Himalaya, Rama, and he has two daughters unequaled on earth in beauty. 
Their mother, Rama, Himalaya’s lovely and beloved wife, was Mena, fair- 
waisted daughter of Mount Meru. The Ganges, eldest daughter of 
Himalaya, was born to her, Raghava, after which he had a second daughter 
named Uma. In their desire to effect a divine purpose, the gods asked that 
lord of mountains for his eldest daughter, Ganges, the river that goes by 
three paths. In the interests of righteousness and his desire for the welfare of 
the three worlds, Himalaya gave away the Ganges, his daughter who 
purifies the worlds and moves freely by any path. Acting for the good of the 
world and for the sake of the three worlds, the gods accepted her and, 
having accomplished their hearts’ desire, they took the Ganges and 
departed. 

[18-21] “But, delight of the Raghus, the other daughter of the mountain 
was an ascetic maiden who undertook a dreadful vow and practiced 
austerity. The foremost of mountains gave this daughter, Uma, possessed of 
fierce ascetic power and worshiped by the world, in marriage to the 
incomparable Rudra. These, then, delight of the Raghus, are the daughters 
of the mountain king: Ganges, most excellent of rivers, and the goddess 
Uma. All the world worships them. Now, my fleet-footed son, I have told 
you all about how the river that goes by three paths went first by the path of 
the sky.” 


Sarga 35 
[1-5] When the sage had finished speaking, both heroes, Raghava and 
Laksmana, applauded his tale and addressed that bull among sages: “This is 
a wonderful and edifying tale you have told, brahman. You are familiar with 
these matters in detail; so please tell us the details of the origins, both in 
heaven and in the world of men, of the eldest daughter of the mountain 
king. Why does she who sanctifies the worlds sanctify three paths? How is 
it that the Ganges, most excellent of rivers, is known throughout the three 


worlds as Tripathaga, ‘She Who Goes by Three Paths’? You know the ways 
of righteousness; please tell us of the great events with which she is 
associated.” When Kakutstha had finished speaking in this fashion, the 
ascetic ViSvamitra told the full story in the midst of the seers, omitting 
nothing. 

[6-11] “Long ago, Rama, when the great ascetic, black-throated Siva, 
had gotten married, he looked with desire upon the goddess and began to 
make love to her. Thus engaged, the black-throated god passed a hundred 
years of the gods. But even so, foe-consuming Rama, the goddess 
conceived no child. By that time the gods, led by Grandfather Brahma, had 
become alarmed and thought, ‘Who will be able to withstand the being who 
will be born from this union?’ Drawing near, all the gods prostrated 
themselves and spoke: ‘Great god, god of gods, you are devoted to the 
welfare of this world. Please be gracious to the gods who have fallen at 
your feet. Best of gods, the worlds cannot contain your semen. You should, 
instead, together with the goddess, perform the austerities prescribed in the 
vedas. For the sake of the three worlds, you must retain your semen in your 
body. You should protect all these worlds, not destroy them.’ 

[12—18] “When the great lord of all the worlds heard the words of the 
gods, he said, ‘Very well.’ Then he spoke to them further: ‘With the help of 
Uma, I shall retain the semen in my body. Let the thirty gods and the earth 
rest easy. But tell me this, great gods: who will contain such of my 
incomparable semen as has already been dislodged from its place?’ 
Addressed in this fashion, the gods replied to Siva, whose standard is the 
bull, “The Earth will bear the semen that has been dislodged.’ And so, when 
they had addressed him in this fashion, the lord of gods released his semen 
upon the Earth, thereby filling it up, together with 1ts mountains and forests. 
Then the gods spoke to Agni, the eater of oblations, saying, “You and Vayu 
must enter Rudra’s abundant semen.’ Once permeated by Agni, it was 
transformed into a white mountain on which there was a celestial thicket of 
white reeds that looked like the sun surrounded by fire. It was there that 
Kartikeya came into being, born from fire. 

[19-26] “Then the gods and the hosts of seers were delighted at heart 
and worshiped Uma and Siva. But the daughter of the mountain was 
enraged, Rama. Her eyes red with anger, she spoke to the gods, cursing 
them: ‘Since I have been thwarted while making love in the hopes of 


begetting a son, you shall be unable to father children upon your own 
wives. From this day forward, your wives shall remain childless.’ After 
addressing all the gods in this fashion, she cursed the Earth as well: ‘O 
Earth, you shall be manifold in form and the wife of many. Moreover, since 
you did not want my son, you evil-minded creature, you shall never 
experience a mother’s love for a son, defiled as you are by my anger.’ When 
the lord of gods had seen all the gods thus put to shame, he set out for the 
west, the direction guarded by Varuna. There the great lord and the goddess 
undertook austerities on the northern slope of a mountain peak in the 
Himalayas. I have now told you the story of the mountain’s daughter in 
detail, Rama. Next you and Laksmana shall hear from me the tale of the 
origin of the Ganges.” 


Sarga 36 

[1-8] “Long ago, while the god Siva was engaged in austerities, the gods 
and hosts of seers, wishing to find a leader for their army, approached 
Grandfather Brahma. Indra and all the gods made Agni, the god of fire, 
their spokesman, and prostrating themselves, they spoke these eloquent 
words to the Grandfather, their lord: ‘Lord, he whom you long ago gave us 
to lead our army has taken to extreme asceticism and is now engaged in 
austerities with Uma. You know how to arrange things. Arrange something 
for us to do next in our desire for the welfare of the worlds. You are our last 
recourse.’ Upon hearing the gods’ words, the grandfather of all the worlds 
comforted them with soothing words, saying: ‘What the mountain’s 
daughter said, that you will never father children on your wives, is 
inviolable truth. Let there be no doubt about this. But here is the Ganges 
who moves through the sky. Agni, the eater of oblations, will father on her a 
son who will be a foe-conquering commander for the army of the gods. The 
eldest daughter of the mountain lord will acknowledge that son. There can 
be no doubt that Uma will accept this.’ 

[9-14] “When the gods had heard Grandfather Brahma’s words, and had 
thus accomplished their purpose, delight of the Raghus, they all bowed low 
and worshiped him. Then all the gods proceeded to Mount Kailasa, adorned 
with metallic ores, and charged Agni, the god of fire, with the task of 
begetting a son, saying: ‘O lord, eater of oblations, you must carry out this 
task of the gods. Great is your splendor. You must release the semen into 


the Ganges, the daughter of the mountain.’ Agni, the purifier, promised the 
gods he would do this, and so, approaching the Ganges, he said, ‘Bear this 
embryo, goddess, as a favor to the gods.’ Upon hearing these words, she 
assumed her divine form, and he, seeing her extraordinary beauty, scattered 
the semen all over. Agni, the purifier, showered it all over the goddess, so 
that all the channels of the Ganges were filled with it, delight of the Raghus. 

[15-20] “Then the Ganges spoke to him, Agni, purohita of all the gods: 
‘O God, I cannot bear your powerful semen. A fire is burning me, and my 
mind is confused.’ The eater of all the gods’ oblations replied to the 
Ganges: ‘Let the embryo be placed at the foot of the Himalayas.’ When the 
mighty Ganges heard Agni’s words, blameless man, she released the 
unbearably brilliant embryo from her channels. Since it had emerged from 
her, it had the luster of molten gold, and as it touched the earth it turned to 
gold and silver, pure and beautiful. From its acrid quality, copper and iron 
were produced, while its impurities became tin and lead. Thus, when it 
touched the earth, it turned into the various elements. 

[21—25] “The moment the embryo was set down, the whole mountain 
forest was pervaded by its splendor and turned to gold. And ever since that 
time, Raghava, tiger among men, gold, lustrous as Agni, eater of oblations, 
has been known as Jatartipa, ‘Formed at Birth.” As soon as the boy was 
born, Indra and all the Marut hosts engaged the Krttikas to provide 
sufficient milk for him. They offered him milk as soon as he was born, and 
came to an excellent arrangement, saying, ‘He shall be the son of all of us.’ 
It was for this reason that all the gods called him Kartikeya, saying, ‘There 
can be no doubt but that this child will be famous throughout the three 
worlds.’ 

[26-29] “When the Krttikas heard those words, they bathed the child 
who had been emitted in that outpouring of the embryonic waters shining 
with the greatest splendor, like fire. And, Kakutstha, since that illustrious 
and fiery Kartikeya had been emitted in that outpouring of embryonic 
waters, the gods called him Skanda, ‘Emission.’ Then all six Krttikas put 
forth wonderful milk, and he grew six heads to take it as it sprang from 
their breasts. After that lord had drunk their milk for but a single day, he 
conquered the hosts of daitya warriors through his own might, though his 
form was that of a tender young boy. Because of that, the hosts of the gods 
assembled and, making Agni, the god of fire, their spokesman, consecrated 


him, whose radiance was unblemished, as commander of the hosts of the 
gods. And so, Rama, I have told you the detailed history of the Ganges and 
also of the auspicious and holy birth of Kumara.” 


Sarga 37 

[1-6] When Kausika had finished telling Rama Kakutstha this sweet- 
syllabled tale, he addressed him further: “Long ago there was a heroic and 
righteous king named Sagara, the ruler of Ayodhya. He was childless, 
although he desired children. Rama, the elder wife of Sagara, whose name 
was Kesint, was the righteous and truthful daughter of the king of Vidarbha. 
And Sagara’s second wife was Aristanemi’s daughter, Sumati. In beauty she 
had no rival on earth. Once the king went to the Himalayas, and there he 
and his two wives performed austerities on Mount Bhrguprasravana. When 
a full one hundred years had passed, the sage Bhrgu, foremost among the 
truthful, was pleased with Sagara’s austerities and granted him a boon. 

[7-12] “ ‘Blameless man,’ he said, ‘you will have a vast number of 
children. And what is more, bull among men, you will achieve fame 
unrivaled in this world. My son, one of your wives will give birth to a son 
who will carry on your dynasty. The other will bear sixty thousand sons.’ 
The two wives of the king were greatly delighted, and cupping their hands 
in reverence, they propitiated that tiger among men as he was speaking to 
them, and they said: ‘Which one of us will have the one son, brahman? And 
which one will give birth to many? Brahman, we want to know. May your 
words prove true.” Upon hearing these words, the extremely righteous 
Bhrgu made this excellent reply, “You may arrange it between yourselves. 
One son to carry on the dynasty or many sons mighty, vigorous, and 
renowned—which of you wants which boon?’ 

[13—19] “Now when Kesini heard the sage’s words, Rama, delight of the 
Raghus, she chose, right there in the presence of the king, the son who 
would carry on the dynasty. But Sumati, Suparna’s sister, chose the sixty 
thousand vigorous and renowned sons. Delight of the Raghus, the king then 
walked reverently around the seer. Then, bowing his head in homage, he 
returned to his own city with his wives. So, after some time had elapsed, 
Kesint, the elder, gave birth to Sagara’s son, who was called Asamafyja. But 
as for Sumati, tiger among men, she gave birth to a gourdlike fetal mass. 
And when the gourd was split open, sixty thousand sons emerged. Nurses 


nurtured them in pots filled with clarified butter, and after a long time, they 
grew to young manhood. Indeed, it was a very long time before Sagara’s 
sixty thousand sons grew into their young manhood and beauty. 

[20-26] “But, best of men, delight of the Raghus, the eldest son of 
Sagara took to forcibly seizing children and throwing them into the waters 
of the Sarayu, laughing as he watched them drown. Since he was bent on 
doing such mischief to the people, his father banished him from the city. 
Asamaniyja, however, had a mighty son named Amsumant, who spoke kindly 
to everyone and was well liked by all the people. After some time, best of 
men, Sagara had an idea and formed a resolution, saying, ‘I will perform a 
sacrifice.’ Then, when the king, who was learned in the vedas, had come to 
this decision to perform a sacrifice in consultation with his host of 
preceptors, he began the ritual.” 


Sarga 38 

[1-7] When Visvamitra’s tale was at an end, Rama, delight of the Raghus, 
spoke in delight to the sage who shone like fire: “Bless you, brahman, I 
would like to hear this story too in great detail. How did my ancestor carry 
out his sacrifice?” Gently smiling, Visvamitra once more addressed 
Kakutstha: “Rama, you shall now hear the whole story of great Sagara. 
Himavant, greatest of mountains and father-in-law of Safkara, stands 
confronting the Vindhya range. The two, in fact, directly face each other. 
Best of men, tiger among men, the sacrifice took place between these two 
ranges, for it is said that this is the best region for sacrificial rites. 
Kakutstha, my son, AmSumant, equipped with a strong bow and a great 
chariot, following Sagara’s instructions, guarded the sacrificial horse. But 
even though Sagara himself was the patron of the rite, Vasava, taking on the 
form of a rdksasa, carried off the sacrificial horse in an instant. 

[8—16] “Now, as the great man’s horse was being carried off, Kakutstha, 
all his hosts of preceptors spoke to him, the patron of the rite: ‘At this very 
moment, your sacrificial horse is being taken away by force. You must kill 
the thief, Kakutstha, and bring back the horse. For this is a defect in the 
sacrifice that will bring disaster upon us all. Your majesty, you must see to 
it that this defect is made good.’ When the king heard the words spoken by 
his preceptors in the assembly, he addressed these words to his sixty 
thousand sons: ‘My sons, bulls among men, I do not see how rdksasas 


could have done this, for this great rite is being carried out by illustrious 
sages who are sanctified by vedic mantras. Therefore, my sons, you must 
go and seek the horse. May good fortune attend you. Follow its trail over all 
the ocean-garlanded earth. You must search carefully, my sons, league by 
league. In searching for the horse thief, at my command, you must dig up 
the very earth itself until you find the horse. Bless you. I am in a state of 
consecration. Therefore, I must wait here with my grandson and my 
preceptors until the horse is found.’ 

[17-22] “When they had been addressed in this manner, Rama, the 
king’s mighty sons were delighted and roamed the earth carrying out their 
father’s orders. Tiger among men, with arms as hard as adamant, they each 
tore up the earth for a league on every side. Torn up by lances like bolts of 
lightning and with fearsome ploughshares, the earth cried out, delight of the 
Raghus. Raghava, there was an unbearable outcry of creatures being killed 
—of nagas, asuras, and raksasas. Delight of the Raghus, those heroes tore 
up the earth to a distance of sixty thousand leagues, all the way down to the 
splendid underworld, Rasatala. In this fashion, tiger among men, the king’s 
sons roamed everywhere, digging up this mountain-studded continent of 
Jambiudvipa. 

[23-26] “Then all the gods, gandharvas, asuras, and serpents, their 
minds reeling, approached Grandfather Brahma. Utterly terrified, their faces 
downcast, they propitiated the great Grandfather, addressing these words to 
him: ‘O lord, the sons of Sagara are digging up the entire earth. Many great 
beings, as well as creatures of the waters, are being killed. Crying, “He has 
carried off the horse! He has ruined our sacrifice!” the sons of Sagara are 
slaughtering all creatures.’ ” 


Sarga 39 
[ 1—8] “When the holy lord, Grandfather Brahma, had heard the words of the 
gods, who were terrified and bewildered by the might of those destructive 
men, he replied to them, saying: ‘Wise Vasudeva, to whom this whole earth 
belongs, has assumed the form of Kapila and ever upholds the earth. This 
tearing up of the earth was foreseen as necessary. So also was the 
destruction of Sagara’s short-lived sons.’ Upon hearing the Grandfather’s 
words, the thirty-three foe-conquering gods were greatly delighted and 
departed as they had come. Then, as Sagara’s great sons continued tearing 


up the earth, there arose a noise like that of an earthquake. When they had 
split open the entire earth and walked reverently around the whole of it, all 
the sons of Sagara together addressed these words to their father: “We have 
gone over the entire earth and have slain many powerful beings: gods, 
danavas, rdksasas, pisdcas, serpents, and kinnaras. Yet we have found 
neither the horse nor the horse thief. What shall we do? Bless you, think of 
a plan.’ 

[9-14] “When he heard these words from his sons, delight of the 
Raghus, that foremost of kings, Sagara, replied to them in anger: “You must 
dig further, bless you. Tear open the earth! Come back when you have 
accomplished your mission and found the horse thief.’ Acting upon their 
father’s words, the sixty thousand sons of great Sagara rushed back to 
Rasatala. Digging down from there, they saw Viriipaksa, one of the 
mountainous elephants who support the earth, bearing his burden. Delight 
of the Raghus, that great elephant Virupaksa supports the entire earth, with 
its mountains and forests, on his head. So whenever that great elephant 
shakes his head for a moment to relieve his weariness, there is an 
earthquake. 

[15-22] “When they had walked reverently around the great elephant, 
the guardian of the east, and done him honor, they went on tearing up 
Rasatala. After tearing up the east, they went on and tore up the south. In 
the south, they saw another great elephant, mighty Mahapadma, who, like a 
huge mountain, supports the earth on his head. It filled them with the 
greatest wonder. But when the sixty thousand sons of Sagara had walked 
reverently around him, they tore up the west. In the west too, those mighty 
men saw a great and mountainous elephant, Saumanasa, one of the 
elephants who support the earth. They walked around him reverently and 
inquired about his well-being, then went on digging up the north. In the 
north, best of the Raghus, they saw snow-white Bhadra, who supports the 
earth with his splendid body. Those sixty thousand sons touched him, and 
after walking around him reverently, tore up the earth once more. 

[23-28] “Finally, all the sons of Sagara went to the famous northeastern 
quarter and dug up the earth in their fury. And it was there that they saw the 
eternal Vasudeva in the form of Kapila and, grazing near the god, the horse. 
Thinking him to be the one who had ruined their sacrifice, they were 
enraged, and they ran toward him, eyes clouded with anger, crying: ‘Stay 


where you are! Stay where you are! You are the one who stole our 
sacrificial horse. Fool! Know that we, the sons of Sagara, have come!’ 
When Kapila heard these words, delight of the Raghus, he was filled with 
great fury and uttered the syllable ‘Hum.’ That very instant, Kakutstha, all 
the sons of Sagara were reduced to a heap of ashes by the great and 
unfathomable Kapila.” 


Sarga 40 

[1-6] “When, delight of the Raghus, King Sagara realized that his sons had 
been gone for a very long time, he spoke to his grandson, who shone with 
an inner splendor. ‘You are a hero accomplished in the arts of war and equal 
in blazing energy to your forefathers. Go then and seek out the path of your 
forefathers, the path by which the horse was taken. The creatures that live 
underground are huge and powerful, so you must take your bow and a 
sword to ward them off. You must pay homage to those who deserve 
homage and kill those who would obstruct you. Then, when you have 
accomplished your mission, you must come back and complete my 
sacrifice.” When Amsumant had been thus fittingly addressed by the great 
Sagara, he took his bow and sword and departed, striding swiftly. At the 
behest of the king, O best of men, he set out on the subterranean path that 
had been excavated by his great forefathers. 

[7-11] “There that mighty man saw one of the elephants who support the 
earth. It was being worshiped by daityvas, danavas, rdksasas, pisdcas, and 
the great birds and serpents. After he had walked around it reverently, he 
inquired as to its well-being, asking also about his forefathers and the horse 
thief. When the elephant heard Amsumant’s words, it replied affectionately, 
‘Son of Asamafija, you shall quickly accomplish your mission and return 
with the horse.’ Hearing these words, he set out to question all the elephants 
who support the earth, in the proper manner and in due sequence. All those 
guardians of the directions, who understood the subtleties of speech and 
were themselves eloquent, honored and encouraged him, saying, ‘You shall 
return with the horse.’ 

[12-15] “When he heard these words, he strode swiftly to where his 
forefathers, the sons of Sagara, had been turned to heaps of ash. Then the 
son of Asamafia was overcome with grief. Deeply anguished over their 
death, he cried out in his great sorrow. Overwhelmed with grief and sorrow, 


that tiger among men spied the sacrificial horse grazing nearby. That 
mighty man wished to perform the funerary libations for the king’s sons, 
but although he searched for water, he could find no body of water. 

[16—22] “But then, Rama, casting about his sharp eye, he spied his 
forefathers’ uncle, the king of birds, Suparna, rival of the wind. And the 
bird, the mighty Vainateya, said these words to him: ‘Do not grieve, tiger 
among men. This slaughter took place for the good of the world. And since, 
wise man, these mighty men were consumed by none other than 
unfathomable Kapila, you should not offer them the water of this world. 
Bull among men, the Ganges is the eldest daughter of Himalaya. It is she 
alone, the purifier of the world, who can purify these men, now turned to 
heaps of ash. When their ashes are moistened by the Ganges, beloved of all 
the world, only then, my son, will the sixty thousand princes be carried to 
heaven. Illustrious bull among men, take the horse and go. For, hero, you 
must complete your grandfather’s sacrifice.” Heeding Suparna’s words, the 
renowned and mighty Amsumant took the horse and returned home swiftly. 

[23-26] “Then, delight of the Raghus, he approached the king, who was 
still in a state of consecration. He told him all that had happened, just as it 
had taken place, and repeated Suparna’s words. After hearing the dreadful 
words of Amsumant, the king completed his sacrifice in due order, 
according to precept. But when the majestic lord of the earth, the king, had 
completed the sacrifice and returned to his capital, he could think of no plan 
to bring down the Ganges. Finally, after a very long time, the great king, 
who had reigned for thirty thousand years, went to heaven still without 
having thought of a plan.” 


Sarga 41 
[1—7] “When Sagara had succumbed to the law of time, Rama, his ministers 
made righteous Amsumant their king. Amsumant was a very great king, 
delight of the Raghus, and he had a great son famed as Diltpa. Turning the 
kingdom over to Dilipa, delight of the Raghus, he performed very severe 
austerities on a lovely peak in the Himalayas. After living in an ascetics’ 
grove for thirty-two thousand years, the renowned ascetic King Amsumant 
at last attained heaven. Mighty Dilipa too, upon learning about the slaughter 
of his grandfathers, found his thoughts so scattered by grief that he too was 
unable to arrive at a solution. He brooded about it constantly, wondering: 


‘How can I bring down the Ganges? How can I perform their funerary 
libations? How can I save them?’ Thus did the king, celebrated for his 
righteousness, constantly brood, and, in time, a most righteous son named 
Bhagiratha was born to him. 

[8-15] “Mighty King Dilipa performed many sacrifices and reigned for 
thirty thousand years. Yet, even so, tiger among men, he could think of no 
way to save his ancestors. At last he took ill and succumbed to the law of 
time. After first consecrating his son Bhagiratha as king, that bull among 
men, the king, went to Indra’s world by virtue of the merit he had acquired 
for himself through his deeds. Now, the righteous and mighty royal seer 
Bhagiratha had no children, delight of the Raghus. And so, since he lacked 
an heir, he wished to have one. For this reason, delight of the Raghus, he 
undertook protracted austerities at Gokarna. Keeping his arms continually 
raised, eating but once a month, and controlling his senses, he practiced the 
austerity of the five fires. After he had practiced such awesome asceticism 
for a thousand years, Lord Brahma, supreme lord and master of all 
creatures, was greatly pleased. Accompanied by the hosts of gods, 
Grandfather Brahma approached great Bhagiratha, still immersed in his 
austerities, and said: ‘Illustrious Bhagiratha, lord of the people, I am 
pleased with these austerities you have performed so well. You have been 
true to your vows and so may choose a boon.’ 

[16—19] “The illustrious and mighty Bhagiratha stood, cupping his hands 
in reverence, and spoke to Brahma, grandfather of all the worlds: ‘If you are 
pleased with me, Lord, and if I am to have some reward for my austerities, 
then let me be the one to offer the funerary libations to all the sons of 
Sagara. Let the ashes of those great men, my great-grandfathers, be 
moistened by the waters of the Ganges, so that they may, at last, attain 
heaven. O God, grant me also children so that our line shall never fail. O 
God, let this be my second boon on behalf of the House of Iksvaku.’ 

[20—24] “When the king had delivered this speech, the grandfather of all 
the worlds replied to him in fine words, both sweet and sweetly spoken: 
‘Bhagiratha, great chariot warrior, this noble wish of yours shall come true. 
Bless you, you shall extend the Iksvaku dynasty. Haimavati, the Ganges, is 
the eldest daughter of the Himalaya. Your majesty, Hara shall be charged 
with checking her fall. For, your majesty, the earth would not be able to 
withstand the force of the Ganges’s fall. Hero, I know of no one other than 


Siva, the trident bearer, who could check her fall.’ When the god, creator of 
the world, had addressed the king in this fashion, he spoke to the Ganges, 
and then went to heaven with all the hosts of the Maruts.” 


Sarga 42 

[1-6] “After the god of gods had gone, Rama, Bhagiratha stood for a year 
on the tip of one big toe, worshiping Siva. At the end of that year, Siva 
Pasupati, lord of beasts, and husband of Uma, who is worshiped by all the 
worlds, said this to the king: ‘Best of men, I am pleased with you and will 
do what you desire. I shall bear the daughter of the mountain king on my 
head.’ And so, Rama, Ganges, the elder Haimavati, who is worshiped by all 
the worlds, then took on an extremely powerful form and plunged from the 
sky with irresistible force onto Siva’s gracious head. But bewildered by the 
coils of his matted hair, she could not find her way out; and so the goddess 
wandered about in there for a great many years. Hara was immensely 
pleased by this, delight of the Raghus, and so he released the Ganges into 
Lake Bindu. 

[7-10] “And that is how she came down from the sky onto Safikara’s 
head, and from there to the earth, her waters rushing down with a deafening 
roar. And as she fell to earth from the sky, the gods, seers, gandharvas, 
yaksas, and hosts of perfected beings looked on. Even the gods, gathered 
there in their flying palaces, huge as cities, with their horses and splendid 
elephants, were awed. Thus did the hosts of immeasurably powerful gods 
assemble in their desire to see that greatest of marvels, the mighty descent 
of the Ganges. 

[11-16] “The cloudless sky was shining with the hosts of hastening gods 
and the splendor of their ornaments, so that it seemed illumined by a 
hundred suns. Filled with masses of twisting snakes, dolphins, and fish, the 
sky seemed shot with scattered lightning. Now white with a thousand 
shreds of flying foam and flocks of hamsas, the sky seemed suddenly filled 
with autumnal clouds. At some points the river flowed swiftly, at others 
slowly. In some places it moved tortuously or broadened out; at others, it 
narrowed and sank between its banks only to rise again elsewhere. Here and 
there the water dashed back upon itself, momentarily hurled up into the air, 
only to fall to earth once more. The water fell first upon Safikara’s head, 


and only then to earth. Therefore, it shone, for it was pure and able to wash 
away all sin. 

[17-20] “Then thinking, ‘Water fallen from Bhava’s body is holy,’ the 
gandharvas and the hosts of seers bathed there with those who dwelt on 
earth. Even those who had fallen to earth from heaven through some curse 
were freed from all sin by bathing there. Cleansed of their sins by that 
shining water, they flew up into the sky again and were restored to their 
proper worlds. People were delighted by that shining water and joyfully 
bathed in the Ganges, freeing themselves from all weariness. 

[21-24] “Then, as the royal seer mighty Bhagiratha, mounted in a 
celestial chariot, drove on before, the Ganges followed along behind him. 
Joyously following the Ganges, Rama, all the gods, the hosts of seers, the 
daityas, danavas, and rdksasas, the foremost of the gandharvas and yaksas, 
the kinnaras, great serpents, and all the apsarases with all the creatures of 
the waters made a procession behind Bhagiratha’s chariot. And thus did this 
most illustrious of rivers, the Ganges, who washes away all sins, follow in 
King Bhagiratha’s train.” 


Sarga 43 

[1-6] “Followed by the Ganges, the king proceeded to the ocean and 
entered that gaping hole in the earth where his ancestors had been turned to 
ashes. And when those ashes were flooded with water, Rama, Brahma, the 
lord of all the worlds, spoke to the king: ‘Tiger among men, the sixty 
thousand sons of great Sagara have been saved and like gods, have gone to 
heaven. Your majesty, the sons of Sagara will remain in heaven like gods as 
long as the waters of the ocean remain in the world. And the Ganges will be 
your eldest daughter. She too will remain in the world and will be known by 
a name that you shall give her. For the Ganges, the river of the three paths, 
will be known as the celestial Bhagtrathi. And because she sanctifies three 
courses, she will be known as the Tripathaga, “She Who Goes by Three 
Paths.” 

[7-11] “ ‘Lord of men, you must perform here the funerary libation for 
all your forefathers. Fulfill your vow, your majesty. Your majesty, your 
glorious ancestor Sagara, a champion of righteousness, could not fulfill this 
cherished hope. Nor, my son, was this vow fulfilled by Amsumant, though 
his power was unrivaled in this world and he strove to bring the Ganges 


down. Then there was your father, the mighty royal seer Dilipa, whose 
power was equal to that of a great seer and whose austerity was equal to 
mine. But even that blameless and illustrious man, so steadfast in the code 
of the kshatriyas, could not, though he too strove to do so, think of a way to 
bring down the Ganges. 

[12—15] “ ‘But you have fulfilled this vow, bull among men. You have 
won the highest and most coveted glory in the world. And, foe-conquering 
hero, by bringing down the Ganges, you have earned the great abode of 
righteousness. Bathe yourself in these waters, best of men, for bathing here 
is always purifying. Purify yourself, tiger among men, and now achieve the 
holy purpose of your quest. Make the funerary libations for all your 
forefathers. Farewell, I shall go to my own world. You may depart, your 
majesty.’ 

[16-20] “Having spoken in this fashion, the lord of gods, the glorious 
grandfather of all worlds, departed for the world of the gods just as he had 
come. Then the glorious king the royal seer, Bhagiratha, offered 
magnificent funerary libations to the sons of Sagara in due order and 
according to the ritual injunctions. At last, after bathing and purifying 
himself once more, he returned to his own city. Having thus accomplished 
his purpose, best of men, he once more ruled his kingdom. His people too 
rejoiced, Raghava. For in regaining their king, they too had accomplished 
their goal and were freed from all sorrow and anxiety. And now I have told 
you the entire history of the Ganges, Rama. Bless you and may fortune 
smile upon you. But see, the time for our evening devotions 1s slipping 
away. The tale I have just told you, ‘The Descent of the Ganges,’ brings one 
wealth, fame, long life, heaven, and even sons.” 


Sarga 44 
[1-6] When R&aghava, seated there with Laksmana, heard Visvamitra’s 
words, he was amazed and said to him: “Brahman, this excellent tale you 
have told, the tale of the holy descent of the Ganges and the filling of the 
ocean, is truly wonderful.” And as he sat with Saumitri in contemplation of 
Visvamitra’s marvelous tale, the whole night slipped away. Then, in the 
clear light of dawn, foe-conquering Raghava said these words to the great 
sage Visvamitra, who had already performed his daily devotions: “The holy 
goddess Night has gone and we have heard something well worth hearing. 


Mighty ascetic, in my careful contemplation of your story, the whole night 
passed for me as though it were but a moment. Now let us cross this best of 
streams, the holy river of the three paths. Here is a boat with comfortable 
seats that belongs to the seers of holy deeds. Realizing that so holy a man as 
you had come, they must have sent it in haste.” 

[7-13] When Visvamitra heard great Raghava’s words, he made the 
crossing with a group of seers and the two Raghavas. Reaching the northern 
bank, they paid homage to the host of seers, and, once they landed on the 
Ganges’s bank, they beheld the city of Visala. From there the great sage and 
the two Raghavas proceeded at once toward that lovely and celestial city, 
comparable only to heaven. Wise Rama cupped his hands in reverence and 
questioned the great sage Visvamitra about the excellent city of Visala: 
“Great sage, what royal family dwells in Visala? Bless you, I wish to hear 
about it, for my curiosity is very great.” When he heard Rama’s words, the 
bull among sages began to relate the ancient history of Visala. “Rama, now 
listen to the marvelous story of Sakra as I tell it. Raghava, you shall hear 
what happened in this region just as it took place. 

[14-17] “Long ago, Rama, in the Krta Yuga, the sons of Diti were very 
powerful. But the sons of Aditi were also mighty; and, in addition, they 
were illustrious and extremely righteous. Once, best of men, a thought 
occurred to all of those great beings: ‘How may we become immortal—free 
from old age and sickness?’ As those wise beings were pondering this, an 
idea occurred to them: ‘If we should churn the ocean of milk, we might 
obtain from it the elixir of immortality.’ Their might knew no bounds. So, 
once they had resolved to undertake such a churning, they took the great 
serpent Vasuki for their rope and Mount Mandara as their churn and began 
to churn. 

[18-23] “The first things to appear were the physician Dhanvantari and 
the resplendent apsarases. Since, best of the sons of Manu, these last, the 
most resplendent of women, were born of that churning in the waters (apsu) 
from the elixir (rasa), they came to be known as apsarases, ‘water 
maidens.’ Six hundred million was the number of these resplendent 
apsarases, Kakutstha, and their maidservants were innumerable. But neither 
the gods nor the ddnavas would accept them. So, because they were not 
accepted, they are said to belong to everyone. After this, delight of the 
Raghus, Varuna’s illustrious daughter, Varuni, was born. She too wished to 


be accepted. Heroic Rama, the sons of Diti would not accept Sura, ‘Wine,’ 
the daughter of Varuna, but the sons of Aditi did accept her, for she was 
irreproachable. Because of this, the daiteyas came to be known as the 
asuras, ‘those who have no wine,’ while the sons of Aditi became the 
suras, ‘those who have wine.’ Having accepted Varuni, the gods were 
joyful and excited. 

[24—27] “Next, best of men, came Uccaihsravas, foremost of horses, and 
Kaustubha, most precious of gems, followed by the finest thing of all, the 
nectar. For the sake of this nectar, the sons of Aditi slaughtered the sons of 
Diti, so that her family suffered an enormous loss. Indeed, Aditi’s heroic 
sons slew almost all the sons of Diti in that great and terrible war of the 
daiteyas and the ddityas. When Indra, smasher of citadels, had slain the 
sons of Diti and seized sovereignty, he was delighted and ruled the worlds 
together with their hosts of seers and celestial bards.” 


Sarga 45 

[1-7] “Now, when Diti’s sons were killed, Rama, she was overwhelmed 
with grief and spoke to her husband, Marica Kasyapa: ‘Holy one, your 
mighty sons have slain my sons. Now I desire to obtain—through long 
austerity—a son who shall slay Sakra. I will undertake austerities; but you 
must give me a child and promise that he will be a son capable of killing 
Sakra.’ Hearing her words, mighty Marica Kasyapa replied to the grief- 
stricken Diti: ‘Bless you, ascetic woman. Make yourself pure. For you shall 
give birth to a son who can slay Sakra in battle. If you remain pure, then, 
when a full one thousand years have elapsed, you shall, through me, give 
birth to a son capable of destroying the three worlds.’ Speaking in this 
fashion, the mighty man stroked her with his hand. Then, having touched 
her in this way, he said, ‘Farewell,’ and went off to practice austerities. 

[8—11] “When he had gone, best of men, Diti, now utterly delighted, 
went to Kusaplavana where she performed the most awesome austerities. 
But, best of men, while she was practicing these austerities, thousand-eyed 
Indra served her most virtuously. Thus, thousand-eyed Indra brought her 
fire, kusa grass, firewood, water, fruit, roots, and whatever else she desired. 
In this way, Sakra served Diti unceasingly, massaging her limbs to lessen 
her weariness. 


[12-16] “And so it was, delight of the Raghus, that when but ten years 
remained of the thousand, Diti, completely won over by thousand-eyed 
Indra, said to him: “Bless you, foremost among the mighty, there are but ten 
short years remaining of the term of my austerity. Then you shall see your 
brother. He will desire to conquer you, but for your sake I shall appease 
him. Be free now of anxiety, my son, for you shall share the conquest of the 
three worlds with him.’ The sun was at its zenith, and even as the goddess 
Diti was saying this to Sakra, she was suddenly overcome by sleep while 
her feet were where her head should have been. Sakra saw that she was in a 
state of impurity, for she had placed the hair of her head where her feet 
ought to have been and had put her feet in the place for her head. He was 
delighted and laughed aloud. 

[17-22] “Then Indra, smasher of citadels, entered the opening in her 
body and, with complete self-possession, smashed her fetus into seven 
pieces. Smashed by his hundred-pointed vajra, the fetus cried so loudly, 
Rama, that Diti awoke. ‘Ma rudah! Ma rudah\’ ‘Do not cry! Do not cry!’ 
said Sakra to the fetus. Then, though it went on crying, mighty Vasava 
smashed it. ‘Do not kill him! Do not kill him!’ cried Diti, and, in deference 
to a mother’s words, Sakra came forth. Still holding the vajra and cupping 
his hands in reverence, Sakra addressed Diti: ‘Goddess, you were sleeping 
with the hair of your head where your feet should have been and were thus 
impure. I seized upon that opportunity to smash him who was to have been 
born the slayer of Sakra in battle, so that he now lies in seven pieces. 
Goddess, please forgive me for what I have done.’ ” 


Sarga 46 
[1-5] “When Diti’s fetus had been split into seven pieces, she was 
overwhelmed with great sorrow and spoke humbly to the invincible 
thousand-eyed Indra: ‘It is my own fault that my fetus has been split into 
seven pieces and rendered useless. Lord of the gods, slayer of Bala, you are 
not to blame for this. But I should like to see some good come of the 
destruction of my fetus. Let the seven fragments become the guardians of 
the regions of the seven winds. Let the seven sons I have borne be known as 
the Marutas, and let them wander freely, in celestial forms, through the 
regions of the winds in heaven. Let one move through Brahmaloka and 


another through the world of Indra, while a third, the illustrious Vayu, shall 
move freely through the sky. 

[6-9] “ ‘Bless you, best of gods, let my remaining four sons be gods and 
at your command range freely in all directions. Let them be known as the 
Marutas, “Those Who Do Not Cry,” the very name you gave them.’ 
Hearing her words, thousand-eyed Indra, the smasher of citadels and slayer 
of Bala, cupped his hands in reverence and addressed Diti: ‘Bless you, 
everything will be just as you say; you need have no doubt. Your sons shall 
become gods and range freely.” And so they reached an agreement there in 
the ascetics’ forest, Rama, and, as both mother and son had accomplished 
their purposes, they departed for heaven, or so we have heard. 

[10-19] “Kakutstha, this is the very region where the great lord Indra 
dwelt while serving Diti, who had become perfect through austerity. Tiger 
among men, an extremely righteous son known as Visala was once born to 
Iksvaku and Alambusa. It was he who founded the city of Visala, here on 
this site. The mighty Hemacandra was Visala’s son, Rama. Hemacandra’s 
immediate successor was called Sucandra. Sucandra’s son was known as 
Dhumrasva, Rama, and this Dhumrasva fathered a son named Srijaya. 
Srfyaya’s son was the majestic and valiant Sahadeva. Sahadeva had a most 
righteous son named Kusasva. Kusasva’s son was the valiant and powerful 
Somadatta. Somadatta’s son was known as Kakutstha. It is the latter’s 
mighty son, the godlike and invincible Sumati, who now lives in this city. 
Through the grace of Iksvaku, all the great kings of Visala are long-lived, 
mighty, and righteous. We shall spend the night here in comfort, Rama. 
Tomorrow morning, best of men, we must see Janaka.” 

[20-22] Now when the mighty and illustrious Sumati, foremost among 
outstanding men, heard that Visvamitra had arrived, he went forth to 
welcome him. Accompanied by his kinsmen and counselors, he accorded 
him the greatest reverence. Cupping his hands in reverence, he inquired 
after Visvamitra’s well-being and said to him: “I am fortunate, sage, indeed, 
I am highly favored, in that you have come not only into my kingdom but 
into my very presence. Surely there is no one more fortunate than I.” 


Sarga 47 
[1-6] The two men greeted each other, each inquiring as to the well-being 
of the other. Then, formalities at an end, Sumati said these words to the 


great sage: “Bless you, these two heroic princes look as valorous as the 
gods. They look like tigers or bulls and move like lions or elephants. Armed 
with swords, quivers, and bows, their eyes as long as lotus petals, in the full 
bloom of their young manhood, they rival the Asvins in beauty. They seem 
like immortals by some chance come to earth from the world of the gods. 
How is it, sage, that they come here on foot? What is the purpose of their 
visit? Whose sons are they? Identical in form, gesture, and movement, they 
adorn this land as the sun and moon adorn the sky. Why have these fine 
men, these heroes, come by this difficult road, bearing such splendid 
weapons? I wish to hear the truth of this.” 

[7-12] When Visvamitra had heard this speech, he told him, just as it 
had happened, of their stay at the Ashram of the Perfected Being and the 
killing of the raksasas. Upon hearing Visvamitra’s words, the king was 
overjoyed and paid due homage to the two mighty sons of DaSsaratha; for 
they were important guests and deserving of great honor. Treated with such 
respect by Sumati, the two Raghavas stayed there for one night and then 
went on to Mithila. When the sages saw Mithila, Janaka’s glorious city, they 
praised it, crying, “Wonderful! Wonderful!” But Raghava, noticing an 
ancient ashram, lovely and deserted, in a wood near Mithila, questioned that 
bull among sages: “This splendid spot appears to be an ashram. Why then is 
it empty of sages? Holy man, I wish to hear about it. To whom did this 
ashram once belong?” 

[13-16] When he heard the words that Raghava had spoken, the great 
sage Visvamitra, so skilled in speech, replied: “Ah! Listen, Raghava, and I 
will tell you exactly whose ashram this was and how it came to be cursed 
by that great man in anger. Best of men, this heavenly ashram, which even 
the gods worship, once belonged to the great Gautama. And it was here, 
renowned prince, that he engaged in austerities with Ahalya for many, many 
years. 

[17-21] “Now, one time, Saci’s lord, thousand-eyed Indra, learning of 
the sage’s absence, took on his appearance and said these words to Ahalya: 
‘Shapely woman, men filled with desire do not wait for a woman’s fertile 
period. Fair-waisted woman, I want to make love to you.’ Now the foolish 
woman knew that it was thousand-eyed Indra in the guise of the sage, 
delight of the Raghus, but she consented in her lust for the king of the gods. 
And when she had accomplished her heart’s desire, she said to the best of 


gods: “You have fulfilled your desire, best of gods. Now you must go 
quickly. You must always protect yourself and me, lord of the gods, my 
lover.’ Smiling, Indra said these words to Ahalya: ‘Fair-hipped woman, I 
am fully satisfied and shall depart as I came.’ 

[22—27] “Having made love to her in this manner, Rama, he came out of 
her leaf hut uneasy about Gautama and hastening in his fear. But there he 
met the great sage Gautama coming in, unassailable by the gods and 
danavas and filled with the power of his austerities. That bull among sages 
was still damp with the water of the bathing place, yet carrying kindling and 
kusa grass, he shone like fire. Seeing him, the lord of gods became 
frightened, and his face fell. Now, when the good sage saw the wicked 
thousand-eyed Indra in his own guise, he spoke in anger: ‘You fool! For 
taking on my form and doing a thing that is not to be done, you shall lose 
your testicles.” No sooner had the great and furious sage Gautama spoken in 
this fashion than thousand-eyed Indra’s testicles fell to the ground. 

[28-32] “Having cursed Sakra, he then cursed his wife as well, saying: 
“You shall live here for many thousands of years. You shall dwell in this 
ashram with nothing to eat, your only food air, suffering, lying on ashes, 
and invisible to all creatures. You will be purified only when Rama, the 
invincible son of Dasaratha, comes to this dreadful forest. Only through 
extending hospitality to him, you wicked woman, will you take on your 
proper body in my presence, free from lust and folly and filled with joy.’ 
When the mighty Gautama had spoken to his ill-behaved wife in this 
fashion, he abandoned his ashram. And now the great ascetic performs his 
austerities in the Himalayas on a lovely peak, frequented by perfected 
beings and celestial bards.” 


Sarga 48 
[1-4] “Now that Sakra was emasculated, he spoke, his terror showing in his 
face, to the gods who were led by Agni, god of fire, and accompanied by 
the celestial bards and hosts of seers: ‘In arousing the anger of great 
Gautama and thereby creating an obstacle to his austerities, I have 
accomplished the work of the gods. For in his wrath he has emasculated me 
and repudiated his wife. Thus, in provoking this great outpouring of curses, 
I have robbed him of his ascetic’s power. Therefore, all of you—great gods, 


celestial bards, and hosts of seers—should restore my testicles to me, for I 
have aided the gods.’ 

[S—10] “When the gods led by Agni heard these words of Indra, god of a 
hundred sacrifices, they went with all the hosts of the Maruts to see the 
divine ancestors and said: ‘Sakra has been emasculated. But here is a ram 
whose testicles are intact. Take the ram’s testicles and give them to Sakra at 
once. The castrated ram will give you the greatest satisfaction, as will those 
men who offer one for your pleasure.’ When the divine ancestors assembled 
there had heard Agni’s words, they tore out the ram’s testicles and gave 
them to thousand-eyed Indra. And from that time onward, Kakutstha, the 
assembly of the divine ancestors eats castrated rams, reserving their 
testicles for Indra. And that is why, from that time onward, Raghava, 
through the power of the great Gautama’s asceticism, Indra has had a ram’s 
testicles. 

[11-16] “Come then, mighty man, to the ashram of that holy sage and 
save illustrious Ahalya, who is as lovely as a goddess.” Upon hearing 
Visvamitra’s words, Raghava followed the sage and entered the ashram 
with Laksmana. There he saw that illustrious woman, blazing with an inner 
splendor through her austerities, yet hidden from the eyes of all who came 
near, even gods and asuras. She was like a goddess, and it seemed as if the 
Creator himself had wrought her, with great effort, out of pure creative 
energy. She was like a brilliant flame whose form is obscured by smoke. 
She was like the light of the full moon, but clouded, or obscured by mist or 
like the blazing splendor of the sun discerned but dimly through dense 
clouds. For through the words of Gautama, she had become invisible to the 
three worlds until such time as she should see Rama. 

[17-22] The two Raghavas then grasped her feet, and she welcomed 
them, recalling Gautama’s words. Attentively, she provided hospitality, 
giving them the guest-offering and water for their feet, according to the rites 
enjoined by tradition, and Kakutstha accepted them. Suddenly there was a 
great shower of blossoms accompanied by the sound of the gods’ drums. 
And there was a great gathering of gandharvas and apsarases. “Wonderful! 
Wonderful!” cried the gods, and they paid homage to Ahalya, now once 
more submissive to Gautama’s control, her body purified through the power 
of her austerities. Mighty Gautama was overjoyed to be reunited at last with 
Ahalya, and the great ascetic did homage to Rama in the prescribed fashion. 


Then, having done so, he resumed his austerities. And as for Rama, he 
received this great homage from the great sage Gautama in the prescribed 
fashion and then proceeded on to Mithila. 


Sarga 49 

[1-5] Following Visvamitra, Rama and Saumitri proceeded toward the 
northeast until they came to a sacrificial ground. Then Rama and Laksmana 
spoke to the tiger among sages: “Wonderful indeed is the magnificence of 
great Janaka’s sacrifice. Illustrious sage, there are many thousands of 
brahmans here, residents of many countries, all learned in the vedas. The 
dwellings of these seers all appear to be crowded with hundreds of carts. 
Brahman, please arrange for a place for us to stay.” Upon hearing Rama’s 
speech, the great seer ViSvamitra made camp in a secluded spot with water 
near at hand. 

[6-11] Learning that Visvamitra had arrived, the king, following his 
irreproachable purohita, Satananda, and his great sacrificial priests, at once 
brought the guest-offering and righteously offered it to the best of sages to 
the accompaniment of vedic mantras. Accepting the homage of the great 
Janaka, he inquired after the king’s health and the smooth progress of the 
sacrifice. He also inquired after the sages, preceptors, and the purohita, 
embracing them all joyously, as is the custom. Then the king, his hands 
cupped in reverence, addressed the best of sages, “Please be seated with 
these excellent sages, holy man.” Hearing Janaka’s words, the great sage sat 
down, followed by the purohita, sacrificial priests, the king, and his 
counselors. 

[12-16] Then the king, seeing them seated all around in proper fashion, 
spoke to Visvamitra: “Today the gods have made fruitful the lavishness of 
my sacrifice. But in seeing this holy man, I have already gained the fruit of 
the sacrifice. Brahman, bull among sages, how fortunate I am, how grateful 
that you have come with these sages to my sacrificial ground. My wise men 
tell me that twelve days remain of this session, brahman-seer. Then, if you 
please, Kausika, you may witness the gods seeking their portions.” When 
he had spoken to the tiger among sages in this fashion, the protector of men, 
with complete self-possession, questioned him further, his face showing his 
delight, and his hands cupped in reverence: 


[17-25] “Bless you, these two heroic princes look as valorous as the 
gods. They look like tigers or bulls and move like lions or elephants. Armed 
with swords, quivers, and bows, their eyes as long as lotus petals, in the full 
bloom of their young manhood, they rival the Asvins in beauty. They seem 
like immortals by some chance come to earth from the world of the gods. 
How is it, sage, that they come here on foot? What is the purpose of their 
visit? To whom do they belong? Whose sons are they, great sage, that they 
bear such splendid weapons? Identical in form, gesture, and movement, 
they adorn this land as the sun and moon adorn the sky. I want to know the 
truth about these two heroes who still wear sidelocks.” When he had heard 
great Janaka’s words, he told him about the two great sons of DaSaratha. He 
told them of their stay at the Ashram of the Perfected Being and the killing 
of the raksasas, about their daring journey and their visit to Visala, of their 
meeting with Ahalya and Gautama, and of how they had come to test the 
great bow. When he had related all that to great Janaka, the great and 
mighty sage Visvamitra lapsed into silence. 


Sarga 50 
[1-3] Upon seeing Rama and hearing these words of wise Visvamitra, the 
great and powerful ascetic Satananda, Gautama’s eldest son, who shone 
brightly through the power of his austerities, was moved to the greatest 
wonder, and the hairs of his body bristled with delight. Seeing to it that the 
king’s sons were comfortably seated, Satananda spoke to Visvamitra, best 
of sages: 

[4-9] “Tiger among sages, did you present my renowned mother, who 
has suffered such prolonged penances, to the king’s son? Mighty man, did 
my renowned mother do homage with offerings of forest fruits to Rama, 
who is worthy of the homage of all living beings? Mighty man, have you 
told Rama of what happened to my mother long ago, when the god used her 
so wickedly? Bless you, Kausika, best of sages, was my mother reunited 
with my father after seeing Rama? Son of Kusika, was great and mighty 
Rama shown reverence by my father, and did he show him reverence in 
return before coming here? Son of Kusika, did this self-possessed Rama 
respectfully salute my father with a tranquil heart before coming here?” 

[10-16] When the great sage Visvamitra, skilled in speech, heard 
eloquent Satananda’s words, he replied: “Best of sages, I did all that was 


required within the limits of propriety. The sage and his wife were reunited 
like Bhargava and Renuka.” When mighty Satananda heard wise 
Visvamitra’s words, he turned to Rama and said: “Welcome, best of men. 
How fortunate that you have come, following this great seer, the invincible 
Visvamitra. Inconceivable in his actions and immeasurable in his splendor, 
the mighty Visvamitra became a brahman-seer through his own austerity. 
Did you know that he is the highest recourse? There is no one on earth more 
fortunate than you, Rama, for your guardian is Kusika’s son, who has 
performed great austerities. Please listen, as I tell you about the great 
Kausika. Listen as I recount the history of his mighty deeds, just as it 
happened. 

[17-20] “The righteous man was long a foe-conquering king. He knew 
the ways of righteousness, had mastered all the sciences, and was devoted 
to the welfare of his subjects. Once there was a king named KusSa, a son of 
Prajapati, lord of creatures. Kusa’s son was the mighty and righteous 
Kusanabha. Kusanabha’s son was known as Gadhi, and this great sage, 
mighty Visvamitra, is Gadhi’s son. Mighty Visvamitra once ruled the earth, 
reigning as a king for many thousands of years. 

[21-28] “But on one occasion that man of great blazing energy 
assembled his forces and, surrounded by a vast army, wandered over the 
earth. Roaming in turn through cities, countries, rivers, mountains, and 
ashrams, the king at length came to Vasistha’s ashram, filled with all sorts 
of flowers, fruits, and trees. Greatest of conquerors, the mighty Visvamitra 
saw Vasistha’s ashram, which was like a second Brahmaloka. It was filled 
with herds of all kinds of animals and frequented by perfected beings and 
celestial bards. It was made lovely by gods, danavas, gandharvas, and 
kinnaras. It was filled with tame deer and was the home of flocks of birds. 
It was filled with hosts of brahman-seers and frequented by hosts of divine 
seers—great men who had perfected themselves through the practice of 
austerities and who shone like fire. It was splendid and continuously 
thronged with great men who resembled Brahma and who lived on water 
alone, or air, or only withered leaves. It was filled with seers and 
valakhilyas—self-controlled men who had conquered their anger and 
subdued their senses—men who lived only on fruit and roots and who were 
given over entirely to prayer and sacrifice.” 


Sarga 51 

[1-5] “Mighty Visvamitra was delighted to see Vasistha, foremost in vedic 
recitation, and bowed to him in humility. Then great Vasistha spoke to him, 
saying, ‘You are welcome!’ Holy Vasistha then indicated that he should be 
seated. Once wise Visvamitra was seated, the eminent sage offered him fruit 
and roots as custom demanded. The eminent king, mighty Visvamitra, 
accepted Vasistha’s homage and then inquired after the progress of his 
austerities, his agnihotra rites, his disciples, and his grove of great trees. 
Vasistha replied that all was well. 

[6—9] “Then Vasistha, son of Brahma, great ascetic and foremost in vedic 
recitation, in turn questioned King Visvamitra, who sat there at his ease: ‘I 
trust that all is well with you, your majesty. Your majesty, you are a 
righteous man; I trust that you are governing your subjects in the manner 
proper to a king, and that, within the limits of righteousness, you keep them 
satisfied. Your dependents are, I trust, well taken care of and obedient to 
your commands. Foe-slaughtering hero, I trust that all your foes are 
conquered. Tiger among men, bane of your foes, I trust all is well with your 
army, treasury, and allies, and, sinless man, with your sons and grandsons as 
well.’ 

[10-17] “The mighty king Visvamitra humbly replied to the eminent 
Vasistha that everything was well. The two righteous men then engaged in 
pleasant conversation for a long time, with the greatest pleasure, so that 
they became quite fond of each other. At the end of their conversation, 
delight of the Raghus, Vasistha, smiling slightly, said these words to 
Visvamitra: ‘Mighty and unfathomable man, I wish to offer my hospitality, 
as befits your rank, to you and to your troops. Please accept this from me. 
Please, your majesty, accept the welcome that I am offering you. For you 
are the greatest of guests, your majesty, and I must make every effort to do 
you honor.’ When Vasistha had addressed him in this fashion, the wise King 
Visvamitra replied: ‘In merely speaking of honoring me, you have already 
done so. It is you who are deserving of honor, holy man, and yet you have 
honored me in every way with the things to be had in your ashram—with 
fruit and roots, with water for rinsing my feet and mouth, and by permitting 
me to see you. I shall go now, wise and holy man. Goodbye. Please look 
kindly upon me.’ 


[18-23] “But even though the king spoke in this fashion, Vasistha, who 
was both noble-minded and righteous, repeatedly pressed his invitation. At 
last, the son of Gadhi replied to Vasistha: ‘Very well. Let it be just as you 
wish, holy and eminent sage.’ On receiving this reply, Vasistha, foremost in 
vedic recitation and cleansed of all sin, was pleased and called to his 
brindled cow. ‘Come! Come quickly, Sabala, and hear my words. I have 
decided to prepare a hospitable welcome, replete with sumptuous foods, for 
the royal seer and his troops. See to it for me. For my sake, heavenly wish- 
fulfilling cow, you must pour forth anything these men desire—as much as 
they want, using all the six flavors. Hurry, Sabala, for you must make a 
huge amount of food, including savory rice and beverages, and delicacies to 
lick and suck.’ ” 


Sarga 52 

[1-6] “Addressed in this fashion by Vasistha, O foe-slaughtering hero, the 
wish-fulfilling cow Sabala produced as much as anyone desired. She made 
sugar cane and sweets, parched grain and maireya wine, excellent liquors, 
costly beverages, and all sorts of food. She produced mountainous heaps of 
steaming rice, savory food, pulses, and rivers of curds. There were 
thousands of silver platters, filled with various delicious confections. In this 
way, Rama, Vasistha was able to satisfy the hunger of Visvamitra’s entire 
army. Fed to satiation, the army was full of happy and well-fed people. The 
royal seer King Visvamitra, his womenfolk, brahmans, and purohitas, were 
likewise happy and well fed. 

[7—9] “The honor shown him and his ministers and counselors filled him 
with great joy, and he addressed Vasistha: ‘Brahman, you who are yourself 
worthy of honor have cordially recetved me and shown me great honor. But 
listen, eloquent sage, for I have something to say: Please give me Sabala in 
exchange for a hundred thousand cows, for, holy man, she is truly a jewel, 
and all jewels belong to the king. Therefore, twice-born brahman, you must 
give me Sabala. For, by rights, she is mine.’ 

[10-15] “Addressed in this fashion by Visvamitra, the eminent, 
righteous, and holy sage Vasistha replied to that lord of the earth: ‘I would 
not give you Sabala, your majesty, for a hundred thousand or even a 
thousand million cows—not even for masses of silver. For she is as 
inseparable from me as is good repute from a man of self-control. Foe- 


conquering hero, Sabald is not deserving of abandonment. For upon her 
depend my offerings to the gods and the offerings to my departed ancestors, 
as well as our bodily sustenance—so do the agnihotra rites, the bali, and 
the homa offerings. So too do the ritual utterances svahd and vasat, and the 
various branches of learning—all this depends upon her, royal seer. Of this 
there can be no doubt. Truly, she is everything to me, always gratifying me. 
Your majesty, there are many reasons why I cannot give you Sabala.’ 

[16-24] “However, being spoken to in this fashion by Vasistha only 
made the eloquent Visvamitra still more determined, and he said these 
words: ‘I will give you fourteen thousand elephants with golden chains for 
girth and neck, equipped with goads of gold. And I will give you eight 
hundred golden four-yoked chariots, adorned with bells and drawn by white 
horses. Sage firm in your vows, I will give you, in addition, one thousand 
and ten powerful horses, foaled in good regions and born of noble stock. 
And to this I will add ten million young cows, each distinguished by a 
different coloring. Now give me Sabala.’ Addressed in this fashion by wise 
Visvamitra, the holy man replied: ‘I would not give up Sabala for anything, 
your majesty. For she alone is my jewel. She alone is my wealth. She alone 
is everything to me, my very life. Your majesty, she alone represents for me 
the new and full-moon rites, the sacrifices by which I earn my fees. She 
represents all the various ritual performances. There is no doubt, your 
majesty, that all my ritual performances depend upon her. But what is the 
use of all this idle chatter? I will not give up the wish-fulfilling cow.’ ” 


Sarga 53 

[1-5] “Now, when the sage Vasistha would not give up Sabala, the wish- 
fulfilling cow, Rama, Visvamitra had her dragged away from him by force. 
As the great king had Sabala led away, Rama, she was overwhelmed with 
grief and began to think: ‘Has great Vasistha abandoned me, that the king’s 
servants are taking me away, even though I am despondent and so terribly 
unhappy? What wrong have I done the great contemplative seer that this 
righteous man should abandon me, his favorite, when I am innocent and 
devoted to him?’ Reflecting thus, she sighed repeatedly and then ran 
quickly to the incomparably powerful Vasistha. 

[6—12] “Shaking off servants by the hundreds, foe-slaughtering hero, she 
ran with the speed of the wind to the great man’s feet. Standing before 


Vasistha, Sabala bellowed like thundering storm clouds. Weeping and 
crying out, she spoke: ‘Holy son of Brahma, since the king’s men are taking 
me away from you, have you abandoned me?’ Addressed in this fashion, 
the brahman-seer spoke these words, as though to an unhappy sister whose 
heart was consumed with grief: ‘I have not abandoned you, Sabala, nor 
have you wronged me. This mighty king is taking you from me by force. 
My power is not equal to the king’s, especially today. For he is a mighty 
kshatriya monarch, the lord of the earth. There is his vast army with hosts 
of horses and chariots, bristling with elephants and banners. By virtue of 
this, he is stronger than I.’ 

[13—18] “Addressed in this fashion by Vasistha and skilled in speech, she 
humbly spoke these words in reply to the immeasurably splendid brahman- 
seer: “They say that a kshatriya has no real power, and that a brahman is, in 
fact, more powerful. Brahman, the power of a brahman is divine and much 
greater than that of the kshatriyas. Your power is immeasurable. Visvamitra 
is very powerful, but he is not mightier than you. Your power is 
unassailable. Just give the order, mighty man, and filled with the power of 
the brahmans, I will crush the might and pride of this wicked man.’ When 
she had addressed him in this fashion, Rama, the greatly renowned Vasistha 
said: ‘Create an army to destroy the armies of my enemy.’ Then, protector 
of men, she gave a roar, ‘Humbha,’ from which were born hundreds and 
hundreds of Pahlavas who destroyed Visvamitra’s army before his very 
eyes. 

[19-23] “The king was furiously angry, and his eyes wide with rage, he 
destroyed those Pahlavas with all manner of weapons. Seeing the Pahlavas 
struck down in their hundreds by Visvamitra, the cow created a new, mixed 
force of dreadful Sakas and Yavanas. This mixed force of Sakas and 
Yavanas covered the earth. Splendid and immensely powerful, they shone 
like so many golden filaments of flowers. Carrying long swords and sharp- 
edged spears and clad in golden armor, they consumed the entire army of 
the king like so many blazing fires. Then mighty Visvamitra fired his 
weapons.” 


Sarga 54 
[1-7] “Seeing her hosts stunned and overwhelmed by Visvamitra’s 
weapons, Vasistha commanded: ‘Wish-fulfilling cow, create more troops 


through your yogic power.’ From her bellow, ‘Humbha,’ were produced 
Kambojas as radiant as the sun, while from her udders came Pahlavas, 
weapons in hand. From her vulva came Yavanas, from her anus, Sakas, and 
from the pores of her skin, Mlecchas, Haritas, and Kiratas. In an instant, 
delight of the Raghus, Visvamitra’s entire army was destroyed, with its 
infantry, elephants, horses, and chariot. Then the hundred sons of 
Visvamitra, seeing that their army had been destroyed by great Vasistha, the 
foremost reciter of the vedas, took up various weapons and charged him 
furiously. But the great seer, merely uttering the syllable ‘Hum,’ consumed 
them all. And so, in a single moment, the sons of Visvamitra, horses, 
chariots, infantry, and all were reduced to ashes by great Vasistha. 

[8—12] “When the renowned Visvamitra saw that his sons and his army 
had been annihilated, he was ashamed and sank into gloomy thought. Like 
the ocean becalmed or a snake whose fangs are broken, like the sun in 
eclipse, he was suddenly deprived of his splendor. With his sons and army 
slain, he grew dejected, like a bird whose wings are clipped. His pride 
demolished, his energy sapped, he grew depressed. So, appointing his one 
surviving son as king, he said, ‘Rule the earth according to the code of the 
kshatriyas,’ and entered the forest without delay. He went to the slopes of 
the Himalayas, frequented by kinnaras and serpents, and there that great 
ascetic performed austerities to gain the favor of the great god Siva. 

[13-18] “After some time, that lord of gods, the granter of boons, whose 
emblem is the bull, revealed himself to the great sage Visvamitra. He said: 
‘For what purpose are you practicing austerities, your majesty? Say what 
you want to say. Name the boon you desire, for I am the granter of boons.’ 
Addressed in this fashion by the great god Siva, the great ascetic ViSvamitra 
prostrated himself and said these words: ‘If you are satisfied with me, great 
god without sin, then please teach me the science of arms, with its ancillary 
and secondary sciences, upanisads, and secret spells. God without sin, grant 
me knowledge of whatever weapons are known among the gods, ddnavas, 
great seers, gandharvas, and yaksas. Through your grace, god of gods, let 
what I desire come to pass.’ The lord of gods said, ‘So be it,’ and returned 
to heaven. 

[19-23] “And now the mighty royal seer, already proud, was filled with 
still greater pride upon receiving those weapons. Swelling with might like 
the ocean on the full moon day, he regarded the eminent seer Vasistha as 


good as dead. Returning to the sage’s ashram, the king let fly his weapons, 
by which, through their blazing energy, the entire ascetics’ grove was 
consumed. And when the sages saw the weapons discharged by wise 
Visvamitra, they were terrified and fled in their hundreds in all directions. 
Even Vasistha’s disciples and the beasts and birds were frightened of the 
danger and fled by the thousands in all directions. 

[24—28] “In what seemed but a moment, great Vasistha’s ashram was as 
empty and silent as a desert despite Vasistha’s repeated cries of: ‘Don’t be 
frightened. I shall destroy the son of Gadhi as the sun, bringer of light, 
destroys the mist.’ When he had spoken in this fashion, the mighty Vasistha, 
foremost reciter of the vedas, spoke these words in wrath to Visvamitra: 
“You fool, since your conduct is so depraved that you would wreck an 
ashram that has so long flourished, you shall die.’ So saying, in a towering 
rage, he quickly raised his staff, which was like a second rod of Yama, the 
god of death, and stood there like the smokeless fire of universal 
destruction.” 


Sarga 55 

[1-4] “When Vasistha had spoken to him in this fashion, mighty Visvamitra 
fired the divine weapon of Agni, crying, “Stand! Stand!’ Holy Vasistha then 
spoke these words in anger: ‘Here I am, you kshatriya in name only. Let us 
see just how mighty you really are. Son of Gadhi, I shall crush your pride in 
your weapons. What comparison is there between your kshatriya power and 
the immense power of a brahman? You are a disgrace to the kshatriyas and 
shall now witness my divine brahmanical power!’ 

[S—13] “And so the great and terrible divine weapon of Agni, released by 
Gadhi’s son, was quenched by the brahman’s staff, like the fierceness of fire 
by water. Enraged, the son of Gadhi then fired the Varuna, Raudra, Aindra, 
Pasupata, Aisika, Manava, Mohana, Gandharva, Svapana, Jrmbhana, 
Mohana, Samtapana, Vilapana, Sosana, Darana, the irresistible Vajra, 
Brahma’s noose, Kala’s noose, Varuna’s noose, the coveted divine weapon 
Pinaka, the Suska and Ardra lightning bolts, the divine weapon Danda, the 
divine weapons Paisaca and Kraufica, the discus of Dharma, the discus of 
Kala, the discus of Visnu, and the divine weapons Mathana, and Hayasiras 
as well as that of Vayu. Then he hurled a pair of spears, the Kankala and the 
Musala, that great divine weapon of the vidyadharas, the dreadful divine 


weapon of Kala, the dreadful divine weapon Tristla, the Kapala, and the 
Kankana. Indeed, delight of the Raghus, he hurled all these divine weapons 
at Vasistha, the foremost reciter of the vedas. But a wondrous thing 
occurred: the son of Brahma engulfed them all with his staff. 

[14—19] “When all these divine weapons had been rendered harmless, 
the delight of Gadhi hurled Brahma’s divine weapon. Seeing that divine 
weapon raised, the gods, with Agni at their head, the divine seers, 
gandharvas, and great serpents were terrified. And when Brahma’s divine 
weapon was released, the three worlds shook with fear. But, Raghava, 
through his brahmanical power, Vasistha swallowed up even Brahma’s great 
and terrible divine weapon with his brahman’s staff. And once he had 
swallowed up Brahma’s divine weapon, great Vasistha’s appearance became 
fierce and very dreadful, stupefying the three worlds. For from every pore 
of great Vasistha’s body, there sprang, like sparks, smoky tongues of flame. 
Raised in his hand, like a second rod of Yama, Vasistha’s brahmanical staff 
blazed like the smokeless fire of universal destruction. 

[20—24] “Then the hosts of sages praised Vasistha, foremost reciter of the 
vedas, saying: ‘Brahman, your might is infallible. Restrain this power with 
your own power. Brahman, you have defeated the great ascetic Visvamitra. 
Be gracious, foremost reciter of vedas. Let the worlds be free of this alarm.’ 
Addressed in this fashion, the mighty ascetic calmed himself, and 
Visvamitra, humiliated, sighed and said: ‘To hell with the power of the 
kshatriyas. Only the power of a brahman’s blazing energy is power indeed. 
All my divine weapons have been destroyed by a single brahman’s staff. 
Therefore, when I have reflected on this and calmed my mind and senses, I 
shall undertake great austerities, for this alone will make me too a 
brahman.’ ” 


Sarga 56 
[1-5] “This then, Raghava, is the way in which the mighty ascetic 
Visvamitra began his feud with the great Vasistha. Sick at heart, 
remembering his defeat, and sighing repeatedly, he then traveled to the 
south with his queen. There he engaged in extreme and awesome 
austerities. Eating fruit and roots and controlling his senses, he engaged in 
extreme austerities. In time, several sons were born to him. They were 
devoted to truth and righteousness, and their names were Havispanda, 


Madhuspanda, Drdhanetra, and Maharatha. When a full thousand years had 
passed in this way, Brahma, grandfather of the worlds, spoke sweet words 
to the ascetic Visvamitra: ‘Son of Kusika, your austerities have won for you 
the worlds to which royal seers aspire. By virtue of your austerity we 
acknowledge you as a royal seer.’ 

[6-9] “When he had finished this speech, the powerful supreme lord of 
all the worlds went first to Indra’s heaven, Trivistapa, with the gods and 
then to the Brahmaloka, his own realm. But Visvamitra, upon hearing that, 
became dejected. Lowering his face in shame and filled with great sorrow, 
he said this: ‘I have performed the most severe austerities, yet all the gods 
and hosts of seers regard me as a mere royal seer. I do not consider this a 
fitting recompense for my austerities.’ Having come to this decision, 
Kakutstha, that great, supremely self-controlled ascetic, once more 
performed the most extreme austerities. 

[10-15] “Now, at that very time, there was a descendant of the Iksvaku 
dynasty known as Trisanku. He had conquered his senses and spoke the 
truth. Once, Raghava, he conceived the following plan: ‘I will perform a 
sacrifice such that I shall ascend to the highest realm of the gods in my own 
body.’ He summoned Vasistha and told him of his intention, but the great 
Vasistha simply told him, ‘That’s impossible!’ So, since Vasistha had 
refused him, he went to the south where the sons of Vasistha, given to 
prolonged austerities, were practicing austerity. There mighty Trisanku saw 
Vasistha’s hundred brilliantly radiant and renowned sons performing their 
austerities. Approaching those great sons of his guru with his face 
somewhat lowered in shame, the mighty king saluted them in due order. 
Then, cupping his hands in reverence, he addressed them all: 

[16-20] “ ‘I have come as a refugee, seeking refuge with you, for you 
alone can give me refuge. Bless you, I have been refused by the great 
Vasistha. I wish to perform a great sacrifice. Please permit it. 1 am bowing 
before my guru’s sons in order to secure their favor. Bowing my head, I beg 
you brahmans, firm in your austerities. Please, gentlemen, together offer 
sacrifice for me, so that I may attain, in this very body, the world of the 
gods. Since Vasistha has refused me, ascetics, I can see no other recourse 
but you, my guru’s sons. Our purohita has always been the last resort of all 
Iksvakus. After him, gentlemen, you are my gods.’ ” 


Sarga 57 

[1—5] “Now, when the hundred sons of the seer heard Trisanku’s words, 
Rama, they were enraged and replied to the king: ‘You fool, you have been 
refused by your guru, who always speaks the truth. How dare you go 
beyond him and come to someone else? Your purohita has always been the 
final resort of all Iksvakus. It is impossible to circumvent the word of one 
who speaks the truth. If the holy seer Vasistha has told you, “That’s 
impossible,” how can we undertake this sacrifice of yours? You are a fool, 
best of men. Now go back to your city. Your majesty, the holy seer is able to 
perform such a sacrifice as would give him control over all the three 
worlds.’ 

[6-8] “Upon hearing these words, the syllables of which were slurred 
with anger, the king addressed them once again, saying: ‘So! I am refused 
by both my guru and my guru’s sons. Very well, then, I shall find some 
other way. Ascetics, I bid you farewell.’ When the sons of the seer heard 
those words with their horrifying implications, they flew into a towering 
rage and cursed him, ‘You shall become a candala!’ So saying, the great 
men entered their ashram. 

[9-11] “And so, when the night had passed, the king was transformed 
into a candala. He became black and coarse, with black garments and 
unkempt hair. His ornaments were of iron, his garlands and ointment from 
the cremation ground. Seeing him in the guise of a canddla, Rama, the 
townsfolk, even his counselors and courtiers, abandoned him and ran away 
together. The king was all alone, Kakutstha. Supremely self-controlled, but 
suffering torment day and night, he went to the ascetic Visvamitra. 

[12-17] “Bless you, Rama. When the sage Visvamitra saw the ruined 
king in the guise of a candala, he was moved to compassion, and it was this 
compassion that led the powerful and supremely righteous sage to speak to 
the dreadful-looking king: ‘Why have you come here, mighty prince? 
Heroic lord of Ayodhya, it is a curse that has made you a candala.’ Hearing 
these words, the eloquent canddla king cupped his hands in reverence and 
spoke to him who was skilled in speech: ‘I have been refused both by my 
guru and my guru’s sons. I have suffered this calamity without having 
accomplished my desire. “May I enter heaven in this body!” such was my 
dream, kind sir. Yet I have performed a hundred sacrifices and gained 
nothing by it. 


[18-23] “ ‘I have never told a lie, nor will I ever, though I have come 
upon hard times, kind sir. This I swear to you by the code of the kshatriyas. 
I have performed many kinds of sacrifices, ruled my subjects in 
righteousness, and satisfied my great gurus with my virtuous conduct. Yet, 
though I strive continually for righteousness, bull among sages, and wish to 
offer sacrifice, my gurus are not satisfied. And so I think that fate alone is 
supreme and human effort good for nothing. Everything is overcome by 
fate. Our final recourse is to fate. Please show your grace to me, for in my 
sore affliction I must seek it. My fate has brought all my good works to 
nothing. I shall not seek for any other refuge; for there is no other refuge 
left to me. Please try through human effort to overcome the power of fate.’ 


92: 


Sarga 58 

[1-5] “When the king had spoken in this fashion, Kusika’s son took pity on 
him and spoke sweet words directly to him, although his appearance was 
that of a canddla: ‘Welcome, Iksvaku, my son. I know you are a righteous 
man. Have no fear, bull among kings, I shall be your refuge. Your majesty, I 
shall summon all the great seers, holy in their every act, as my assistants in 
this sacrifice. Then, free from all anxiety, you may perform your sacrifice. 
You shall ascend bodily to heaven and in the very form you now possess, 
the one created by your gurus’ curse. Lord of men, I feel that heaven is 
already within your grasp, for you have come to me, a Kausika, for refuge, 
and I can well provide it.’ 

[6-9] “After speaking in this fashion, the mighty man gave instructions 
to his wise and righteous sons concerning the preparations for the sacrifice. 
Then he summoned all his disciples and addressed them in these words: 
‘My sons, on my authority you are to bring all truly learned men, the 
foremost of the seers, with their disciples and sacrificial priests—all those 
who are friendly to us. And should anyone, provoked by the force of my 
words, say anything in disrespect, you are to report to me the whole of his 
speech, omitting nothing.’ 

[10-16] “Heeding these words and following his instructions, they 
dispersed in all directions. And so it was that vedic scholars came there 
from all parts of the country. All his disciples then rejoined that blazingly 
splendid sage and reported to him what all the vedic scholars had said: 


‘Hearing your proclamation, twice-born brahmans are gathering in every 
part of the country. All of them are coming except Mahodaya. But listen, 
bull among sages, to all the words, their syllables slurred with anger, of 
Vasistha’s hundred sons: “How can the gods and seers in a sacrificial 
assembly partake of the offerings of a man whose sacrificial priest is a 
kshatriya, especially when he himself is a canddla? Or is the patronage of 
this Visvamitra sufficient to ensure that the great brahmans will go to 
heaven even after having eaten a candala’s food?” Such, tiger among sages, 
were the contemptuous words uttered with reddened eyes by Mahodaya and 
all of Vasistha’s sons.’ 

[17-23] “When the bull among sages heard these words, his own eyes 
grew red with rage, and he spoke in anger: ‘Since they revile me, who am 
not to be reviled, engaged as I am in fierce austerities, these vile creatures 
will without doubt be reduced to ashes. Today K4ala’s noose has led them to 
the abode of Vaivasvata, lord of death. May they all become keepers of the 
dead for seven hundred lifetimes. May they wander through the world as 
Mustikas, vile outcastes, hideous to look upon and loathsome in their 
occupation, their daily food the flesh of dogs. The evil-minded Mahodaya 
too has reviled me who am not to be reviled. Let him become a tribesman 
of the Nisadas, reviled among all peoples. Pitiless, intent upon destroying 
life, he shall drag out a long and miserable life for angering me.’ Having 
uttered these words in the midst of the seers, the great sage VisSvamitra, a 
mighty ascetic, fell silent.” 


Sarga 59 
[1-7] “After mighty Visvamitra had ruined Mahodaya and the sons of 
Vasistha through the power of his austerities, he spoke in the midst of the 
seers: ‘Here stands Trisanku, a pious and generous heir of Iksvaku. Because 
he wishes to enter the world of the gods in this body of his, he has had to 
seek refuge with me. Gentlemen, let us offer a sacrifice such that he may 
ascend to the world of the gods in his own body.’ When they heard 
Visvamitra’s words, all the great seers, who knew what was right, 
assembled and spoke together in keeping with righteousness: ‘This sage, the 
heir of Kusika, is extremely irritable. There can be no doubt but that we 
must do whatever he commands and do it properly. For the holy man is like 
fire. If angered, he will surely curse us. So let the sacrifice commence so 


that Iksvaku’s heir may go to heaven in his body through Visvamitra’s 
power.’ Then crying, ‘Let the sacrifice commence,’ they all took part in it. 

[8—14] “When the great seers had spoken in this fashion, they performed 
the various ritual acts. But the principal officiant of that sacrifice was the 
mighty Visvamitra himself. The sacrificial priests, skilled in vedic mantras, 
performed every rite to the accompaniment of vedic mantras in due order 
and according to precept and ritual injunctions. Then, after a long time, the 
great ascetic Visvamitra summoned the gods to come for their portions. But 
although they were summoned to come for their portions, not one of the 
gods came. The great sage Visvamitra was filled with rage. Angrily raising 
a sacrificial ladle, he said this to Trisanku: ‘Lord of men, behold the power 
of my slowly garnered austerity. Through this immense power, I shall now 
conduct you bodily to heaven. Ascend bodily to heaven, lord of men, 
difficult though it may be. For I have garnered for myself some small fruit 
of my austerity, and through the power of that, your majesty, you shall 
ascend bodily to heaven.’ 

[15-21] “No sooner had the sage spoken these words, Kakutstha, than 
the lord of men ascended bodily to heaven before the very eyes of the sages. 
But when Indra, the chastiser of Paka, saw that Trisanku had arrived in the 
world of the gods, he and all the hosts of gods said this: ‘Go back, Trisanku. 
There is no place for you in heaven. You fool, you have been ruined by the 
curse of your gurus. Fall headfirst back to earth!’ Addressed in this fashion 
by the great lord Indra, Trisanku fell back again, crying out to the ascetic 
Visvamitra, ‘Save me!’ Kausika heard him crying out; and, displaying his 
fierce anger, he called out, ‘Stop! Stop!’ Then, standing among the seers, 
beside himself with rage, the renowned and mighty sage, like a second 
Prajapati, lord of creatures, created a whole new set of constellations in the 
south, fashioning another constellation of the Seven Seers in the southern 
portion of the sky. 

[22—24] “When he had created this new set of constellations, he spoke, 
choking with rage: ‘I will create another Indra, or perhaps the world should 
be without an Indra.’ And in his wrath he began to create even gods. At 
this, the bulls among gods and the hosts of seers became thoroughly 
alarmed and spoke soothing words to great Visvamitra: ‘Illustrious ascetic, 
this king has been ruined by his gurus’ curse; he is not worthy of bodily 
entering heaven.’ 


[25-28] “Now when the bull among sages, Kausika, heard those words 
of the gods, he spoke grave words to them in reply: ‘Bless you, I made a 
solemn promise to King Trisanku that he should ascend bodily to heaven. I 
dare not make it false. Trisanku—in his bodily form—shall remain in 
heaven forever. And all my constellations shall endure. Yes, all these things 
that I created shall last as long as the worlds endure. You must all agree to 
this, O gods.’ 

[29-33] “Addressed in this fashion, all the gods replied to the bull 
among sages: ‘So be it, bless you. Let all your many constellations remain 
in the sky outside the circuit of the sun, which shines on all men. And, best 
of sages, let Trisanku, blazing brightly and looking like a god, remain head 
downwards, one among those shining stars.’ Then, praised by all the gods 
and seers, the righteous and mighty Visvamitra replied, ‘Very well.’ And so, 
best of men, at the end of the sacrifice, the gods and great ascetic sages 
departed just as they had come.” 


Sarga 60 

[1-4] “When the great Visvamitra saw that the seers had departed, tiger 
among men, he spoke to all the forest dwellers: ‘Since this great obstacle 
arose here in the southern region, we shall go to some other region and 
practice our austerities there. Great men, let us go and practice our 
austerities undisturbed at Puskara in the sparsely peopled west. That is the 
best of all ascetics’ forests.” Having said this, the great and powerful sage 
performed severe and difficult austerities at Puskara, subsisting only on 
roots and fruit. 

[S—8] “Now just at that very time, lord of Ayodhya, a king known as 
Ambarisa undertook a sacrifice. But while he was engaged in that sacrifice, 
Indra carried off the sacrificial victim, and, since the victim was lost, the 
priest said to the king: ‘Your majesty, today, through your carelessness, the 
sacrificial victim has been stolen. Lord of men, such lapses destroy a king 
who does not guard against them. Bull among men, there is only one way to 
expiate this lapse, and it is a very serious one indeed. Quickly, while the rite 
is still in progress, you must either recover the victim or replace it with a 
man.’ 

[9-15] “Upon hearing the words of his preceptor, bull among men, the 
wise king sought to find a victim in exchange for thousands of cows. Now it 


happened, delight of the Raghus, my son, that in searching regions, 
countries, cities, forests, and holy ashrams, one after the other, the lord of 
the earth encountered Rcika in Bhrgutunda, seated with his wife and sons. 
The mighty and immeasurably splendid royal seer prostrated himself, 
propitiating the brahman-seer Rcika, blazing with ascetic power. Then, after 
inquiring about his well-being in all respects, he said these words: ‘If, 
illustrious Bhargava, you will sell me your son for a hundred thousand cows 
to be my sacrificial victim, I will have accomplished my purpose. For I 
have wandered over every country and have still not found a victim suitable 
for sacrifice. So please give me one of your sons for a price.’ Addressed in 
this fashion, mighty Rcika said these words: ‘Best of men, I would not sell 
my eldest son for anything.’ 

[16—22] “But when she heard Rcika’s words, the ascetic woman, mother 
of his great sons, spoke to Ambarisa, that tiger among men: ‘Your majesty, 
you must realize that I too have a favorite, Sunaka, my youngest. For just as 
the eldest are usually dearest to their fathers, best of men, so are the 
youngest to their mothers. Therefore, I shall keep my youngest son.’ But 
after the sage and his wife had spoken, Rama, Sunahsepa, their middle son, 
spoke for himself: ‘My father says that the eldest cannot be sold, and my 
mother says the same of the youngest. So I gather that the middle son has 
been sold. Lead me away, your majesty.’ And so the lord of men departed, 
delight of the Raghus, delighted to have gotten SunahSepa for a hundred 
thousand cows. Quickly placing Sunahéepa in his chariot, the renowned and 
mighty royal seer Ambarisa sped away.” 


Sarga 61 
[1-6] “Having taken Sunahégepa, delight of the Raghus, best of men, the 
renowned king stopped to rest at midday in Puskara. While the king was 
resting, the renowned SunahSepa wandered over to the splendid Puskara 
lake, where he saw Visvamitra. His face downcast, miserable with thirst and 
fatigue, he fell into the sage’s lap, Rama, crying: ‘I have no mother and no 
father, nor kinsmen anywhere on either side. Kind sir, bull among sages, 
please save me, if it can be done with righteousness. For you are a saviour, 
best of sages, and a helper to all. With calm mind, protect me who have no 
protector, in such a way that the king may accomplish his purpose and I 
may attain the heavenly world after a long and healthy life and the 


performance of unexcelled austerities. Righteous man, please save me from 
calamity, as a father would a son.’ 

[7-11] “Upon hearing those words of his, the great ascetic Visvamitra 
soothed him in various ways, then turned to his own sons and said: ‘Fathers, 
seeking what is good, beget sons for the sake of their own welfare in the 
next world. The time for the accomplishment of that purpose is now at 
hand. This boy, the son of a sage, is seeking refuge with me. My sons, you 
must do him a favor at the cost of your lives. All of you have done your 
duties well and have made righteousness your highest goal. Now, as 
sacrificial victims of the lord of men, you shall glut the sacred fire. In this 
way, Sunahégepa will have a protector, the sacrifice will be unimpeded, the 
gods will be satisfied, and my word proved true.’ 

[12-16] “But, best of men, the sage’s sons, Madhusyanda and the rest, 
hearing his words, replied with arrogance and disrespect: ‘How is it, lord, 
that you would abandon your own sons to save the son of another? We 
regard this as a forbidden act, like the eating of dog’s flesh.” Now, when the 
bull among sages heard what his sons had said, his eyes grew red with rage 
and he began to curse them: ‘The dreadful and hair-raising words you 
mouth so brazenly, contradicting what I have said, are utterly to be censured 
from the standpoint of righteousness. You shall all dwell on earth for a full 
one thousand years as eaters of dog’s flesh, caste-fellows of Vasistha’s 
sons.’ 

[17-21] “Then, after he had cursed his sons, the best of sages addressed 
the afflicted Sunahsepa, providing him an infallible means of protection: 
‘When you are brought to Visnu’s sacrificial post, bound with the sacred 
cords and adorned with red garlands and ointment, you must invoke Agni, 
god of fire, with sacred speech. Son of a sage, you must chant these two 
divine stanzas at Ambarisa’s sacrifice. Then you shall accomplish your 
purpose.’ Sunahsepa mastered the two stanzas, with deep concentration. 
Then, hastening, he spoke to Ambarisa, lion among kings: ‘Mighty lion 
among kings, let us go quickly to the place of sacrifice. Return, lord of 
kings, and enter a state of consecration.’ 

[22-27] “Upon hearing the words of the seer’s son, the king was filled 
with joyful anticipation and went swiftly, but vigilantly, to the sacrificial 
ground. There, with the consent of the officiating priests, the king had his 
victim marked with the sacred signs and clothed in red. Then he had him 


bound to the sacrificial post. But once he was bound, the son of the sage 
praised the two gods, Indra and Indra’s younger brother, Visnu, in the 
prescribed fashion with those excellent stanzas. Thousand-eyed Indra was 
pleased and gratified by that secret hymn of praise, Raghava, and he 
granted long life to Sunahsepa. And as for the king, Rama, best of men, he 
obtained manifold fruits from that sacrifice through the grace of thousand- 
eyed Indra. At last, best of men, the great ascetic, righteous ViSvamitra, 
took up austerity for another thousand years at Puskara.” 


Sarga 62 

[1-3] “When a thousand years had passed and the great sage had bathed 
upon completion of his vow, all the gods approached him in their desire to 
grant him the fruit of his austerities. Mighty Brahma spoke very pleasing 
words to him, ‘Bless you! Through the holy rites in which you have 
engaged, you have become a seer.’ Then, having spoken to him in this 
fashion, the lord of the gods returned to heaven. But mighty Visvamitra 
only plunged himself once more into profound austerity. 

[4-8] “Now, after a long time, best of men, Menaka, the most beautiful 
of the apsarases, came to bathe at Puskara. The mighty son of Kusika saw 
Menaka there, unrivaled in beauty, like a streak of lightning in a rain cloud. 
The moment he saw her, the sage came under the spell of Kandarpa, god of 
love, and said this: ‘Welcome, apsaras. Come and live here in my ashram. 
Bless you, please be gracious to me, for I am infatuated by Madana, the god 
of love.’ Since he spoke to her in this manner, that exquisite woman made 
her home there, and in this way a great obstacle to his austerities arose for 
Visvamitra. And so, ten years passed pleasantly, gentle Raghava, while she 
was living in Visvamitra’s ashram. 

[9-14] “But when that period had elapsed, the great sage ViSvamitra was 
ashamed of himself and became prey to grief and anxiety. Soon an angry 
thought crossed the sage’s mind, delight of the Raghus: ‘All of this, this 
great theft of my ascetic power, is the work of the gods! Ten years have 
passed like a single day and night with me a victim of love’s infatuation. 
Truly an obstacle has presented itself to me.’ Sighing, the eminent sage was 
made miserable by regret. Still, seeing the frightened apsaras trembling, her 
hands cupped in a gesture of supplication, Visvamitra, the son of Kusika, 
dismissed her with gentle words, Rama, and went to the northern 


mountains. Determined to succeed, that renowned sage made a supreme 
resolution, and coming to the banks of the Kausikit River, he engaged in 
truly dreadful austerities. 

[15-18] “After he had been engaged in such dreadful austerity for a 
thousand years on the northern mountains, the gods became alarmed. So all 
the gods and hosts of seers assembled and took counsel together, saying, 
‘Very well! Let the son of Kusika receive the title “great seer.”’ Heeding 
those words of the gods, Brahma, the grandfather of all the worlds, spoke 
sweet words to the ascetic Visvamitra: ‘Hail, great seer. Kausika, my son, I 
am pleased by your fierce austerity. I grant you greatness and preeminence 
among seers.’ 

[19-21] “But when the ascetic Visvamitra heard Grandfather Brahma’s 
speech, he bowed, cupping his hands in reverence, and replied: ‘If, holy 
one, because of the holy actions I have performed, you had addressed me by 
the unequaled designation “brahman-seer,” then I would have been shown 
to have truly conquered my senses.’ Brahma, however, merely replied: ‘So 
far you have not conquered your senses. Exert yourself!’ Having said this, 
he returned to heaven. 

[22-26] “Therefore, when the gods had departed, the great sage 
Visvamitra continued his austerities, standing unsupported, his arms raised, 
his only sustenance the air. In summer the ascetic kept the five fires, during 
the rains he lived outdoors, and in the winter he stood in water day and 
night. In this fashion, he practiced the most dreadful austerities for a 
thousand years. Now when the great sage Visvamitra adopted these 
austerities, Vasava and the gods were greatly alarmed. Sakra and all the 
Marut hosts spoke to the apsaras Rambha in words to their advantage and 
to the disadvantage of Kausika.” 


Sarga 63 
[1—6] “ ‘Rambha, there is an important task you must undertake on behalf 
of the gods. You must seduce Kausika by infatuating him with love for 
you.’ But, Rama, the apsaras was dismayed at being addressed in this 
fashion by thousand-eyed Indra, wise lord of the gods. Cupping her hands 
in reverence, she replied: ‘Lord of the gods, the great sage Visvamitra is 
fearsome. He will unquestionably unleash his dreadful wrath on me. O God, 
I am afraid. Be merciful.’ But though she stood there trembling, her hands 


cupped in supplication, thousand-eyed Indra merely replied: ‘Have no fear, 
Rambha. Now please carry out my instructions. For I shall take a kokila’s 
form to captivate his heart. Then, when spring has come and trees are at 
their loveliest, Pll stand beside you together with Kandarpa, god of love. 
Rambha, you must put on your most beautiful and radiant form and 
infatuate the ascetic seer Kausika.’ 

[7-12] “When that seductive woman had heard his words, she made 
herself surpassingly beautiful, and, with an enchanting smile, she set out to 
seduce Visvamitra. He heard the sound of the kokila singing sweetly, and 
his heart was delighted when he saw her. But the sight of Rambha and the 
sound of her incomparable singing aroused suspicion in the sage. He 
recognized it all as the work of thousand-eyed Indra, and, overcome with 
rage, the son of Kusika, bull among sages, cursed Rambha: ‘Unfortunate 
Rambha, since you would seduce me, who seek to conquer lust and anger, 
you shall be turned to stone for ten thousand years. You have been defiled 
by my wrath, Rambha. But you shall be saved by a mighty brahman with 
great ascetic power.’ 

[13—15] “But no sooner had the great sage, mighty Visvamitra, uttered 
these words than he regretted it. For he had been unable to control his 
anger. Nonetheless, through the force of his dreadful curse, Rambha turned, 
then and there, to stone. But Indra and Kandarpa, upon hearing the great 
seer’s words, slipped away. Now that the mighty sage, his senses yet 
unmastered, had wasted his austerity through anger, Rama, he found no 
peace of mind.” 


Sarga 64 
[1-4] “After this, Rama, the great sage abandoned the region of the 
Himalayas and went to the east, where he performed truly fearsome 
austerities. He undertook the unsurpassed vow of a thousand-year silence, 
Rama, performing unparalleled and virtually impossible austerities. And 
when those thousand years had passed, the great sage, who had been tested 
by so many distractions, had become just like a piece of wood, and anger 
could no longer seize him in its grip. His splendor stupefied the gods, 
gandharvas, serpents, asuras, and rdksasas. His ascetic power dimmed 
their innate luster. In great dejection, they all spoke to Grandfather Brahma: 


[S—9] “ ‘O God, we have seduced and angered the great sage Visvamitra 
in many ways, yet still he increases in ascetic power. No sin at all, not even 
a minute one, is to be found in him. If he is not granted what his heart 
desires, then, with his ascetic powers, he will destroy the three worlds along 
with their moving and unmoving contents. Already, all directions are 
clouded and nothing can be seen. All the oceans are agitated and the 
mountains are crumbling. The earth trembles and the wind blows wildly. O 
God, we must propitiate that holy sage, who is blazing with great splendor 
like a fire, lest he set his mind upon destruction. The three worlds are 
aflame, just as they were long ago with the fire of universal destruction. 
Grant him whatever he wants, even the kingdom of the gods.’ 

[10-15] “Then the host of the gods, with Grandfather Brahma at their 
head, spoke sweet words to great ViSvamitra: ‘Hail, brahman-seer! We are 
well satisfied with your austerities. Kausika, through your fierce austerities, 
you have become a brahman. The Marut hosts and I now grant you long 
life, brahman. Bless you! May you attain happiness. You may go now, kind 
sir, Just as you please.’ The great sage was delighted to hear these words of 
Grandfather Brahma and all the denizens of heaven. Prostrating himself, he 
spoke: ‘If I have really gained the status of a brahman and long life, let the 
sacred syllables om and vasat and the vedas be fully revealed to me. And, O 
gods, Vasistha, son of Brahma, foremost among those who know the vedas 
of the kshatrtyas and brahmans, must himself address me by this title. If 
this, my greatest wish, is granted, then, bulls among gods, you may depart.’ 

[16-20] “And so the gods propitiated Vasistha, foremost in vedic 
recitation. Then, saying, ‘So be it,’ the brahman-seer befriended him. He 
told him: ‘You are a brahman-seer. There can be no doubt of it. Everything 
has turned out well for you.’ Then, when he had spoken in this fashion, all 
the gods departed as they had come. But righteous Visvamitra, having at 
last attained the unsurpassed status of a brahman, paid homage to the 
brahman-seer Vasistha, foremost in vedic recitation. When he had thus 
accomplished his desire, he wandered over the entire earth, unwavering in 
his austerities. And that, Rama, is how this great man attained the status of a 
brahman. Rama, he is the greatest of sages. He is austerity incarnate. He is 
always the highest authority and the ultimate resort of power.” 

[21-28] When Janaka had heard Satananda’s tale there in the presence of 
Rama and Laksmana, he cupped his hands in reverence and addressed the 


son of Kusika: “I am indeed fortunate and grateful, righteous bull among 
sages, that you have come to my sacrifice with the Kakutsthas. I have been 
purified by you, brahman, by the very sight of you, great sage. Just meeting 
you enriches me with manifold blessings. Mighty brahman, the great Rama 
and I have heard about your great austerities recounted here at length. The 
officiants assembled at our sacrificial session, too, have heard about your 
many virtues. Your austerity and might are both immeasurable. Truly, son 
of Kusika, your virtues are immeasurable forever. Never will I tire of 
hearing the wonderful stories about you, lord, but, best of sages, the orb of 
the sun is sinking low, and it is time for the sacrifice to begin. Please come 
to see me once again tomorrow morning, mighty man. I bid you welcome, 
best of ascetics. Now please excuse me.” 

[29-30] When Vaideha, lord of Mithila, surrounded by his preceptors 
and kinsmen, had spoken in this fashion to the best of sages, he quickly 
circled him in reverence. Then righteous Visvamitra, reverenced by the 
great seers, went to his own quarters with Rama and Laksmana. 


Sarga 65 

[1—8] In the clear dawn, Janaka, the lord of men, performed his ritual duties 
and summoned great Visvamitra and the two Raghavas. The righteous man 
paid homage to him and the two Raghavas with rites set down in the 
traditional texts and then spoke: “Welcome to you, holy one. What can I do 
for you, sinless man? Command me, sir, for I am yours to command.” 
Addressed in this fashion by great Janaka, the righteous sage, skilled in 
speech, said these words to that hero: “These two kshatriyas are the world- 
renowned sons of DaSaratha. They wish to see that foremost of bows that 
you have in your possession. Please show it to them, and once they have 
attained their desire by seeing the bow, the princes will return home as they 
please.” Addressed in this fashion, Janaka replied to the great sage: “You 
must first learn the purpose for which the bow is here. Holy man, there was 
once a king named Devarata, the sixth in descent from Nimi. Great Siva left 
it in his hands as a trust. 

[9-15] “Long ago, at the time of the destruction of Daksa’s sacrifice, the 
mighty Rudra bent this bow, and in his anger, spoke contemptuously to the 
gods: ‘Since you failed to set aside a portion for me who desire a portion, O 
gods, I shall cut off your precious heads with this bow.’ In despair, bull 


among sages, the gods all propitiated him, Bhava, the lord of gods, so that, 
at length, he was pleased with them. Filled with pleasure, he gave the bow 
to all the great gods. And, lord, it was that very jewel of a bow, belonging to 
the great god of gods, that was given as a trust to our forebear. Now once, 
as I was ploughing a field, a girl sprang up behind my plough. I found her 
as I was clearing the field, and she is thus known by the name Sita, 
‘Furrow.’ Sprung from the earth, she has been raised as my daughter, and, 
since she was not born from the womb, my daughter has been set apart as 
one for whom the only bride-price is great strength. 

[16-20] “Many kings have come, bull among sages, and asked for the 
hand of this girl who sprang from the earth and has been raised as my 
daughter. But, holy man, although all the rulers of the earth are asking for 
this girl, | have not given my daughter in marriage, reflecting that she is one 
whose bride-price is great strength. So all the kings assembled, bull among 
sages, and came to Mithila eager to test their strength. Since they wished to 
test their strength, I offered them the bow. But they could not even grasp it, 
much less lift it. So, you must know, great sage, that when I saw these 
mighty kings had but little strength, I rejected them all. 

[21-27] “But when the strength of the kings had been called into 
question, bull among sages, they all laid siege to Mithila in great anger. 
Feeling themselves slighted, bull among sages, they were filled with great 
fury and harassed the city of Mithila. By the time a full year had passed, all 
my resources were exhausted, best of sages, and I was truly miserable. So, I 
propitiated all the hosts of gods with austerities, and since they were 
pleased with me, the gods gave me an army, complete with the four 
divisions. Then those wicked kings, whose strength had been called into 
question, were broken. They fled with their ministers in all directions, 
stripped of their strength while being slaughtered. This, then, is the 
incomparably splendid bow, tiger among sages, firm in your vows. I shall 
show it to Rama and Laksmana. And if, sage, Rama, the son of Dasaratha, 
can string this bow, I will give him my daughter who was not born from the 
womb.” 


Sarga 66 
[1-4] When the great sage Visvamitra had listened to King Janaka’s words, 
he said to him, “Show Rama the bow.” So King Janaka gave the order to his 


ministers, “Bring the celestial bow and see that it is perfumed and adorned 
with garlands.” Commanded by Janaka, the ministers entered the city and, 
placing the bow before them, came forth on the king’s orders. Five 
thousand tall and brawny men were hard put to drag its eight-wheeled chest. 

[S—11] But when they brought the iron chest that held the bow, his 
counselors addressed the godlike King Janaka: “Your majesty, best of kings, 
lord of Mithila, here is the great bow, worshiped by all the kings. If you 
wish it, it may be seen.” Upon hearing their words, the king cupped his 
hands in reverence and spoke to great Visvamitra, Rama, and Laksmana: 
“Here is the great bow, brahman, that the Janakas worship and that the 
mighty kings were unable to string. All the hosts of gods, asuras, raksasas, 
and the foremost among the gandharvas and yaksas, kinnaras, and great 
serpents are incapable of bending this bow, stringing it, fitting an arrow to 
it, drawing its string, or even lifting it. What chance is there, then, for mere 
men? Indeed, bull among sages, it is the greatest of bows that has been 
brought here. Illustrious sage, please show it to the two princes.” 

[12-17] When righteous Visvamitra heard what Janaka had said, he 
turned to Raghava and said, “Rama, my son, behold the bow.” Following 
the great seer’s instructions, Rama opened the chest in which the bow lay 
and regarding it closely, he then spoke: “Now, brahman, I shall touch this 
great bow with my hand. I shall attempt to lift and even to string it.” “Very 
well,” replied both the king and the sage. So, following the sage’s 
instructions, he easily grasped the bow in the middle. Then, as though it 
were mere play to him, the righteous prince, the delight of the Raghus, 
strung the bow as thousands watched. The mighty man affixed the 
bowstring and, nocking an arrow to it, drew it back. But in so doing, the 
best of men broke the bow in the middle. 

[18—27] There was a tremendous noise as loud as a thunderclap, and a 
mighty trembling shook the earth, as if a mountain had been torn asunder. 
Of all those men, only the great sage, the king, and the two Raghavas 
remained standing; the rest fell, stunned by the noise. When the people had 
recovered their senses, the eloquent king, free from his anxiety, cupped his 
hands in reverence and addressed the bull among sages: “Holy man, I have 
witnessed the might of Dasaratha’s son Rama. It is marvelous and 
inconceivable. I had no idea of it. With Rama, Dasaratha’s son, for her 
husband, my daughter Sita will bring glory to the House of the Janakas. 


And so, Kausika, my vow that great strength should be her only bride-price 
has been proven true. For my daughter Sita, as dear to me as life itself, shall 
be given in marriage to Rama. Bless you, Kausika brahman! With your 
permission, my counselors shall set out at once for Ayodhya in swift 
chariots. With courteous words they shall bring the king to my city. And 
they shall tell him all about the betrothal of my daughter, whose only bride- 
price was great strength. They shall also tell the king that the Kakutsthas are 
under the sage’s protection. The king will be delighted. Now, let them go 
swiftly and bring him here.” “So be it,” Kausika replied. The righteous king 
then spoke to his counselors, and when they had received their orders, he 
dispatched them to Ayodhya. 


Sarga 67 

[1-5] Instructed by Janaka, his messengers spent three nights on the road 
and then entered the city of Ayodhya, their horses exhausted. In accordance 
with the orders of their king, the messengers entered the royal dwelling and 
saw the aged king, godlike DaSaratha. Cupping their hands in reverence, 
restrained yet free from anxiety, they all spoke sweet words to the king: “O 
great king, King Janaka of Mithila, delight of his people, accompanied by 
priests who have performed the agnihotra rite, repeatedly inquires in sweet 
and affectionate words after the continuing well-being of you, your 
preceptors, purohitas, and attendants. 

[6-12] “And, having thus made inquiry about your continuing well- 
being, Vaideha, the lord of Mithila, with Kausika’s permission, addresses 
these words to you: ‘You know my long-standing vow that my daughter’s 
only bride-price would be great strength. You know, too, that the kings, 
lacking strength, have been made angry and hostile. Now, your majesty, this 
very same daughter of mine has been won by your heroic son, who chanced 
to come here following Visvamitra. For, your majesty, great king, the great 
Rama has broken my celestial bow in the middle, before a vast assembly of 
the people. Therefore, I must give Sita, whose only bride-price was great 
strength, to this great man. Please permit this, for I wish to make good my 
vow. Please come quickly, great king, with your preceptors, placing your 
purohita before you. Please come and see the two Raghavas. Please make 
my happiness complete, lord of kings, for you too shall obtain happiness on 
account of your two sons.’ ” 


[13—19] Such was the sweet speech of the lord of Videha, sanctioned by 
both Visvamitra and Satananda. When the king heard the messengers’ 
words, he was utterly delighted. Addressing Vasistha, Vamadeva, and his 
other counselors, he spoke: “The increaser of Kausalya’s joy is staying in 
Videha with his brother Laksmana, under the protection of the son of 
Kusika. Great Janaka has witnessed Raghava Kakutstha’s might, and he 
wishes to give him his daughter. If this news pleases you, then let us go 
quickly to great Janaka’s city. Let there be no delay.” His counselors and all 
the great seers replied, “Excellent.” At this, the king was greatly delighted 
and said to them, “The journey will begin tomorrow.” All the virtuous 
counselors of Janaka, lord of men, were delighted. They spent the night 
there and were shown the greatest honor. 


Sarga 68 

[1-7] When the night had passed, King Dasaratha, in great delight, 
addressed Sumantra in the presence of his preceptors and kinsmen: “Have 
all the officers of the treasury go on ahead of us today with great wealth, all 
kinds of jewels, and an adequate guard. Then, see to it that all four branches 
of the army set forth at once with fine palanquins and carriages the moment 
they get my orders. Also have the brahmans—Vasistha, Vamadeva, Jabali, 
Kasyapa, long-lived Markandeya, and the seer Katyayana—go on ahead. 
Then, have my chariot yoked so that no time will be lost, for the 
messengers are bidding me to make haste.” So, in accordance with the 
orders of the lord of men, all four branches of the army followed behind the 
king, who traveled in the company of the seers. After four days on the road, 
he reached Videha, and the majestic King Janaka, hearing of this, prepared 
a welcome. 

[8—12] When King Janaka met the aged King DaSaratha, protector of 
men, he was delighted and experienced great joy. Those two most eminent 
of men conversed together and were filled with delight. “Welcome, great 
king,” said Janaka. “It is my good fortune that you have come, Raghava. 
You shall experience great joy, on account of your two sons, for they have 
won it for you through their great strength. It is also my good fortune that 
the holy seer, mighty Vasistha, has come along with all the foremost twice- 
born brahmans, like Indra of the hundred sacrifices along with the gods. 
Through my good fortune, I have overcome all obstacles; my House has 


been honored by an alliance with the great Raghavas, the mightiest of all. 
Best of men, lord of great kings, tomorrow morning, at the end of my 
sacrifice, please have this marriage, already approved by the seers, 
performed.” 

[13—18] When he had heard those words of his in the presence of the 
seers, the lord of men, foremost among the eloquent, replied to the lord of 
the earth: “Long ago I learned that the receiver is dependent upon the giver. 
Since you know what is proper, we shall do just as you say.” And when the 
lord of Videha heard that truthful man’s most righteous and glorious words, 
he was moved to the highest wonder. Then all the hosts of sages, mingling 
with one another, in great joy, passed the night happily. And the king, 
having seen his sons, the two Raghavas, was overjoyed. Then, well pleased 
and greatly honored by Janaka, he passed the night. Mighty Janaka, gifted 
with insight, also passed the night after completing both his sacrifice and 
the rites for his two daughters, in accordance with righteousness. 


Sarga 69 

[1-4] In the morning, when eloquent Janaka had completed his ritual duties 
with the great seers, he spoke to Satananda, his purohita: “My mighty and 
righteous younger brother, Kusadhvaja, dwells in the lovely and sacred city 
of Samkasya. Surrounded by a lofty palisade and washed by the river 
Iksumati, it resembles the flying palace Puspaka. I wish to see that mighty 
man, for I regard him as the protector of my sacrifice. He should share this 
pleasure with me.” 

[S—9] Then, on the instructions of the lord of men, they went with swift 
horses to bring that tiger among men. And so, at the behest of the lord of 
men, Kusadhvaja came like Visnu at the behest of Indra. When he had made 
obeisance to Satananda and the righteous king, great Janaka, he met with 
the king, a lover of righteousness. He took his place upon a celestial throne, 
splendid and worthy of a king, and then the two heroic and immeasurably 
mighty brothers dispatched Sudamana, best of counselors, saying: “Go 
quickly, lord of counselors, and bring the invincible and immeasurably 
splendid Dasaratha Aiksvaka with his sons and ministers.” 

[10-15] Proceeding to the royal camp, he spied the dynast of the Raghus, 
and, bowing his head in obeisance, he spoke: “Heroic lord of Ayodhya, 
Vaideha, the lord of Mithila, is ready to see you, your preceptors, and your 


purohita.” When the king heard the words of that best of counselors, he 
went with his kinsmen and the host of seers to where Janaka awaited him. 
The king, the foremost among the eloquent, in the company of his 
counselors, his preceptors, and his kinsmen, then addressed Vaideha: “As 
you know, great king, the holy seer Vasistha is the divinity of the House of 
Iksvaku. He will speak for us in all matters. Now, with the permission of 
Visvamitra and in the presence of all the great seers, righteous Vasistha will 
recite my lineage in due sequence.” 

[16—24] Dasaratha then fell silent, and the holy and eloquent seer 
Vasistha addressed these words to Vaideha and his purohita: “Brahma is 
eternal, everlasting, and imperishable; and his origins are unknowable. 
From him was born Marici. Marici’s son was Kasyapa. Vivasvant was born 
of Kasyapa. And Manu, who was known as Vaivasvata, was, long ago, one 
of the Prajapatis, lords of creatures. Manu’s son was Iksvaku. This Iksvaku, 
you must know, was the first king of Ayodhya. A son, the majestic Vikuksi, 
was born to Iksvaku. Vikuksi’s son was the mighty and valorous Bana. 
Bana’s son was the mighty and valorous Anaranya. From Anaranya was 
born Prthu. Trisanku was Prthu’s son. Trisanku’s son was the renowned 
Dhundhumara. After Dhundhumara came mighty Yuvanasva, a great 
chariot-warrior. YuvanaSva’s son was the majestic Mandhatr, lord of the 
earth. A son was born to Mandhatr, the majestic Susandhi. Susandhi had 
two sons, Dhruvasandhi and Prasenajit. Dhruvasandhi had a renowned son 
who was known as Bharata. After Bharata was born a mighty man named 
Asita. 

[25-32] “Next, Sagara was born with poison (sa-gara). After Sagara 
came Asamafija and after Asamafyja, Amsumant. Dilipa was Amsumant’s 
son, and Dilipa’s was Bhagiratha. After Bhagiratha came Kakutstha, and 
Kakutstha’s son was Raghu. Raghu’s son was mighty Pravrddha, the man- 
eater. He came to be known as Kalmasapada, and to him was born 
Safikhana. Sudargana was Sankhana’s son. After Sudargana came 
Agnivarna. Agnivarna’s son was Sighraga. Sighraga’s son was Maru. After 
Maru came Prasusruka and after Prasusruka, Ambarisa. Ambarisa’s son was 
Nahusa, lord of the earth. Nahusa’s son was Yayati. And to Yayati was born 
Nabhaga. Nabhaga’s son was Aja. To Aja was born DasSaratha, and it is to 
this Dasaratha that these two brothers, Rama and Laksmana, were born. 
Your majesty, the kings of the House of Iksvaku have been heroic, 


righteous, truthful, and pure in lineage from their very beginning. And this 
is the royal House in which Rama and Laksmana were born. On their behalf 
I ask you for your two daughters. Best of men, please bestow these two 
worthy women upon these equally worthy men.” 


Sarga 70 

[1-5] When Vasistha had finished speaking in this fashion, Janaka cupped 
his hands in reverence and replied: “Bless you, now if you please, you shall 
hear me recount the genealogy of our eminent House. For, best of sages, on 
the occasion of his daughter’s betrothal, the scion of a noble line should 
fully recount his genealogy. Please listen, great sage. There was once a 
righteous king, the mightiest of men, named Nimi, renowned for his deeds 
in all three worlds. His son was named Mithi, and Mithi’s son was Janaka, 
the first of that name. After Janaka was born Udavasu. After Udavasu was 
born the righteous Nandivardhana, and Nandivardhana’s son was called 
Suketu. 

[6-10] “After Suketu, the righteous and mighty Devarata was born. The 
royal seer Devarata had a son known as Brhadratha. Brhadratha had a son, 
the valorous hero Mahavira. Mahavira’s son was the steadfast and truly 
valorous Sudhrti. And Sudhrti’s son was the righteous, nay, the very 
righteous Dhrstaketu. The royal seer Dhrstaketu had a son named Haryasva. 
Haryasva’s son was Maru. Maru’s son was Pratindhaka. Pratindhaka’s son 
was righteous King Kirtiratha. Kirtiratha’s son was known as Devamidha. 
Devamidha’s son was Vibudha, and Vibudha’s was Mahidhraka. 

[11-16] “Mahidhraka’s son was the mighty King Kirtirata. Maharoman 
was born to the royal seer Kirtirata. Righteous Svarnaroman was born to 
Maharoman. Hrasvaroman was born to the royal seer Svarnaroman. Two 
sons were born to that great man who knew the ways of righteousness. I am 
the elder, and the younger is my brother, the heroic Kusadhvaja. My father, 
the lord of men, consecrated me, the elder, as king and, leaving Kusadhvaja 
in my care, retired to the forest. Ever since my aged father went to heaven, I 
have borne this burden in accordance with righteousness and looked upon 
my godlike brother Kusadhvaja with affection. Then, one time, the mighty 
king Sudhanvan came from Samkasya and laid siege to Mithila. 

[17-24] “He sent me a message, saying, ‘You must give me both Siva’s 
unsurpassed bow and your daughter, lotus-eyed Sita.” Because I did not 


cede these to him, he engaged me in battle, brahman-seer. But I killed that 
lord of men, Sudhanvan, as he faced me in combat. And, best of sages, 
since I had killed Sudhanvan, the lord of men, I consecrated my heroic 
brother, Kusadhvaja, as ruler of Samkasya. This is my younger brother, 
great sage; I am the elder. Now, bull among sages, with great pleasure I give 
away my two girls, Sita to Rama, bless you, and Urmila to Laksmana—my 
daughter Sita, who is like a daughter of the gods, whose only bride-price 
was great strength, and Urmila, my second daughter. I say it three times so 
there can be no doubt. With great pleasure, delight of the Raghus, I give you 
these two girls. Your majesty, please have the tonsure ceremony performed 
for Rama and Laksmana. Then, bless you, you may perform the rites of 
ancestor worship and the wedding itself. We are now under the lunar 
mansion of Magha, great-armed lord. Your majesty, you may perform the 
marriage ceremony in three days time under the lunar mansion of 
Uttaraphalguni. You should distribute gifts on behalf of Rama and 
Laksmana to ensure their happiness.” 


Sarga 71 

[1-8] When the heroic King Vaideha had finished speaking, the great sage 
Visvamitra, seconded by Vasistha, responded: “The Houses of the Iksvakus 
and the Videhas are beyond conception and beyond measure, bull among 
men. There is none to equal them. Your majesty, this lawful union of Sita 
and Urmila with Rama and Laksmana is highly appropriate, the more so 
because of the perfection of their beauty. But now, best of men, hear the 
words that I feel bound to utter. Here is your brother, King Kusadhvaja, 
who knows the ways of righteousness. Your majesty, this righteous man has 
two daughters unrivaled on earth for beauty. Best of men, we ask you for 
them to be the wives of Prince Bharata and wise Satrughna. We ask for your 
two daughters, your majesty, on behalf of these two great men. For all the 
sons of Dasaratha are endowed with beauty and youth, like the guardians of 
the world, and are equal to the gods in valor. Lord of kings, holy in your 
every deed, through this connection with the two of you, let your flawless 
House be joined to that of Iksvaku.” 

[9-15] When Janaka had heard Visvamitra’s words, which had the 
approval of Vasistha, he cupped his hands in reverence and addressed both 
bulls among sages: “Since you yourselves commend this as a fitting union 


of Houses, so be it. Bless you, let the inseparable Satrughna and Bharata 
take the daughters of Kusadhvaya to be their wives. Great sage, let all four 
mighty princes take the hands of the four princesses on the very same day. 
Brahman, the wise recommend that marriages take place on the second of 
the two days of Phalguna, when the god Bhaga presides as Prajapati, lord of 
creatures.” When King Janaka had uttered these agreeable words, he rose 
and, cupping his hands in reverence, addressed the two eminent sages: “You 
have discharged my highest duty for me. I shall be the disciple of both of 
you forever. Now let both of you, bulls among sages, be seated on these fine 
thrones. This city of mine is as much DasSaratha’s as is Ayodhya. Please 
have no doubts as to his authority here and act accordingly.” 

[16-19] When Janaka Vaideha had spoken in this fashion, King 
Dasaratha, delight of the Raghus, was pleased and replied to the lord of the 
earth: “You two brothers, the lords of Mithila, have numberless virtues. You 
do great honor to the seers and the hosts of kings.” Then he said: “Bless 
you, attain happiness. I shall now return to my own quarters to perform all 
the rites for my departed ancestors.” Taking his leave of the lord of men, the 
renowned King DaSaratha then placed the two lordly sages before him and 
departed quickly. 

[20-24] Proceeding to his own quarters, the king performed the rites for 
his ancestors in accordance with the ritual injunctions, and, rising the next 
morning, he performed a splendid tonsure ceremony as befitted the 
occasion. The king, lord of men, in keeping with traditional practice, gave 
hundreds of thousands of cows to the brahmans on behalf of each of his 
sons. In this way, the bull among men gave away four hundred thousand 
milch cows with gilded horns, each with a calf and a milking vessel of fine 
brass. And the delight of the Raghus, devoted to his sons, gave, on the 
occasion of their tonsure ceremony, much additional wealth to the 
brahmans. Standing there surrounded by his sons after their tonsure 
ceremonies, the lord of men looked like the benevolent Prajapati, lord of 
creatures, surrounded by the guardians of the world. 


Sarga 72 
[1-8] Now it happened that on the very day that the king performed that 
lavish tonsure ceremony, the hero Yudhajit, son of the king of Kekaya and 
Bharata’s maternal uncle, arrived. When he had seen the king and inquired 


about his well-being, he said this: “The royal lord of Kekaya affectionately 
inquires after your well-being,” adding, “Those whose well-being you have 
at heart are at present in good health. Lord of kings, lord of the earth, I 
would like to see my sister’s son. For that purpose, delight of the Raghus, I 
journeyed to Ayodhya. But in Ayodhya, lord of the earth, I heard that your 
sons had gone with you to Mithila to be married. Therefore, I came here in 
haste, eager to see my sister’s son.” King DaSaratha, seeing that a cherished 
guest, one worthy of honor, had arrived, honored him with the utmost 
cordiality. He passed the night in the company of his great sons and then, 
placing the seers before him, proceeded to the sacrificial enclosure. At the 
auspicious hour called Vijaya, Rama and his brothers, adorned with every 
ornament, stood before Vasistha and the other great seers and underwent the 
auspicious ceremony of the wedding thread. 

[9-11] Holy Vasistha then went to Vaideha and addressed him as 
follows: “Foremost of great men, your majesty, King DaSaratha and his 
sons have performed the auspicious ceremony of the wedding thread and 
are waiting for you to give away the brides. For all affairs are best 
transacted directly between the giver and receiver. Now, you must carry 
through the splendid wedding ceremony and so fulfill your duty.” 

[12-16] When great Vasistha had addressed him in this fashion, that 
noble and mighty man, knowing full well the ways of righteousness, 
replied: “Which of my chamberlains is on duty? For whose orders are you 
waiting? My kingdom is yours! Why do you hesitate in your own house? 
Best of sages, my daughters have undergone the entire ceremony of the 
wedding thread. They have now approached the altar, where they shine like 
flames of the fire. I am ready. I am standing by the altar waiting for you. Let 
the king perform the ceremony without delay. What are we waiting for?” 
When Dasaratha heard Janaka’s words, he had his sons and all the hosts of 
seers enter the king’s dwelling. 

[17-21] King Janaka then spoke to Rama, the increaser of Kausalya’s 
delight: “This daughter of mine, Sita, shall be your lawful wedded wife. 
Accept her, bless you. Take her hand in yours. Come, Laksmana. Bless you. 
Accept Urmila, whom I give you. Take her hand without delay.” After 
speaking in this fashion, Janaka addressed Bharata, saying, “Take 
Mandavi’s hand in yours, delight of the Raghus.” Then the righteous lord of 
the Janakas turned to Satrughna, saying, “Great-armed man, take 


Srutakirti’s hand in yours. All of you Kakutsthas are gentle and true to your 
vows; now take your wives without delay.” 

[22—27| Upon hearing Janaka’s words and securing the approval of 
Vasistha, the four men took the hands of the four women in their own. 
Finally, in the company of their wives, the eminent Raghus reverently 
circled the fire, the altar, the king, and the great seers. Thus did they 
perform their marriage ceremony in the prescribed fashion according to the 
ritual injunctions. Suddenly, from the sky, there fell a great and radiant 
shower of blossoms accompanied by the thundering of celestial drums and 
the sounds of singing and musical instruments. Troupes of apsarases 
danced at the wedding of the Raghu princes, and gandharvas sang sweetly. 
It was truly miraculous. To music such as this—singing and the sound of 
blaring horns—those mighty men were wedded to their wives, stepping 
three times around the sacred fire. At last the princes, delights of the 
Raghus, returned to their camp with their brides. And the king, along with 
the host of his seers and kinsmen, followed, gazing after them. 


Sarga 73 

[1-5] When the night had passed, the great sage Visvamitra took his leave 
of the two kings and departed for the mountains of the north. Once 
Visvamitra had departed, King DaSaratha took his leave of Vaideha, lord of 
Mithila, and quickly made ready to return to his own city. But first the king 
of Videha, lord of Mithila, gave his daughters lavish gifts, including many 
hundreds of thousands of cows, the finest blankets, and fine silk garments. 
He also gave them beautifully adorned and godlike troops, including 
elephants, horses, chariots, and foot soldiers. The father of the brides also 
gave them an unsurpassed complement of male and female servants, as well 
as much silver, gold, pearls, and coral. 

[6-10] With the greatest delight the king, lord of Mithila, gave his 
daughters unsurpassed gifts. Then, having conferred enormous wealth upon 
them, he took his leave of Dasaratha, lord of the earth, and returned home to 
Mithila. The king, lord of Ayodhya, and his great sons, however, placed all 
the seers before them and departed with their army and attendants. But as 
the tiger among men was proceeding on his way with the Raghavas and his 
company of seers, birds shrieked dreadful cries at him from all sides while 
all terrestrial beasts circled him reverently. Observing this, the tiger among 


kings inquired of Vasistha: “The birds are savage and dreadful, and yet the 
beasts would seem to augur well. What is this that makes my heart tremble 
so? My thoughts are filled with misgivings.” 

[11-15] When the great seer heard King Dasaratha’s words, he replied in 
sweet words: “I shall tell you the meaning of this. That which has issued 
from the mouths of the birds in the sky signifies a terrible and imminent 
danger. But the beasts indicate that this danger will be averted. You need 
have no anxiety.” As they were discussing this, a sudden wind arose, 
shaking the whole earth and knocking down the lovely trees. The sun was 
shrouded in darkness, and it was impossible to see in any direction. 
Everything was covered with ash; the entire army stood stupefied. Only 
Vasistha and the other seers, the king, and his sons remained conscious. The 
others fell, senseless. 

[16—22] In that dreadful darkness, with their whole army covered in ash, 
they saw a dreadful-looking man as unassailable as Mount Kailasa and as 
irresistible as the fire of universal destruction. Wearing a coil of matted hair, 
he was impossible for ordinary people to look upon, for he seemed to be 
blazing with some extraordinary energy. With his battle-axe slung over one 
shoulder and a bow—a streak of lightning it seemed—and mighty arrow in 
his hand, he looked like Hara, destroyer of Tripura. Seeing this dreadful- 
looking man, blazing like fire, the purifier, Vasistha and the other brahman 
sages, devoted to prayer and sacrifice, gathered together and discussed the 
matter among themselves, saying: “Surely he does not intend once more to 
exterminate the kshatriyas in his rage over his father’s murder. For, long 
ago, when he had slaughtered the kshatriyas, he was freed from his anger 
and grief. Surely he does not mean to exterminate them again!” When they 
had taken counsel in this fashion, the seers took guest-offerings and spoke 
sweet words to the dreadful Bhargava, calling, “Rama! Rama!” The 
valorous Rama Jamadagnya accepted the homage of the seers. Then he 
turned to Rama Dasarathi and spoke. 


Sarga 74 
[1-4] “Mighty Rama Dasarathi, I have heard all about your extraordinary 
might and how you broke the bow. It is extraordinary, almost inconceivable, 
that you should have broken that bow; and so, when I heard about it, I came 
here with yet another splendid bow. Now show me how mighty you really 


are. You must nock an arrow to this, Jamadagni’s great bow, so dreadful to 
behold. If I see that you have strength enough to nock an arrow to this bow, 
then I shall challenge you to single combat, which is praised by men of 
might.” 

[S—9] When King Dasaratha heard these words, his face fell. Filled with 
despair, he cupped his hands in reverence and spoke: “Your wrath against 
the kshatriyas has now subsided, and you are a brahman of great renown. 
Please grant safe passage to my sons, for they are mere boys. You were 
born in the House of the Bhargavas, ever engaged in vedic studies and holy 
vows. Moreover, you made a promise before thousand-eyed Indra and laid 
your weapons down. Concerned only with righteousness, you gave the earth 
to Kasyapa and retired to the forest to make your home on Mount 
Mahendra. Great sage, you have come to destroy everything I have. For if 
Rama is killed, none of us will survive.” 

[10-16] Even though DasSaratha was speaking in this fashion, the valiant 
Jamadagnya paid no heed to his words, but spoke directly to Rama: 
“Visvakarman, god of craft, skillfully wrought two divine bows—splendid, 
world famous, indestructible, and powerful. The one you broke, Kakutstha, 
best of men, was the bow that destroyed the three cities after the gods gave 
it to three-eyed Siva, who was thirsting for battle. But, Kakutstha, the 
foremost of the gods gave this, the second of those invincible bows, just as 
powerful as Rudra’s, to Visnu. Then all the gods, in their desire to 
determine the relative strength of Visnu and black-throated Siva, questioned 
Grandfather Brahma. Understanding the purpose of the gods, Grandfather 
Brahma, most truthful of all, provoked a quarrel between the two. Out of 
that quarrel arose a great hair-raising battle between Visnu and black- 
throated Siva, each of whom desired to defeat the other. 

[17-22] “Then, by means of the syllable ‘Hum,’ Siva’s awesomely 
powerful bow was unstrung, and the great three-eyed god himself was 
paralyzed. The gods who had assembled along with hosts of seers and 
celestial bards entreated the two greatest of gods so that they made peace. 
Seeing that Siva’s bow had been unstrung by Visnu’s valor, the gods and 
hosts of seers judged Visnu to be the greater of the two. But the glorious 
Rudra was still angry and gave his bow and arrows into the hands of the 
royal seer Devarata of Videha. But this, Rama, is Visnu’s bow, a conqueror 
of enemy citadels. Visnu gave it as a sacred trust to the Bhargava sage 


Rcitka. And mighty Rcika gave the divine bow to his son, my father, the 
great Jamadagni, unrivaled in his deeds. 

[23—28] “But when my father had laid his weapons down and was armed 
only with the might of his austerities, Arjuna, acting on a base thought, 
brought about his death. In my rage at learning of the unparalleled and 
brutal murder of my father, I exterminated the kshatriyas—generation after 
generation, time and time again. Having thus conquered the whole earth, 
Rama, I gave it away as a fee to great Kasyapa, holy in his deeds, at the end 
of a sacrifice. Then, as I was dwelling on Mount Mahendra, armed only 
with the might of my austerities, I heard about the breaking of the bow and 
came here as swiftly as I could. Rama, here is Visnu’s great bow, which 
belonged to my father and my grandfather before him. Now take it and 
follow the code of the kshatriyas. This arrow is a conqueror of enemy 
citadels. Nock it to this best of bows if you can, Kakutstha. Then I shall 
challenge you to single combat.” 


Sarga 75 

[1-8] When Dasarathi had heard the words of Rama Jamadagnya, he 
replied, tempering his response out of respect for his father: “Bhargava, I 
have heard about the feat you accomplished. We respect it, brahman, for 
you were only discharging your debt to your father. But, Bhargava, you 
regard me as if I were some weakling, incapable of upholding the code of 
the kshatriyas. Now you shall witness my strength and valor for yourself.” 
And so saying, Raghava, with rapid stride, angrily snatched the superb 
weapon and the arrow from Bhargava’s hand. Stringing the bow, Rama 
nocked the arrow to the string. Then Rama addressed Rama Jamadagnya in 
wrath, saying: “I owe you reverence both because you are a brahman and 
for the sake of Visvamitra. Therefore, Rama, I cannot loose this deadly 
arrow upon you. However, I shall destroy either your retreat or the 
incomparable worlds you have won through the power of your austerity. 
The choice is yours. For the divine arrow of Visnu, which conquers enemy 
citadels and crushes with its power all pride in strength, never flies in vain.” 

[9-15] At this, the gods and hosts of seers put Grandfather Brahma at 
their head and assembled there in their ranks to witness Rama holding that 
great weapon. The gandharvas, apsarases, perfected beings, celestial bards, 
kinnaras, yaksas, raksasas, and great serpents also came to see that great 


marvel. Then, as the world stood stunned and Rama held the great bow, 
Rama Jamadagnya, robbed of his strength, stared at Rama. Jamadagnya was 
stunned to feel his strength sapped by the power of lotus-eyed Rama and 
spoke to him in a voice grown very faint: “Long ago, when I gave the earth 
to Kasyapa, he told me, ‘You may not stay in my realm.’ Therefore, 
Kakutstha, in obedience to my guru Kasyapa’s words, I made him this 
promise, ‘Never again will I spend a night on earth.’ Therefore, heroic 
Raghava, please do not destroy my retreat. I shall go there with the speed of 
thought, to Mahendra, best of mountains. 

[16-23] “But with this great arrow, Rama, you may destroy the 
incomparable worlds that I have won through my austerities. Let there be 
no delay. From the way you handle the bow, I know you to be Visnu, lord of 
the gods, and the imperishable slayer of Madhu. Hail, destroyer of your 
foes. All the hosts of gods assembled here bear witness that you are 
incomparable in your deeds and unrivaled in battle. And so, Kakutstha, I 
need not be ashamed of being bested by you, the Lord of the three worlds. 
Rama, you are true to your vows; you must loose this incomparable arrow. 
Once the arrow is released, I shall depart for Mahendra, best of mountains.” 
And so, when Rama Jamadagnya had finished speaking, the majestic and 
valorous Rama Dasarathi released the great arrow. At once, all the cardinal 
and intermediate directions were freed from darkness, and Rama, still 
holding his weapon aloft, was praised by the gods and hosts of seers. Lord 
Rama Jamadagnya then praised Rama DasSarathi and, after circling him 
reverently, went back to his retreat. 


Sarga 76 

[1-5] Once Rama had gone, Rama Dasarathi, calm once more, gave the 
bow and arrow into the hands of immeasurable Varuna. Then Rama, delight 
of the Raghus, made obeisance to Vasistha and the other seers. Turning to 
his dazed father, he spoke: “Rama Jamadagnya is gone. Let the four 
divisions of the army proceed toward Ayodhya, under the protection of you, 
its lord.” Upon hearing Rama’s words, King Dasaratha took his son 
Raghava in his arms and kissed him on the head. For the king was 
overjoyed at hearing the words “Rama is gone,” and, in his delight, he 
urged his army on and soon reached his city. 


[6-8] Adorned with flags and pennants on staffs and echoing with the 
sound of musical instruments and song, it was lovely as the king entered it. 
Its royal highways were sprinkled with water, and it was beautiful with 
bouquets of flowers scattered everywhere. It was adorned with throngs of 
people, jammed with townsfolk crying out blessings, their faces gladdened 
at the entrance of the king. Kausalya, Sumitra, fair-waisted Kaikeyi, and the 
king’s other wives busied themselves with receiving the brides. 

[9-12] The king’s wives welcomed illustrious Sita, renowned Urmila, 
and the two daughters of Kusadhvaja. Clad in silken garments and greeted 
with blessings, they went at once to worship at the shrines of the gods. 
Then, once they had made obeisance to everyone worthy of it, all the 
princesses in great delight made love with their husbands in their private 
chambers. Having thus acquired wives and divine weapons, those bulls 
among men, surrounded by wealth and friends, passed their days in the 
service of their father. 

[13-18] But the world-renowned and truly valorous Rama surpassed 
them all in virtue, as self-existent Brahma surpasses all beings. And so 
Rama passed many seasons with Sita, devoted to her and absorbed in her. 
And she kept him ever in her heart. Sita was naturally dear to Rama, for she 
was the wife her father had given him. Yet, because of her virtue and 
beauty, his love grew greater still. And yet, in her heart, she cherished her 
husband twice as much. Even their innermost hearts spoke clearly one to 
the other. But even so, Maithili, Janaka’s daughter, lovely as a goddess and 
beautiful even as Sri, knew his innermost heart especially well. In the 
company of that lovely and noble princess who loved him so dearly, Rama, 
son of a royal seer, was as well adorned as is Lord Visnu, lord of the 
immortal gods, by Sri. 

The end of the Balakanda. 


a Emendation: see PVR 1: 318. 


Chapter 2 
The Ayodhyakanda 


Sarga 1 
[1-4] Time passed, and then one day King Dasaratha, the delight of the 
Raghus, spoke to Bharata, his son by Kaikeyt: “My mighty son, your 
mother’s brother Yudhajit, the son of the king of Kekaya, has come and is 
waiting to take you back home with him.” When he had heard what 
Dagaratha said, Kaikeyi’s son, Bharata, prepared to depart with Satrughna. 
Taking leave of his father, of tireless Rama, and of his mothers, the hero, 
the best of men, went off with Satrughna. 

[5-9] Delighted to have Bharata and Satrughna with him, mighty 
Yudhayjit returned to his native city, to the great satisfaction of his father. 
There, Bharata lived with his brother, enjoying the warm hospitality of his 
uncle ASvapati, who showered him with all the affection one shows a son. 
And yet, as the mighty brothers stayed on, their every desire satisfied, they 
often thought with longing of aged King DasSaratha. The great king likewise 
often thought of his two absent sons, Bharata and Satrughna, the equals of 
great Indra and Varuna. For he cherished every one of those four bulls 
among men, his sons, as if they were four arms extending from his body. 

[10-14] But still, of all of them, it was mighty Rama who brought his 
father the greatest joy. For he surpassed his brothers in virtue, just as the 
self-existent Brahma surpasses all other beings. In Bharata’s absence Rama 
and powerful Laksmana showed reverence to their godlike father. 
Following his father’s orders, righteous Rama did all that was required to 
please and benefit the people of the city. He scrupulously did all that his 
mothers required of him and attended to his gurus’ requirements with strict 
punctuality. Thus, Dasaratha was pleased with Rama’s conduct and 
character, as were the brahmans, the merchants, and all who lived in the 
realm. 

[15—21] Rama was always even-tempered and kind spoken. Even if he 
were to be harshly addressed, he would not answer back. He would be 


satisfied with a single act of kindness, whatever its motive, and would 
ignore a hundred injuries, so great was his self-control. With good men— 
men advanced in years, virtue, and wisdom—he would converse at every 
opportunity, even during breaks in his weapons practice. He was of noble 
descent on both sides of his family, he was upright and cheerful, truthful, 
and honest. Aged twice-born brahmans had seen to his training, men who 
were wise in the ways of righteousness and statecraft. And thus he 
understood the true nature of righteousness, statecraft, and personal 
pleasure. He was retentive and insightful, knowledgeable, and adept in the 
social proprieties. He was learned in the sastras and skilled in the practice 
of them as well. ?7He was an excellent judge of men and could tell when it 
was appropriate to show his favor or withhold it. He knew the right means 
for collecting revenue and the accepted way of regulating expenditure. He 
had achieved preeminence in the sum total of the sdstras, even the most 
complex. 

[22—28] Only after satisfying the claims of righteousness and statecraft 
would he give himself up to pleasure, and then never immoderately. He was 
a connoisseur of the fine arts and understood all aspects of political life. He 
was proficient in training and riding horses and elephants, eminently 
knowledgeable in the science of weapons, and esteemed throughout the 
world as a master chariot-warrior. He could head a charge and give battle 
and lead an army skillfully. He was invincible in combat, even if the gods 
and asuras themselves were to unite in anger against him. He was never 
spiteful, haughty, or envious, and he had mastered his anger. He would 
never look down on any creature nor bow to the will of time. By his 
eminent virtues the prince won the esteem of people throughout all the three 
worlds, for he was patient as the earth, wise as Brhaspati, and mighty as 
Indra, Saci’s lord. Rama’s virtues were prized by all the people, a source of 
joy to his father, and lent the prince himself such splendor as the sun derives 
from its shining beams. His conduct and invincible valor made him so like 
one of the world guardians that Earth herself desired to have him as her 
master. 

[29-33] Now, as King DaSaratha, slayer of enemies, observed the many 
incomparable virtues of his son, he fell to thinking. In his heart he cherished 
this single joyous thought: “When shall I see my dear son consecrated? His 
one desire is that the world should prosper, he shows compassion to all 


creatures, and is loved in the world even more than I, like a cloud laden 
with rain. He is as mighty as Yama or Sakra, wise as Brhaspati, steady as a 
mountain, and far richer in virtues than I. Oh that at my age I might go to 
heaven seeing my son holding sway over this entire land.” 

[34-37] Recognizing that his son was endowed with all these 
consummate virtues, the great king consulted with his advisers and chose 
him to be prince regent. The lord of the earth then convened the chief men 
of the land from the various cities and provinces in which they lived. The 
kings arrived and in the different places he assigned to them, they solemnly 
took their seats, facing the king. The lord of men paid his respects to the 
nobles and the men of the city and provinces, and, as they sat deferentially 
around him, he resembled Indra, the thousand-eyed lord, surrounded by the 
deathless gods. 


Sarga 2 

[1—7] King Dasaratha, lord of the earth, called the whole assembly to order, 
and, rumbling like a storm cloud, his loud voice deep and resonant as a war 
drum, he made this incomparable speech to their delight and benefit: “The 
whole world has long been under the protection of Iksvaku kings. It is my 
desire to ensure its well-being, for continued happiness is its due. I myself 
have always kept to the path my ancestors followed and watched over my 
subjects unremittingly, to the best of my ability. And in my striving for the 
benefit of the entire world, my body has grown old in the shade of the white 
parasol. I have lived a life of many countless years, and now I crave repose 
for this aged body of mine. I have grown weary bearing the burden of 
righteousness for the world. For it is heavy, one must have self-discipline to 
bear it and the royal powers it encompasses. 

[8-12] “Therefore, with the approval of all you twice-born men 
assembled here, I seek respite by entrusting my subjects’ welfare to the care 
of my son. My eldest son was born resembling me in every virtue. He is a 
conqueror of enemy fortresses, as powerful as Indra, smasher of citadels. It 
is my pleasure to invest Rama, champion of righteousness and bull among 
men, with the office of prince regent, a union as propitious as the moon’s 
with the constellation Pusya. The majestic eldest brother of Laksmana will 
be a fit and proper master for you. Indeed, the three worlds all together 


would find a superior master in him. Once I have ensured the well-being of 
this land by entrusting it to this son of mine, I shall be free from care.” 

[13-17] When the king had spoken in this fashion, the nobles rejoiced at 
his words like peacocks at the rumble of a rain-laden cloud. They fully 
recognized that the aim of their aged king, Dasaratha, was embraced in the 
wisdom of righteousness and statecraft, and when they had reflected upon 
it, they replied: “You are old, your majesty, and have lived many countless 
years. You should consecrate Rama as prince regent of the land.” But when 
the king heard their reply, he pretended not to know it was their heart’s 
desire, and in order to test them he asked: “How can it be that, while I am 
ruling the land in righteousness, you want to see my son become prince 
regent?” 

[18—22] In concert with the men of the city and provinces the nobles 
answered great Dasaratha: “Your majesty, the virtues of your son are many 
and excellent. They are divine virtues, which make valiant Rama the equal 
of Sakra and elevate him far above all other Iksvakus, lord of the people. 
All the world knows Rama to be a decent man, for truth and righteousness 
are his first concern. And he is wise in the ways of righteousness, true to his 
word, a man of character, and never spiteful. He is forbearing, conciliatory, 
kind spoken, grateful, and self-disciplined. He is gentle, firm of purpose, 
ever capable, and unspiteful. Raghava speaks kindly to all people, and yet 
he always tells the truth. He shows reverence for aged and deeply learned 
brahmans. 

[23-27] “Because of this, his fame among us is without equal and his 
glory and power have steadily grown. He is proficient in the use of all the 
weapons of the gods, asuras, and men. Whenever he goes forth with 
Saumitri to battle in defense of a village or city, he always returns 
triumphant. And when returning from battle on chariot or elephant, Rama 
always stops to ask the men of the city after their welfare as if they were his 
kinsmen—about their sons, sacred fires, and wives as well as their hosts of 
servants, and students, without omission and in due order, just as a father 
might ask his own flesh-and-blood sons, asking them: ‘Do your students 
obey you? Are they prompt in their tasks?’ This is how Rama, tiger among 
men, always questions us. 

[28-34] “When misfortune strikes anyone, Rama feels the sorrow 
keenly, and he takes the pleasure a father might in all the people’s 


celebrations. He is a great archer, a man who tells the truth, who seeks the 
counsel of the aged and is master of his senses. How fortunate you are to be 
blessed with a son like your Raghava, who, like Marica Kasyapa, has every 
virtue a son should have. The people of the kingdom and in this the 
foremost of cities wish the celebrated Rama strength, health, and long life— 
all the people of the city and the provinces, outsiders as well as intimates. 
And at dawn and at dusk women young and old alike devoutly worship all 
the gods for glorious Rama’s sake. By your grace, O lord, let what they pray 
for come to pass. Grant, great king, that we may see Rama become prince 
regent, your son who is dark as the blue lotus and deadly to his every 
enemy. O lord, your godlike son is committed to the good of all the world, 
and so for our good, granter of boons, please consecrate the exalted prince 
joyfully and without delay.” 


Sarga 3 

[1-7] All around him they held out their hands, cupped like lotuses in 
reverence, and the king acknowledged them, adding these kind and 
beneficial words: “Ah, how overjoyed I am. You have magnified my 
grandeur beyond all measure that you should want my beloved eldest son to 
become prince regent.” When the king had paid the brahmans this honor in 
return, he addressed Vasistha and Vamadeva as the others stood listening: 
“This is the majestic and auspicious month of Caitra, when the woods are in 
full bloom. Let all the preparations be made for R&ma’s installation as 
prince regent.” “It shall be done just as you command,” the two bulls 
among twice-born brahmans replied with joy and delight as_ they 
approached the lord of the world. Then the splendid king said to Sumantra: 
“Please bring Rama, my accomplished son, here at once.” Sumantra 
assented with the words “So be it” and, by order of the king, went in his 
chariot to fetch Rama, best of chariot-warriors. 

[8—13] Meanwhile, the kings who were seated there—the eastern, 
northern, western, and southern kings, adryan and barbarian, and others who 
lived in the forest and mountain regions—all paid homage to King 
Dasaratha, as the gods do to Vasava. From the terrace of the palace where 
he stood in their midst like Vasava among the Maruts, the royal seer 
watched his son approaching in his chariot. Rama was the very image of the 
king of gandharvas, and renowned throughout the world for his manliness 


as well. His arms were long, his strength immense, and he carried himself 
like a bull elephant in rut. He was extremely handsome and his face had the 
lovely glow of moonlight. With his beauty and nobility he ravished both the 
sight and the hearts of men. He was like the rain that refreshes people 
parched by summer’s heat, and the lord of men could not get enough of 
gazing at him as he drew near. 

[14-16] Sumantra helped Raghava down from his splendid chariot and 
followed at the rear, his hands cupped in reverence, as Rama made his way 
into his father’s presence. Accompanied by the charioteer, Raghava, bull 
among men, went to see his father, ascending to the rooftop terrace as lofty 
as Mount Kailasa’s peak. With his hands cupped in reverence, Rama came 
before his father. He prostrated himself and, announcing his name, did 
obeisance at his father’s feet. 

[17-20] Gazing at his dear son bowed down beside him with his hands 
cupped in reverence, the king drew him up by his clasped hands and 
embraced him. The majestic king then directed Rama to the throne made 
ready for him, a splendid one brilliantly set with gems and gold. As 
Raghava sat down, the throne seemed to glow more brightly still from the 
prince’s own luster, like Mount Meru when the bright sun rises. As the 
autumnal sky, for all its bright planets and constellations, is illuminated still 
further by the moon, so was the assembly hall lit up by the radiance Rama 
shed. 

[21—28] Dasaratha observed his dear son with keen satisfaction. It was as 
if he were looking in a mirror and seeing an enhanced reflection of himself. 
The king, and most blessed of fathers, turned to his son with a smile and, in 
words Kasyapa might once have used with Indra, lord of the gods, he said: 
“Rama, my dear son, you were born of my eldest wife—a worthy son of a 
worthy woman—and you are most virtuous. Moreover, since through your 
virtues you have won the loyalty of these my subjects, you shall become 
prince regent on the day of the lunar mansion Pusya’s conjunction. You are 
by nature disciplined and virtuous, as much as one could desire. But still, in 
spite of these virtues, I shall give you some beneficial advice, my son, 
because of my affection for you. Impose even stricter discipline on yourself, 
exercise constant self-control, and avoid all the vices that spring from desire 
and anger. Actively concern yourself with both overt and covert activities, 
to retain the loyalty of all your subjects, from the ministers down. He who 


protects the earth while keeping the people content and loyal will give his 
allies cause to rejoice as did the immortal gods when they obtained nectar. 
So restrain yourself, my son, and behave in this fashion.” 

[29-32] When Rama’s loving friends heard this speech, they quickly 
hurried off to inform Kausalya. That excellent lady directed that gold and 
cows and an assortment of precious objects be given to those who brought 
the news. Raghava, meanwhile, after doing obeisance to the king, mounted 
the chariot and started back to his splendid dwelling amid the acclaim of the 
multitude. When the townsfolk heard the king’s announcement, it was as if 
they had secured some longed-for object, and, on taking leave of the lord of 
men, they went home and worshiped the gods in deep delight. 


Sarga 4 

[1-4] Once the townsfolk had gone, the king held further consultation with 
his counselors. When he learned what they had determined, the lord 
declared with determination: “Tomorrow is the day of the Pusya asterism, 
so tomorrow my son Rama, his eyes as coppery as lotuses, shall be 
consecrated as prince regent.” Retiring then to his private chamber, King 
DaSsaratha instructed his charioteer Sumantra to fetch Rama once again. 
Upon receiving his orders the charioteer set out at once for Rama’s abode to 
fetch him. 

[S—7] The guards informed Rama that Sumantra had returned, and as 
soon as he learned of his arrival he felt uneasy. Rama had him shown in at 
once, saying: “Tell me the reason for your returning, omitting nothing.” The 
charioteer replied: “The king wishes to see you. Such is the message, but 
you of course must be the judge of whether to go or not.” 

[8—10] Such were the charioteer’s words, and, upon hearing them, Rama 
hastily went to the palace to see the lord of men once more. When King 
Dasaratha heard that Rama had arrived, he had him shown into his chamber, 
anxious to pass on the wonderful news. As majestic Raghava entered the 
residence he caught sight of his father, and, at a distance, prostrated himself, 
cupping his hands in reverence. 

[11-16] Rama bowed low until the protector of the earth bade him rise 
and embraced him. Then, directing him to a splendid seat, the king once 
again addressed him: “Rama, I am old, my life has been long. I have 
enjoyed all the pleasures I desired. I have performed hundreds of sacrifices 


rich in food, with lavish priestly stipends. The child I desired—and you are 
he—was born to me, a son who has no peer on earth today, the very best of 
men. I have given alms, offered sacrifices, and studied the scriptures. I have 
experienced every pleasure, everything I wanted—and thus, my mighty son, 
I have discharged all my debts, to the gods, the seers, my ancestors, the 
brahmans, and to myself. There is nothing further required of me except 
your consecration. Therefore, you must do for me what I am about to tell 
you. All my subjects today expressed their wish to have you for their king, 
and so, my dear son, I will consecrate you as prince regent. 

[17-20] “But there is more, Rama. I have had dreams _ lately, 
inauspicious, ominous dreams. Great meteors and lightning bolts have been 
falling here out of a clear sky with a terrible crash. The astrologers also 
have informed me, Rama, that my birth star is obstructed by hostile planets, 
Mars, Rahu, and the sun. When such portents as these appear, it usually 
means a king is about to die or meet with some dreadful misfortune. You 
must therefore have yourself consecrated, Raghava, before my resolve fails 
me. For the minds of men are changeable. 

[21-27] “Today the moon has reached Punarvasu, just to the east of 
Pusya; tomorrow, the astrologers predict, its conjunction with Pusya is 
certain. On this very Pusya day you must have yourself consecrated—I feel 
a sense of great urgency. Tomorrow, slayer of enemies, I will consecrate 
you as prince regent. Therefore, today you and your wife must take a vow 
to remain chaste this night, to fast and sleep upon a bed of darbha grass. 
Have your friends guard you warily today at every turn, for there are many 
impediments to affairs of this sort. And I believe the best time for your 
consecration is precisely while Bharata is absent from the city. Granted, 
your brother keeps to the ways of the virtuous, defers to his elder brother, 
and is righteous, compassionate, and _ self-disciplined. Nonetheless, 
Raghava, it is my firm belief that the mind of man is inconstant, even the 
mind of a good man constant in righteousness. Even such a man 1s best 
presented with an accomplished fact.” 

[28—33] Once he had been informed that his consecration was set for the 
next day, Rama was given leave to go, and, after doing obeisance to his 
father, he went to his dwelling. In keeping with the king’s instructions 
regarding the consecration, he entered his house but then left immediately 
and went to his mother’s apartments. There in the shrine-room he saw her, 


clothed in linen, solemnly and silently praying for his royal fortune. Sumitra 
and Laksmana had already come, and Sita had been sent for as soon as they 
heard the news of Rama’s consecration. At that moment, Kausalya stood 
with her eyes closed, while Sumitra, Sita, and Laksmana were seated 
behind her. From the moment she had received word that her son was to be 
consecrated as prince regent on the day of the Pusya asterism, she had been 
controlling her breathing and meditating on the Primal Being, Janardana. 

[34-37] As she was engaged in these observances, Rama approached her 
and did obeisance. Then, to her delight, he said: “Mother, my father has 
appointed me to the task of protecting the people. On Father’s instructions 
my consecration will take place tomorrow. And as Father, with his 
sacrificial priests and preceptors, directs, Sita and I both are to fast tonight. 
Please see to it that any auspicious rites appropriate for my consecration 
tomorrow are performed today on behalf of Vaidehi and me.” 

[38-41] Upon hearing Rama say what she had so long desired, Kausalya 
replied to Rama in words choked with tears of joy: “Rama, my child, may 
you live long. May all who block your way be vanquished. And when you 
are invested with sovereignty, may you bring joy to my kinsmen and 
Sumitra’s. Truly, it was under an auspicious constellation that I bore you, 
my dear son, since by your virtues you have won the favor of your father, 
Dasaratha. Truly, the vows of self-denial I made to the lotus-eyed Primal 
Being were not in vain, since the royal fortune of the Iksvakus will pass to 
you, my son.” 

[42-45] When Rama had been addressed in this fashion by his mother, 
he spoke, smiling slightly, to his brother, who sat humbly by with his hands 
cupped in reverence: “Laksmana, you must rule this land together with me. 
Royal sovereignty falls to your share too, for you are my second self. You 
too shall enjoy every pleasure you desire, Saumitri, and all the fruits of 
kingship. For it is for the sake of you alone, my second self, that I desire 
kingship and even life itself.’ When he had addressed Laksmana in this 
fashion, he paid obeisance to his mothers and, bidding Sita to take leave of 
them, he returned home. 


Sarga 5 
[1-6] When the lord of men had given Rama his instructions regarding the 
consecration on the following day, he summoned his purohita Vasistha and 


said: “Go, ascetic, and assist Kakutstha and his wife in undertaking a fast 
today, so that my son, a man strict in his vows, may gain majesty, glory, and 
kingship.” “So be it,” said the holy Vasistha, greatest of vedic scholars, in 
reply to the king, and he went himself to Rama’s residence. Upon reaching 
Rama’s dwelling, which resembled a bank of white clouds, the great sage 
entered and drove through the three courtyards in his chariot. In a flurry of 
excitement, Rama hurried from his house to show veneration to the 
venerable seer who had arrived. Hurrying to the side of the wise man’s 
chariot and lending him support, he helped him to climb down. 

[7-11] The purohita, noting Rama’s deference, addressed him with 
compliments, and then, to the delight of the prince, who was deserving of 
every kindness, he said: “Your father is well disposed toward you, Rama; 
you shall become prince regent. Today you and Sita must fast. For, 
tomorrow morning, the lord of men, your father, Dasaratha, will consecrate 
you as prince regent with all the joy Nahusa felt in consecrating Yayati.” 
When the sage had addressed Rama, so strict in his vows, in this fashion, he 
then instructed both him and Vaidehi with the appropriate vedic verses in 
the conduct of their fast. Then, when he had been duly honored by Rama, 
the king’s guru took leave of Kakutstha and left his residence. 

[12-16] Rama remained a while sitting there in the company of his 
affable friends. Then, with their best wishes, he took leave of them all and 
went inside. Delight filled the throngs of men and women in Rama’s house 
so that for the moment it resembled a pond of blooming lotuses where 
cheerful birds are flocking. As Vasistha emerged from R&ama’s princely 
residence, he saw the highway filled with people. Curious onlookers, crowd 
upon crowd of them, were jamming every inch of the royal highways in 
Ayodhya. Like waves, the crowds dashed together, and the royal highway 
sent up a roar of delight, like the sound the ocean makes. 

[17-24] The city was being decked with fresh wildflower garlands, 
banners run up high above the houses, the thoroughfares swept and 
sprinkled. All the people who lived in Ayodhya—women, children, and the 
aged alike—were eagerly waiting for sunrise and Rama’s consecration. 
They were anxious to witness Ayodhya’s greatest festival, a source of joy to 
the people, and an occasion for their adornment. The royal highway was so 
jammed that the purohita seemed to part a flood of people as he slowly 
made his way back to the palace. He ascended to the rooftop terrace, which 


resembled a mountain peak wreathed in white clouds, and then rejoined the 
lord of men as Brhaspati might rejoin Sakra. Seeing he had come, the king 
left his throne and questioned him, and Vasistha informed him that his 
mission had been carried out. Given leave then by his guru, the king 
dismissed the multitudes of people and withdrew into his private chamber, 
like a lion into a mountain cave. His palace, rivaling great Indra’s palace, 
was crowded with womenfolk in rich attire, and as the king entered, he shed 
over it as brilliant a light as the hare-marked moon sheds over the sky with 
its crowds of stars. 


Sarga 6 

[1-4] When the purohita had gone, Rama bathed, and then, restraining his 
desire, he worshiped Narayana in the company of his large-eyed wife. With 
bowed head he held out the oblation vessel. Then, in accordance with the 
ritual precepts, he offered the clarified butter in a blazing fire to the great 
divinity. He consumed the remains of the oblation and earnestly made his 
wish. Meditating on the god Narayana, maintaining silence and restraining 
his desire, the prince lay down to sleep with Vaidehi on a thick-spread bed 
of kusa grass in the majestic sanctuary of Visnu. 

[S—8] With one watch of the night remaining, he awoke and saw to the 
decorating of the entire house. This done, and hearing the pleasant voices of 
the bards, genealogists, and panegyrists, he began to intone his prayers in 
deep concentration, performing the morning sandhyd rites. Dressed in 
spotless linen, his head bowed low, he glorified Visnu, crusher of Madhu, 
and had the twice-born brahmans pronounce their blessings. The deep sweet 
sound of their benedictions was echoed by the sound of musical instruments 
and filled all of Ayodhya. 

[9-14] All the people who lived in Ayodhya were elated to hear that 
Raghava and Vaideht had undertaken their fast. ‘All the people of the town 
had heard about Rama’s consecration, and so, when they saw night brighten 
into dawn, they began to adorn the city. On sanctuaries that resembled 
mountain peaks wreathed in white clouds, at crossroads and thoroughfares, 
on shrines and watchtowers, on the shops of merchants rich in their many 
kinds of wares, on the majestic, rich dwellings of householders, on all the 
assembly halls, and on prominent trees, colorful banners and pennants were 
run up high. There were troupes of actors and dancers, there were minstrels 


singing, and their voices could be heard everywhere, so pleasing to the ear 
and heart. 

[15—19ab] ‘In public squares and private houses people spoke with one 
another in praise of Rama, now that his consecration was at hand. ‘Even 
children playing in groups at their front doors talked together in praise of 
Rama. The townsfolk beautified the royal highway too for Rama’s 
consecration, placing offerings of flowers there and perfuming it with 
fragrant incense. And anticipating that night would fall, they set up lantern- 
trees for illumination everywhere along the thoroughfares. Thus, the 
residents decorated their city. 

[19cd—24] Afterward, eagerly waiting for Rama’s consecration as prince 
regent, they grouped together in public squares and in assembly halls. And 
there, in conversation with one another, they sang the praises of the lord of 
the people, saying: “Ah, what a great man our king, the delight of the House 
of the Iksvakus, is to recognize that he is old and to be ready to consecrate 
Rama as king. What a blessing to us all that for a long time to come Rama 
will be the lord of the earth and our protector. For Raghava can tell good 
people from bad, he is wise and righteous and not arrogant. He loves his 
brothers and shows us the same affection he shows to them. Long live the 
righteous king, blameless Dasaratha, by whose grace we shall witness the 
consecration of Rama!” 

[25-28] As the townsfolk conversed in this fashion, the people of the 
provinces listened; for they too had come from every quarter when they got 
word of the event. The people of the provinces had come to the city from 
every quarter to witness Rama’s consecration, and they filled his city to 
overflowing. And as the waves of people rolled in, one could hear a sound 
like that of the sea when its swell is raised on a full-moon night. The city, 
resembling Indra’s residence, grew so noisy and congested everywhere with 
spectators arriving from the provinces that it looked like the ocean waters 
teeming with all the creatures of the deep. 


Sarga 7 
[1-5] Now, Kaikeyi’s family servant woman, who had lived with her from 
the time of her birth, had happened to ascend to the rooftop terrace that 
shone like the moon. From the terrace Manthara could see all of Ayodhya— 
the newly sprinkled royal highway, the lotuses and water lilies strewn 


about, the costly ornamental pennants and banners, the sprinkling of 
sandalwood water, and the crowds of freshly bathed people. Seeing a 
nursemaid standing nearby, Manthara asked: “Why is Rama’s mother so 
delighted and giving away money to people, when she has always been so 
miserly? Tell me, why are the people displaying such boundless delight? 
Has something happened to delight the lord of the earth? What is he 
planning to do?” 

[6-8] Bursting with delight and out of sheer gladness, the nursemaid told 
the hunchback Manthara about the greater majesty in store for Raghava: 
“Tomorrow, the day of the Pusya asterism, King DaSaratha will consecrate 
as prince regent Rama Raghava, the blameless prince who has mastered his 
anger.” When she heard what the nursemaid said, the hunchback was 
furious and descended at once from the terrace that was like the peak of 
Mount Kailasa. 

[9-13] Consumed with rage, the malevolent Manthara approached 
Kaikeyi as she lay upon her couch, and said: “Get up, you foolish woman! 
How can you lie there when danger is threatening you? Don’t you realize 
that a flood of misery is about to overwhelm you? Your beautiful face has 
lost its charm. You boast of the power of your beauty, but it has proved to 
be as fleeting as a river’s current in the hot season.” Addressed in this 
fashion, KaikeyI was deeply distraught at the bitter words of the angry, 
malevolent hunchback. “Manthara,” she replied, “is something wrong? I 
can tell by the distress in your face how sorely troubled you are.” 

[14—18] But when the wrathful Manthara heard Kaikeyi’s gentle words, 
she, clever speaker that she was, began to speak. The hunchback grew even 
more distraught and, with Kaikeyi’s best interests at heart, spoke out, trying 
to sharpen her distress and turn her against Raghava: “Something very bad 
is going on, my lady, something that threatens to ruin you. For King 
Dasaratha is going to consecrate Rama as prince regent. I felt myself 
sinking down into unfathomable danger, stricken with grief and sorrow, 
burning as if on fire. And so I have come here, with your best interests at 
heart. For when you are sorrowful, Kaikeyi, I am too, even more so, and 
when you prosper, so do I. There is not the slightest doubt of this. 

[19-26] “You were born into a family of kings, you are a queen of the 
lord of the earth. My lady, how can you fail to know that the ways of kings 
are ruthless? Your husband talks of righteousness, but he is deceiving you; 


his words are gentle, but he is cruel. You are too innocent to understand, 
and so he has utterly defrauded you like this. When it is expedient to do so, 
your husband reassures you, but it is all worthless. But now that there is 
something of real worth he is ready to bestow it upon Kausalya. Having 
gotten Bharata out of the way by sending him off to your family, the wicked 
man is going to establish Rama in unchallenged kingship tomorrow. He is 
an enemy pretending to be your husband. He is like a viper, child, whom 
you have taken to your bosom and lovingly mothered. For what an enemy 
or a serpent would do if one ignored them, King DaSaratha is now doing to 
you and your son. The man is evil, his assurances false, and, by establishing 
Rama in the kingship, you dear child who has always known comfort, he 
will bring ruin upon you and your family. Kaikeyt, the time has come to act 
for your own good, and you must do so swiftly. You must save your son, 
yourself, and me, my enchanting beauty.” 

[27-30] When she had heard Manthara’s speech, the lovely woman rose 
from the couch and presented the hunchback with a lovely piece of jewelry. 
And when she had given the hunchback the jewelry, Kaikey1, most beautiful 
of women, said in delight to Manthara: “What you have told me is the most 
wonderful news. How else may I reward you, Manthara, for reporting such 
good news to me? For I draw no distinction between Rama and Bharata, 
and so I am perfectly content that the king should consecrate Rama as king. 
You could not possibly tell me better news than this, nor speak more 
welcome words, my well-deserving woman. For what you have told me I 
will give you yet another boon, something you might like even more—just 
choose it!” 


Sarga 8 
[1—5] ‘But Manthara was beside herself with rage and sorrow. She threw the 
jewelry away and said spitefully: “You foolish woman, how can you be 
delighted at such a moment? Are you not aware that you stand in the midst 
of a sea of grief? It is Kausalya who is fortunate; it is her son the eminent 
twice-born brahmans will consecrate as the powerful prince regent 
tomorrow, the day of the Pusya asterism. Once Kausalya secures this great 
object of joy, she will cheerfully eliminate her enemies. And, like a servant, 
you will have to wait on her with your hands cupped in reverence. Delight 


is truly in store for Rama’s exalted women, and all that is in store for your 
daughters-in-law is misery at Bharata’s downfall.” 

[6-10] Seeing how deeply distressed Manthara was as she spoke, Queen 
Kaikeyi began to extol Rama’s virtues: “Rama knows what is right, his 
gurus have taught him self-restraint. He is grateful, truthful, and honest, and 
as the king’s eldest son, he deserves to be prince regent. He will protect his 
brothers and his dependents like a father; and long may he live! How can 
you be upset, hunchback, at learning of Rama’s consecration? Surely 
Bharata as well, the bull among men, will obtain the kingship of his fathers 
and forefathers after Rama’s one hundred years. Why should you be upset, 
Manthara, when we have prospered in the past, and prosper now, and shall 
have good fortune in the future? For he obeys me even more scrupulously 
than he does Kausalya.” 

[11-13] But when Manthara heard what Kaikeyi said, she was yet more 
sorely troubled. She heaved a long and hot sigh and then replied: “You are 
too simpleminded to see what is good for you and what is not. You are not 
aware that you are sinking in a vast ocean of misery fraught with disaster 
and grief. Raghava will be king, Kaikeyi, and then the son of Raghava, 
while Bharata will be utterly excluded from the royal succession. 

[14-19] “For not all the sons of a king stand in line for the kingship, my 
lovely. Were all of them to be so placed, grave misfortune would ensue. 
That is why kings place the powers of kingship in the hands of the eldest, 
faultless Kaikey1, no matter how virtuous the others may be. Like a man 
without a protector, your son, the object of your maternal affection, will be 
cast out from the royal succession and from its pleasures as well. Here I am, 
come on your behalf, but you pay me no heed. Instead, you want to reward 
me in token of your rival’s good luck! Surely once Rama secures 
unchallenged kingship he will have Bharata sent off to some other country 
—if not to the other world! And yet you sent Bharata, a mere boy, away to 
your brother’s, while proximity breeds affection even among insentient 
creatures. 

[20-27] “Now, Raghava will protect Laksmana, just as Saumitri will 
protect Rama, for their brotherly love is as celebrated among the people as 
that of the Asvins. And so Rama will do no harm to Laksmana, but he will 
—undoubtedly—to Bharata. So let your son go straight from Rajagrha to 
the forest. That is the course I favor, and it is very much in your own best 


interests. For in this way good fortune may still befall your side of the 
family—if, that is, Bharata secures, as he rightfully should, the kingship of 
his forefathers. Your child has known only comfort, but he is Rama’s 
natural enemy. How could the one, with his fortunes lost, live under the 
sway of the other, whose fortunes are thriving? Like the leader of an 
elephant herd attacked by a lion in the forest, your son is about to be 
overwhelmed by Rama. You must save him! Then, too, because of your 
beauty’s power, you used to spurn your co-wife, R&ama’s mother, so proudly. 
How could she fail to repay that enmity? When Rama secures control of the 
land, Bharata will surely be destroyed. You must therefore devise some way 
of making your son the king and banishing his enemy this very day.” 


Sarga 9 
[1-7] When Kaikeyt had been addressed in this fashion by Manthara, 
whose face was glowing with rage, she heaved a long, hot sigh and replied 
to her: “Today, at once, I will have Rama banished to the forest, and, at the 
same time, have Bharata consecrated as prince regent. But now, Manthara, 
you must envision some means through which Bharata, and not Rama, may 
secure the kingship.” Addressed thus by Queen Kaikeyi, the malevolent 
Manthara answered her, to the ruin of R&ama’s fortunes: “Look here, 
Kaikeyi—and pay close attention—I shall tell you how your son Bharata 
may secure exclusive kingship.” Upon hearing Manthara’s words, Kaikeyi 
half rose from her sumptuously spread couch and cried: “Tell me a plan, 
Manthara, through which Bharata, and not Rama, may secure the kingship.” 

[8-11] Addressed by the queen in this fashion, the malevolent 
hunchback answered her, to the ruin of Rama’s fortunes: “Once, during a 
battle between the gods and asuras, your husband went with the royal seers 
to lend assistance to the king of the gods, and he took you along. He set off 
toward the south, Kaikeyi, to the Dandakas and the city called Vaijayanta. It 
was there that the great asura of a hundred powers of illusion Timidhvaja 
ruled, the same one who is called Sambara. He had given battle to Sakra, 
and even the host of gods could not defeat him. 

[12-15] “During that great battle, King Dasaratha was_ struck 
unconscious, but you, my lady, conveyed him out of battle. But there, too, 
your husband was wounded by weapons, and once again you saved him, my 
lovely. And so, in his gratitude, he granted you two boons. Then, my lady, 


you said to your husband, ‘I shall choose my two boons when I want them,’ 
and the great king consented. I myself was unaware of this, my lady, until 
you yourself told me a long time ago. You must now demand these two 
boons of your husband: the consecration of Bharata and the banishment of 
Rama for fourteen years. 

[16—21] “Now, you must enter into the chamber where you go when you 
are angry, daughter of Asvapati, as if in a fit of rage. Put on a dirty garment, 
lie down on the bare ground, and do not speak to or even look at him. You 
have undoubtedly always been your husband’s favorite. For your sake the 
great king would even enter fire, the eater of oblations. The king cannot 
bring himself to anger you, nor even bear to look at you when you are 
angry. He would even give up his own life to please you. The lord of the 
earth is powerless to refuse your demands. Foolish girl, recognize the power 
of your beauty. King Dasaratha will offer gems, pearls, gold, a whole array 
of precious gifts—but pay no mind to them. Just keep reminding Dasaratha 
of those two boons he granted at the battle of the gods and asuras. 
Illustrious lady, you must not let this opportunity pass you by. 

[22—26] “Then, when the great king Raghava helps you up himself and 
offers you a boon, you must ask him for this one, first making sure he 
swears to it: ‘Banish Rama to the forest for nine years and five, and make 
Bharata the king and bull among kings.’ In this way, Rama, once banished, 
will become the disfavored prince, and your Bharata, his rival eliminated, 
will be king. And by the time Rama returns from the forest, your steadfast 
son and his supporters will have struck deep roots and won over the 
populace. I think it high time you overcame your timidity. You must 
forcibly prevent the king from carrying out Rama’s consecration.” 

[27-33] And so Manthara induced her to accept such evil by disguising 
it as good, and Kaikeyi, now cheered and delighted, replied: “Hunchback, I 
never recognized your excellence, nor how excellent is your advice. Of all 
the hunchbacks in the world you are foremost in devising plans. You are the 
only one who has always sought my advantage and had my interests at 
heart. I might never have known, hunchback, what the king intended to do. 
There are hunchbacks who are misshapen, crooked, and hideously ugly— 
but not you, you are lovely, you are bent no more than a lotus in the breeze. 
fYour chest is arched, raised as high as your shoulders, and down below, 
your waist, with its lovely navel, seems as if it had grown thin in envy of it. 


Your girdle-belt beautifies your hips and sets them jingling. Your legs are 
set strong under you, while your feet are long. With your broad thighs, 
Manthara, and your garment of white linen, you are as resplendent as a 
rajahamsa when you stand before me. 

[34-39] “And this huge hump of yours, wide as the hub of a chariot 
wheel—your clever ideas must be stored in it, your political wisdom and 
powers of illusion. And it is there, hunchback, where I will drape you with a 
garland made of gold, once Bharata is consecrated and Raghava has gone to 
the forest. When I have accomplished my purpose, my lovely, when I am 
satisfied, I will anoint your hump with precious liquid gold. And for your 
face, hunchback, I will have them fashion an elaborate and beautiful 
forehead mark of gold and exquisite jewelry for you. Dressed in a pair of 
lovely garments, you shall go about like a goddess; with that face of yours 
that challenges the moon, peerless in visage; and you shall strut holding 
your head high before the people who hate me. You too, hunchback, shall 
have hunchbacks of your own, adorned with every sort of ornament, to 
humbly serve you, just as you always serve me.” 

[40-41] As she was being flattered in this fashion, the hunchback replied 
to Kaikeyi, who still lay on her splendid couch like a flame of fire on an 
altar: “One does not build a dike, my dear lady, after the water is gone. Get 
up, apprise the king, and secure your own welfare!” 

[42-47] Thus incited, the large-eyed queen, puffed up with the 
intoxicating power of her beauty, went with Manthara to the chamber she 
used when she was angered. There the lovely lady removed her pearl 
necklace, worth many hundred thousands, and the rest of her costly and 
beautiful jewelry. And then, under the spell of the hunchback Manthara’s 
words, the golden Kaikeyi lay down upon the floor and said to her: 
“Hunchback, go inform the king that I will surely die right here unless 
Bharata receives as his portion the earth and Raghava, as his, the forest.” 
And uttering these ruthless words, the lady put all her jewelry aside and lay 
down upon the ground bare of any spread, like a kinnara woman fallen 
from the heavens. Her face darkened in her swollen rage, her fine garlands 
and ornaments stripped off, the wife of the lord of men grew distraught and 
took on the appearance of a sky shrouded in darkness, when all the stars 
have set. 


Sarga 10 

[1-4] Now, when the great and powerful king had given his orders for 
Raghava’s consecration, he gladly entered the inner apartments to tell his 
wife, so worthy of his love, the good news. But when the lord of the world 
saw her fallen on the ground and lying there in a posture so ill befitting her, 
he was consumed with sorrow. The guileless old man saw her on the floor, 
that guileful young wife of his, who meant more to him than life itself. He 
began to caress her affectionately, as a great bull elephant in the wilderness 
might caress his cow wounded by the poisoned arrow of a hunter lurking in 
the forest. 

[5—12] And as he caressed his lotus-eyed wife with his hands, sick with 
worry and desire, he said to her: “I do not understand, my lady, why you 
should be angry. Has someone offended you, or shown you disrespect, that 
you should lie here in the dust, my precious, and cause me such sorrow? 
What reason have you to lie upon the floor as if possessed by a malignant 
spirit, driving me to distraction, when you are so precious to me? I have 
skilled physicians, who have been gratified in every way. They will make 
you well again. Tell me what hurts, my lovely. Is there someone to whom 
you would have favor shown, or has someone aroused your disfavor? Who 
shall find immediate favor? Who shall incur my lasting disfavour? Is there 
some guilty man who should be freed, or some innocent man I should put to 
death? What poor man should I enrich? What rich man shall I impoverish? I 
and all of my people bow to your will. I could not bring myself to thwart 
any wish of yours, not if it cost me my life. Tell me what your heart desires, 
for all the earth belongs to me, as far as the wheel of my power extends.” 

[13-15] When he had thus addressed her, she was encouraged and 
resolved to tell her hateful plan. She then commenced to cause her husband 
still greater pain: “No one has mistreated me, your majesty, or shown me 
any disrespect. But there is one wish I have that I should like you to fulfill. 
But first, you must give me your promise that you are willing to do it. Then 
I shall reveal what it is I desire.” 

[16-20] The mighty king, hopelessly under the woman’s power, being 
addressed in this way by his beloved Kaikeyi, replied to her with some 
surprise: “Do you not yet know, proud lady, that except for Rama, that tiger 
among men, there is not a single person I love as much as you? Take hold 
of my heart, rip it out, and examine it closely, my lovely Kaikeyt; then tell 


me if you do not find it true. Seeing that I have the power, you ought not to 
doubt me. I will do what will make you happy, I swear to you by all my 
acquired merit.” 

[21—24] His words filled her with delight, and she voiced her dreadful 
wish, which was like a visitation of Yama, the ender of all things: “Let the 
three and thirty gods, with Indra at their head, hear how you in due order 
swear an oath and grant me a boon. Let the sun and moon, the sky, the 
planets, night and day, the quarters of space, heaven and earth, let all the 
gandharvas and raksasas, the spirits that roam the night, the household 
gods in every house, and all the other malignant spirits take heed of what 
you have said. This mighty king, who is true to his word and knows the 
ways of righteousness, in full awareness grants me a boon—let the deities 
give ear to this for me.” 

[25-29] Thus did the queen ensnare the great archer and called upon 
witnesses. She then addressed the king, who, infatuated with desire, had 
granted her a boon: “I will now claim the two boons you once granted me, 
my lord. Hear my words, lord of the earth: Let my son, Bharata, be 
consecrated with the very rite of consecration that you have prepared for 
Raghava. Let Rama withdraw to the Dandaka forest and for nine years and 
five live the life of an ascetic, wearing hides, barkcloth garments, and 
matted hair. Let Bharata become the uncontested prince regent this very 
day, and let me see Raghava depart today for the forest.” 

[30-31] When the great king heard Kaikeyi’s ruthless demands, he was 
shaken and unnerved, like a stag at the sight of a tigress. The lord of men 
gasped as he sank down upon the bare floor. “Oh damn you!” he cried in 
uncontrollable fury before he fell into a stupor, his heart crushed by grief. 

[32-37] Gradually the king regained his senses and then, in bitter sorrow 
and anger, he spoke to Kaikeyi, burning her up, as it seemed, with his gaze: 
“Malicious, wicked woman, bent on destroying this House! Evil woman, 
what evil did Rama or I ever do to you? Raghava has always treated you 
just like his own mother. What reason can you have for trying to wreck his 
fortunes, of all people? It was sheer suicide to bring you into my home. I 
did it unwittingly, thinking you a princess—and not a deadly venomous 
serpent. When praise for Rama’s virtues is on the lips of every living soul, 
what crime could I adduce as pretext for renouncing my favorite son? I 


would sooner renounce Kausalya, Sumitra, sovereignty, or even life itself, 
than Rama, who so cherishes his father. 

[38-41] “The greatest joy I know is seeing my firstborn son. If I cannot 
see Rama, I shall lose my mind. The world might endure without the sun, or 
crops, without water, but without Rama life could not endure within my 
body. Enough of this! Give up this scheme, you evil-scheming woman. 
Have mercy! Must I get down and bow my head to your feet?” His heart in 
the grip of a woman who knew no bounds, the guardian of the earth began 
to lament like a man with no protector, and, as the queen extended her feet, 
he tried in vain to touch them, and collapsed like a man sick to death. 


Sarga 11 

[1-6] The king lay there, in so unaccustomed a posture, so ill befitting his 
dignity, like Yayati himself, his merit exhausted, fallen from the world of 
the gods. But the woman was unafraid, for all the fear she awoke. She was 
misfortune incarnate and had yet to secure her fortunes. Once more she 
tried to force him to fulfill the boon. “You are vaunted, great king, as a man 
true to his word and firm in his vows. How then can you be prepared to 
withhold my boon?” When Kaikeyt had spoken to him in this way, King 
Dasaratha, faltering for a moment, angrily replied: “Vile woman, mortal 
enemy! Will you not be happy, will you not be satisfied until you see me 
dead and Rama, the bull among men, gone to the forest? To satisfy Kaikeyt, 
Rama must be banished to the forest, but if I keep my word in this, then I 
must be guilty of another lie. My infamy will be unequaled in the eyes of 
the people and my disgrace inevitable.” 

[7-10] While he was lamenting in this fashion, his mind in a whirl, the 
sun set and evening came on. To the anguished king lost in lamentation, the 
night, adorned with the circlet of the moon, no longer seemed to last a mere 
three watches. Heaving burning sighs, aged King Dasaratha sorrowfully 
lamented in his anguish, his eyes fixed upon the sky: “I do not want you to 
bring the dawn—here, I cup my hands in supplication. But no, pass as 
quickly as you can, so that I no longer have to see this heartless, malicious 
Kaikeyi, the cause of this great calamity.” 

[11-13] But even as he spoke in this fashion, the king cupped his hands 
before Kaikeyi and once more, begging her mercy, he spoke: “Please, I am 
an old man, my life is nearly over. I am desolate, I place myself in your 


hands. Dear lady, have mercy on me for, after all, | am king. Truly it was 
thoughtless of me, my fair-hipped lady, to have said those things just now. 
Have mercy on me, please, my child. I know you have a heart.” 

[14-15] Although the pure-hearted king lamented, frantically and 
piteously, his eyes reddened and dimmed by tears, the malicious, black- 
hearted woman merely listened and made no reply. And as the king stared 
at the woman he loved but could not appease, whose demand for the exile 
of his own son was so perverse, he once again fell unconscious to the 
ground, overcome with grief. 


Sarga 12 

[1-7] The evil woman watched as Dasaratha Aiksvaka lay writhing 
unconscious on the ground where he had fallen, tortured with grief for his 
son. Then she spoke: “How can you collapse like this and lie there on the 
ground, as though you deemed it a sin to fulfill the promise you made me? 
You must stand by your obligation. For people who understand the meaning 
of righteousness hold truth to be its essence. Now, I am simply appealing to 
truth and exhorting you to do what is right. Saibya, the lord of the world, 
once promised his very own body to a falcon, and he actually gave it to the 
bird, your majesty, thereby attaining the highest goal. The same was true of 
mighty Alarka. When a brahman versed in the vedas begged him for his 
eyes, he plucked them out and gave them unflinchingly. ‘The ocean, lord of 
rivers, respects the truth, keeping his narrow limits, and in accordance with 
the truth does not transgress the shore he pledged to keep. If you do not 
make good this pledge to me, my noble husband, then right before your 
eyes I will abandon my life, as you have abandoned me.” 

[8—11] Thus did the shameless Kaikeyi press the king, and he could no 
more free himself from her snare than Bali could from Indra’s. His heart 
began to beat wildly, his face was drained of color, he was like an ox 
struggling between the yoke and wheels. His eyes so clouded he could 
hardly see, barely steadying himself by an act of will, the lord of the earth 
said to Kaikeyt: “Once, I took and held your hand, sanctified by vedic 
mantras, 1n mine before the marriage fire. I now repudiate you, evil woman, 
as well as the son I fathered on you.” 

[12-16] Stupefied with rage, the wicked Kaikey1 again addressed the 
king in the harshest words at her command: “What are these venomous and 


cutting words you are speaking? Just have your son Rama brought here 
without delay. Not until you have placed my son on the throne, sent Rama 
to live in the forest, and rid me of all my rivals, will you have met your 
obligations.” Subjected to this constant prodding, like a noble horse 
prodded by a sharp goad, the king finally said: “I am bound by the bond of 
righteousness. My mind is failing me! I want to see righteous Rama, my 
beloved eldest son.” 

[17—2lab] When Kaikeyi heard the king’s words, she immediately said 
to the charioteer on her own initiative: “Go! Bring Rama.” Then the 
righteous and majestic king, utterly joyless on account of his son, looked up 
at the charioteer through eyes red with grief and tried to speak to him. 
Hearing the pitiful sound and seeing the king’s desolate expression, 
Sumantra cupped his hands in reverence and withdrew some steps from his 
presence. When in his desolation the lord of the earth proved incapable of 
speaking, Kaikeyi, who well knew her counsels, addressed Sumantra 
herself: “Sumantra, I will see Rama. Bring the handsome prince at once.” 

[21cd—24] Thinking this meant all was well, he rejoiced with all his 
heart. iFor as she pressed him to hurry, Sumantra reflected, “Clearly the 
righteous king has exhausted himself in preparing Rama’s consecration.” 
With this in mind, the mighty charioteer thought, and he departed in great 
delight, eager to see Raghava. As he rushed out, he noticed first the lords of 
the earth at the door and then saw various wealthy townsfolk assembling, 
taking their positions before the door. 


Sarga 13 
[1-3] When they had passed the night, the brahmans, who were masters of 
the vedas, together with the king’s purohitas, assembled at the assembly 
hall. The ministers, the leaders of the army, and the leading merchants 
joyfully convened for Raghava’s consecration. And once the bright sun had 
risen and Pusya day had come, the chief twice-born brahmans began the 
preparations for Rama’s consecration. 

[4-10] They set out golden ewers, a richly ornamented throne, a chariot 
draped with a resplendent tiger skin; water brought from the holy 
confluence of the Ganges and Yamuna, and from all the other holy wells, 
pools, and lakes, from rivers flowing east, west, north, and south, and from 
all the oceans. And they also set out honey, curds, clarified butter, parched 


grain, darbha grass, flowers, and milk; golden and silver pots of grain 
decked with sap-rich twigs, and pots brimming with pure water and adorned 
with lotuses and water lilies. A splendid yak-tail fly whisk stood ready for 
Rama. It was inlaid with jewels, white and softly radiant as moonbeams. 
And a white parasol, majestic and luminous as the orb of the moon, was set 
up in readiness for Rama’s consecration. Standing ready were a white bull, 
a flawless white horse, and a majestic rutting royal elephant. 

[11-14] There were eight maidens to ensure good fortune, all adorned 
with jewelry; all sorts of musical instruments, panegyrists, and others. 
Bringing with them the different sorts of princely equipment required for a 
royal consecration of the Iksvakus, they all convened there by order of the 
king. But the lord of the earth was nowhere to be seen and so they asked: 
“Who will inform the king of our arrival? The sun, maker of day, has risen 
and wise Rama’s consecration as prince regent is ready to begin, but we do 
not see the king.” 

[15-22] As they were speaking, Sumantra, the honored attendant of the 
king, said to all those lords of the earth who had come from all over the 
world: “*I can easily go and inquire, as my lords direct, why the king has 
not come out if he is now awake.” Having said this, the master of ancient 
tales went to the door of the inner apartments, and there he proclaimed his 
blessings and sang the praises of Raghava’s virtues, telling him: “Holy 
night is past, gracious day has begun. Awaken, tiger among kings, and 
attend forthwith to your duties. The brahmans, the leaders of the army, and 
the merchants have come, your majesty. They await your presence. 
Awaken, Raghava.” While Sumantra, the charioteer and skilled counselor, 
was singing his praises, the king became aware of him and said: “I am not 
asleep. Bring Raghava here at once.” So King Dasaratha spoke, again 
ordering the charioteer. Hearing the king’s command and bowing his head 
to him, he left the king’s chamber, thinking there to be some good news. 

[23—28] As the charioteer entered onto the royal highway bedecked with 
banners and pennants, he could hear the people talking about Rama. 
Sumantra then spied the lovely residence of Rama, resplendent as Mount 
Kailasa or the residence of Sakra. It was closed fast with massive gates, and 
adorned with a hundred terraces. There were golden images atop its 
pinnacles and a gateway fashioned of gems and coral. It resembled a bank 
of autumnal clouds, radiant as a cave on Mount Meru, and was adorned 


with enormous wreaths of choice garlands. The charioteer proceeded on his 
horse-drawn chariot, observing the crowds that filled the great and opulent 
royal palace, and, when he reached it, a shiver of delight passed through 
him. It resembled a mountain peak or a motionless cloud, with a complex of 
buildings more splendid than towering mansions, and the charioteer made 
his way through it unchecked, like a dolphin through the gem-stocked sea. 


Sarga 14 

[1-9] The master of ancient tales passed through the door of the inner 
apartments where crowds of people thronged and reached the courtyard. It 
was nearly empty except for the young men who stood guard, armed with 
bows and arrows and wearing polished earrings, wary, alert, and 
unswervingly loyal. He saw the aged guardians of the women stationed at 
the door. They were dressed in saffron-colored robes and_ richly 
ornamented, and they stood watchfully, holding their staffs. At the sight of 
him approaching they at once informed Rama and his wife, eager to 
announce to them the good news. On receiving the message, Raghava at 
once had them usher in the charioteer, his father’s confidant, for he was 
anxious for the good news. The charioteer saw the slayer of enemies seated 
on a richly covered golden couch. He looked like Vaisravana, the lord of 
wealth, in all his jewelry and with the precious sandalwood paste he had 
applied, red as a boar’s blood, pure and fragrant. Sita was beside him—like 
the star Citra beside the hare-marked moon—standing at his side with a 
yak-tail fly whisk in her hand. He blazed like the sun with his natural 
radiance, and the charioteer greeted him, the granter of boons, with the 
deference in which he was practiced. 

[10-17] His hands cupped in reverence, Sumantra, the honored attendant 
of the king, asked the prince if he had passed the time agreeably, and slept 
and rested well. Then he said to him: “O lord, most excellent son of 
Kausalya, your father and Queen Kaikeyi wish to see you. Please go there 
without delay.” Addressed in this fashion, the splendid lion among men was 
delighted. He dutifully assented and then said to Sita: “My lady, the king 
and queen must surely have met and taken some counsel on my behalf 
relating to the consecration. The lady is agreeable and desires to please. 
'Having divined his intention, she must be urging the king in my favor, my 
lovely-eyed wife. A council’s mood will be reflected in the messenger it 


sends. Surely the king is going to consecrate me as prince regent this very 
day. Very well then, I will go off at once and see the lord of the earth. 
Remain here comfortably seated with your companions, and rejoice.” Dark- 
eyed Sita, esteemed by her lord, followed her husband as far as the door, 
uttering prayers for good fortune. 

[18-22] When he saw the crowds of eager people, he approached and 
greeted them. Then he mounted his splendid chariot that glowed like fire, 
the purifier. With the luster of its gleaming gold, it nearly blinded the 
onlookers, while harnessed to it were splendid horses almost the size of 
young elephants. Just as thousand-eyed Indra boards his swift chariot with 
its team of bay steeds, Raghava boarded and sped away, ablaze with royal 
splendor. Raising a clamor like a storm cloud rumbling in the sky, he 
emerged majestically from his residence like the moon from a massive 
cloud. And Rama’s younger brother Laksmana, with a parasol and flywhisk 
in his hands, boarded the chariot at the rear, standing guard over his brother. 

[23-27] As Rama was departing, a wild cheering broke out from the 
flood of people all around. Raghava could hear the comments of the crowd 
gathered there and the different things the people of the city were saying 
about him in their deep delight: “There goes Raghava now, on his way to 
wide sovereignty by the grace of the king. All our wishes have come true, 
now that we shall have him as our ruler. What a great gain for our people, 
that at long last this whole kingdom will pass into his hands.” Like 
Vaisravana he proceeded on his way, while master musicians sounded his 
praises, and eulogists, bards, and genealogists extolled him as they rode 
along, their horses neighing and elephants trumpeting. The lovely 
thoroughfare then came into Rama’s view, with its teeming elephants, 
chariots, and horses, with the great floods of people overflowing the squares 
and with its profusion of precious objects and stocks of many wares. 


Sarga 15 
[1-3] Mounted in his chariot in the midst of his delighted supporters, 
majestic Rama beheld the city crowded with people of every description. 
Rama proceeded down the center of the royal highway. The splendid 
thoroughfare was fragrant with aloewood and adorned with white, cloudlike 
houses—gleaming and spacious, flanked with all kinds of wares and 
foodstuffs of every kind. 


[4-8] And as he made his way, he honored every man, each according to 
his rank, and heard the many blessings spoken by his supporters: “May you, 
after your consecration, embark upon and keep to the path traveled by your 
grandfathers and great-grandfathers. Once Rama is king, we shall live in 
even greater happiness than when his father cared for us and his 
grandfathers in times past. What need have we now of earthly pleasure, 
what need of heavenly bliss? Would only that we might see Rama return 
installed in the kingship. There is nothing more welcome to us than this, 
that Rama, a man of immeasurable power, be consecrated as our king.” 

[9-11] Such and others like them were the heartfelt comments of his 
supporters, and, however laudatory, Rama listened impassively as he 
proceeded along the thoroughfare. And there was not a man among them 
able to tear his eyes or thoughts away from Raghava, best of men, even 
when he had left them far behind. Righteous Rama showed compassion to 
the people of all four social classes in a way befitting their ages, and so they 
were all devoted to him. 

[12-14] On reaching the palace that resembled great Indra’s abode, the 
prince, ablaze with royal splendor, entered his father’s residence. Passing 
through all the courtyards and turning back all his people, the son of 
DaSaratha came to the private inner apartments. When the prince had gone 
into his father’s presence, all the people were delighted, and they awaited 
his return as the ocean, lord of rivers, awaits the rising of the moon. 


Sarga 16 
[1-7] Rama then spied his father, with a wretched look and his mouth gone 
dry, slumped upon his lovely couch, Kaikeyi at his side. First he made an 
obeisance with all deference at his father’s feet and then did homage most 
scrupulously at the feet of Kaikeyi. “Rama!” cried the wretched king, his 
eyes brimming with tears, but he was unable to say anything more or even 
look at him. As if his foot had grazed a snake, Rama was seized with terror 
to see the expression on the king’s face, one more terrifying than he had 
ever seen before. For the great king lay heaving sighs, racked with grief and 
remorse, all his senses numb with anguish, his mind stunned and confused. 
It was as if the imperturbable, wave-wreathed ocean had suddenly been 
shaken with perturbation, as if the sun had been eclipsed, or a seer had told 
a lie. His father’s grief was incomprehensible to him, and the more he 


pondered it, the more his agitation grew, like that of the ocean on the full- 
moon day. 

[8-10] With his father’s welfare at heart, Rama struggled to 
comprehend: “Why does the king not greet me, today of all days? On other 
occasions, when Father might be angry, the sight of me would calm him. 
Why then, when he looked at me just now, did he instead become so 
troubled? He seems desolate and grief-stricken, and his face has lost its 
glow.” Then, after first doing obeisance to Kaikeyi, Rama spoke these 
words to her: 

[11—14] “I hope that I have not unknowingly committed some offense to 
anger my father? Tell me, and make him forgive me. His face is drained of 
color, he is desolate and does not speak to me. I hope that no physical 
illness or mental distress afflicts him? But it is true, well-being is not 
something one can always keep. Some misfortune has not befallen the 
handsome prince Bharata, has it, or courageous Satrughna, or one of my 
mothers? I should not wish to live an instant if his majesty, the great king, 
my father, were angered by my failure to satisfy him or do his bidding. 

[15—19] “How could a man not treat him as a deity incarnate, in whom 
he must recognize the very source of his existence in this world? I trust that 
in anger you did not presume to use harsh words with my father, and so 
throw his mind into such turmoil? Answer my questions truthfully, my 
queen: what has happened to cause this unprecedented change in the lord of 
men? At the bidding of the king, if enjoined by him, my guru, father, king, 
and benefactor, I would hurl myself into the purifying fire, drink deadly 
poison, or drown myself in the sea. Tell me then, my lady, what the king 
would have me do. I will do it, I promise. Rama never takes back his word.” 

[20-26] The ignoble Kaikeyi then addressed these ruthless words to 
Rama, the upright and truthful prince: “Long ago, Raghava, in the war of 
the gods and asuras, your father bestowed two boons on me, for protecting 
him when he was wounded in a great battle. By means of these I have 
demanded of the king that Bharata be consecrated and that you, Raghava, 
be sent at once to the Dandaka forest. If you wish to ensure that your father 
be true to his word, and you to your own, best of men, then listen to what I 
have to say. "You must abide by your father’s command, exactly as he 
promised it, and enter the forest for nine years and five. You must forgo the 
consecration and withdraw to the Dandaka forest, live there seven years and 


seven, wearing matted hair and barkcloth garments. Let Bharata rule this 
land from the city of the Kosalans, with all the treasures it contains, all its 
horses, chariots, elephants.” 

[27-31] When Rama, slayer of enemies, heard Kaikeyi’s hateful words, 
like death itself, he was not the least disconcerted, but only replied: “So be 
it. I shall go away to live in the forest, wearing matted hair and barkcloth 
garments, to safeguard the promise of the king. But I want to know why the 
lord of the earth, the invincible tamer of his foes, does not greet me as he 
used to. You need not worry, my lady. I say it to your face: I shall go to the 
forest—rest assured—wearing barkcloth and matted hair. Enjoined by my 
father, my benefactor, guru, and king, a man who knows what is right to do, 
what would I hesitate to do in order to please him? 

[32-37] “But there is still one thing troubling my mind and eating away 
at my heart: that the king does not tell me himself that Bharata is to be 
consecrated. For I would gladly give up my wealth, the kingship, Sita, and 
my own dear life to my brother Bharata on my own, without any urging. 
How much more so when urged by my father himself, the lord of men, in 
order to fulfill your fond desire and safeguard his promise? So you must 
reassure him. Why should the lord of the earth keep his eyes fixed upon the 
ground and fitfully shed these tears? This very day, let messengers depart 
on swift horses by order of the king to fetch Bharata from his uncle’s house. 
As for me, I shall leave here in all haste for the Dandaka forest, without 
questioning my father’s word, to live there fourteen years.” 

[38-43] Kaikeyi was delighted to hear these words of Rama’s, and 
trusting them implicitly, she pressed Raghava to set out at once, adding: “So 
be it. Men shall go as messengers on swift horses to bring home Bharata 
from his uncle’s house. But since you are now so eager, Rama, I do not 
think it wise to linger. You should therefore proceed directly from here to 
the forest. That the king is ashamed and does not address you himself, that 
is nothing, best of men, you needn’t worry about that. But so long as you 
have not hastened from the city and gone to the forest, Rama, your father 
shall neither bathe nor eat.” “Oh damn you!” the king gasped, overwhelmed 
with grief, and he fell back in a faint on the gilt couch. 

[44-48] Rama raised up the king, pressed though he was by Kaikeyi— 
like a horse whipped with a crop—to make haste and depart for the forest. 
Listening to the ignoble Kaikeyi’s hateful words, so dreadful in their 


consequences, Rama remained unperturbed and only said to her: “My lady, 
it is not in the hopes of gain that I suffer living in this world. You should 
know that, like the seers, I have but one concern and that is righteousness. 
Whatever I can do to please this honored man I will do at any cost, even if 
it means giving up my life. For there is no greater act of righteousness than 
this: obedience to one’s father and doing as he bids. 

[49-52] “Even unbidden by this honored man, at your bidding alone I 
shall live for fourteen years in the desolate forest. Indeed, Kaikeyi, you 
must ascribe no virtue to me at all if you had to appeal to the king, when 
you yourself are so venerable in my eyes. Let me only take leave of my 
mother and settle matters with Sita. Then I shall go, this very day, to the 
vast forest of the Dandakas. You must see to it that Bharata obeys Father 
and guards the kingdom, for that is the eternal way of righteousness.” 

[53-56] When his father heard Rama’s words, he was stricken with such 
deep sorrow that he could not hold back his sobs in his grief and broke out 
in loud weeping. Splendid Rama did homage at the feet of his unconscious 
father and at the feet of that ignoble woman, Kaikeyi; then he turned to 
leave. Reverently Rama circled his father and Kaikey1, and, withdrawing 
from the inner apartments, he saw his group of friends. Laksmana, the 
delight of Sumitra, fell in behind him, his eyes brimming with tears, in a 
towering rage. 

[57-61] "Reverently circling the equipment for the consecration, but 
careful not to gaze at it, Rama slowly went away. The loss of the kingship 
diminished his great majesty as little as night diminishes the loveliness of 
the cool-rayed moon, beloved of the world. Though he was on the point of 
leaving his native land and going to the forest, he was no more 
discomposed than one who has passed beyond all things of this world. 
Holding back his sorrow within his mind, keeping his every sense in check, 
and fully self-possessed, he made his way to his mother’s residence to tell 
her the sad news. As Rama entered her residence, where joy still reigned 
supreme, as he reflected on the sudden ruin of all his fortunes, even then he 
showed no sign of discomposure, for fear it might endanger the lives of 
those he loved. 


Sarga 17 


[1-5] Sorely troubled, heaving sighs like an elephant, but controlling his 
emotions, Rama went with his brother to his mother’s inner apartments. He 
observed the venerable elder seated there at the door of the house and many 
other people standing about. Passing through the first courtyard, he saw the 
brahmans in the second, old men expert in the vedas and held in honor by 
the king. Rama bowed to the old men and passed into the third courtyard, 
where he saw women old and young vigilantly standing guard at the door. 
In delight the women congratulated him and then rushed into the house to 
pass on the good news to Rama’s mother. 

[6-12] Queen Kausalya had spent the night in meditation, and now in the 
early morning was worshiping Visnu to secure the welfare of her son. 
Dressed in linen, intent upon her vow and with deep delight, she was then 
pouring an oblation into the fire in accordance with the vedic verses and 
pronouncing benedictions. As he entered her lovely private apartments, 
Rama saw his mother as she was pouring the oblation into the fire. When 
she saw that her son, his mother’s one joy, had finally come, she 
approached him in delight, as a mare might her colt. In her deep maternal 
affection for her son, the invincible Raghava, Kausalya addressed him with 
these kind and beneficial words: “May you attain the life span of the great 
and aged royal seers who keep to the ways of righteousness. May you attain 
their fame and the righteousness that benefits a ruling House. See, Raghava, 
your father is as good as his word. This very day, the righteous king will 
consecrate you as prince regent.” 

[13-16] Slightly extending his hands cupped in reverence, Raghava 
bowed low out of natural courtesy and profound respect. Then he said to his 
mother: “My lady, I see you do not know of the great danger at hand. It will 
bring sadness to you, Vaidehi, and Laksmana. For fourteen years I must 
dwell in the desolate forest, living on honey, fruit, and roots, giving up meat 
like a sage. The great king is awarding Bharata the office of prince regent 
and banishing me to the Dandaka forest and a life of asceticism.” 

[17-19] A sorrow such as she had never known swept over her, and 
Rama saw his mother fall down in a faint, like a broken plantain tree. He 
came to her side and helped her up. Then, as she stood there in her 
desolation like a mare forced to draw a heavy load, he brushed away the 
dust that covered her every limb with his hand. Tortured by unhappiness 


such as she had never known before, she spoke to Raghava, tiger among 
men, as he attended on her, while Laksmana stood by, listening: 

[20-23] “Raghava, my son, had you never been born to bring me such 
grief, had I been childless, I would have been spared any further sorrow. A 
barren woman’s grief is only of the mind and only a single grief—the 
painful thought, ‘I have no child’; she never comes to feel another, my son. 
But the joy and comfort I had not found to be within my husband’s power to 
give me, Rama, I cherished hopes I perhaps might find in a son. How their 
words will break my heart, the many painful words I shall hear from my 
junior co-wives, being their senior as I am. And what could bring a woman 
greater sorrow? 

[24—28] “Even with you present this is how I am spurned. How much 
more so will it be once you are gone, my child? Surely nothing is left me 
but death. For anyone who used to serve me or respect my wishes will look 
anxiously toward Kaikeyi’s son without so much as a word for me. The ten 
years and seven since you were born, Raghava, I have passed yearning to 
put an end to my sorrow. It was so difficult to raise you in my wretched 
state, and it was all in vain, the meditation and the fasts, and all the pains I 
took. How hard this heart of mine must be that it does not crumble, as the 
bank of a great river crumbles in the rains when the fresh waters wash over 
it. 

[29-33] “It must be that I can never die, or that no room is left for me in 
the house of Yama, if even now Yama, the ender of all things, will not carry 
me off, as brutally as a lion carries off a whimpering doe. My heart must be 
made of iron since it does not split and shatter upon the ground, and my 
body too, under this crushing sorrow. How true it is that people cannot die 
before their fated hour. What a sorrowful thing that my vows, my gifts of 
alms, and acts of self-denial have all been to no avail, that the austerities I 
practiced for my child’s sake have proved to be as barren as seed sown in a 
desert. For if a person broken by heavy sorrow could die before his fated 
hour, of his own free will, then left without you as I am, like a cow without 
her calf, I would go this very instant to the congregation of the dead.” °As 
she gazed upon Raghava and contemplated the great calamity to come, her 
unhappiness was too much for her to bear, and she broke out in copious 
lamentation, as a cow will do at the sight of her calf being bound and 
dragged away. 


Sarga 18 

[1-5] Laksmana grew desolate while Rama’s mother, Kausalya, lamented in 
this fashion. Then he addressed her in words appropriate to the moment: “T 
do not approve of this either, my lady, that Raghava should abdicate the 
majesty of kingship and go off to the forest, bowing to the demands of a 
woman. The king is perverse, old, and debauched by pleasures. What would 
he not say under pressure, mad with passion as he is? I know of no crime on 
Raghava’s part nor any fault that could justify his banishment from the 
kingdom to a life in the forest. I do not know of a single man in this world, 
not an adversary, nor even an outcast, who would assert such a fault, even 
behind our backs. 

[6-11] “Who that has any regard for what is right could renounce, 
without any provocation, a son so godlike, upright, and self-restrained, one 
who cherishes even his enemies? What son, mindful of the conduct of 
kings, would take to heart the words of a king who has become a child 
again? Before anyone learns of this matter, let me help you seize control of 
the government. With me at your side, bow in hand to protect you, who 
could prevail against you, Raghava, when you take your stand like Krtanta, 
the god of death, himself? With my sharp arrows, bull among men, I will 
empty Ayodhya of men if it stands in opposition. I will slaughter everyone 
who sides with Bharata or champions his cause. Leniency always ends in 
defeat. 

[12—15] “Now that the king has provoked our implacable enmity, yours 
and mine, chastiser of foes, what power can he summon to bestow 
sovereignty on Bharata? Truly, my lady, the loyalty I feel to my brother is 
heartfelt. I swear it to you by my truth and my bow, by my gifts of alms and 
sacrifices. Should Rama enter the forest, or a blazing fire, my lady, rest 
assured that I will have entered first. I shall drive your sorrow away with 
my valor just as the rising sun drives away the darkness. Let the queen 
witness my power! Let Raghava witness it!” 

[16-21] When Kausalya heard great Laksmana’s words, weeping and 
sick with grief, she said to Rama: “My son, you have heard your brother 
Laksmana speak. Whatever is best to do next you must do, as you see fit. 
But you must not, heeding the unrighteous words spoken by my co-wife, go 
away and leave me stricken with grief. You know what is right, and if you 
would do it, my most righteous son, obey me. Remain here and do your 


supreme duty. Kasyapa obeyed his mother, my son, and lived a life of self- 
discipline at home. In this way, he acquired ultimate ascetic power and 
reached the highest heaven. 

[22—24] “In no way am I less deserving than the king of the respect you 
owe a guru. I will not give you permission, you may not go away to the 
forest. Parted from you, what use have I for a life of comfort? Better for me 
to be with you and eat the grass of the fields. If you go to the forest leaving 
me sick with grief, I will fast to death right here, for I could not bear to go 
on living. And you will then be guilty of a crime held in infamy in the 
world, like the ocean, lord of rivers, who through unrighteous conduct 
incurred the sin of brahmahatya, the killing of a brahman.” 

[25-31] Then, in a manner consistent with righteousness, righteous 
Rama addressed his desolate mother, Kausalya, as she was lamenting in this 
fashion: “It is not within my power to disobey my father’s words. I bow my 
head to you in supplication; for I wish to go to the forest. Even the wise seer 
Kandu, a man strict in his observances, killed a cow at the bidding of his 
father, for he knew that it was right. And even in our own family, long ago, 
the sons of Sagara at their father’s command dug up the earth and thereby 
met with wholesale slaughter. Rama Jamadagnya, acting on his father’s 
bidding, took an axe and by his own hand butchered his mother, Renuka, in 
the forest. So you see, I am not the only one who acts on his father’s 
commands. I am merely following the path sanctioned and taken by those 
men of old. It is this that is my duty on earth, and I cannot shirk it. Besides, 
no one who does his father’s bidding ever comes to grief.” 

[32-36] After he had spoken to his mother in this fashion, he turned to 
Laksmana and said: “I well know, Laksmana, the profound affection you 
bear me. But you fail to understand the real meaning of truth and self- 
restraint. Righteousness is paramount in the world, and on righteousness is 
truth itself founded. This command of Father’s is based on righteousness, 
and it is absolute. Having once heard a father’s command, a mother’s, or a 
brahman’s, one must not disregard it, my mighty brother, if one would hold 
to what is right. I cannot disobey my father’s injunction, mighty brother, 
and it is at Father’s bidding that Kaikey1 has coerced me. So, give up this 
ignoble notion that is based on the code of the kshatriyas; be of like mind 
with me and base your actions on righteousness, not violence.” 


[37-40] Once Laksmana’s eldest brother had spoken to his brother out of 
affection, he once more addressed Kausalya with his head bowed and his 
hands cupped in reverence: “Please, my lady, give me your permission as | 
am bound to leave here for the forest. By my very life I adjure you, bestow 
your blessings on my journey. Once I have fulfilled the promise, I will 
return to the city from the forest. For I cannot for the sake of mere kingship 
turn my back on glory, whose reward 1s great; nor, since life is so short, my 
lady, would I choose today this paltry land over all that is right.” The bull 
among men thus earnestly pleaded with his mother—he wanted only to go 
to the Dandakas—and firmly taught his younger brother the proper view of 
things. Then, in his heart, he reverently circled the woman who gave him 
birth. 


Sarga 19 

[1-5] Saumitri was shocked and desolate; this was all far more than he 
could bear. He heaved a sigh like a mighty serpent, and his eyes bulged 
with wrath. But Rama steadfastly maintained his composure and in full self- 
possession he turned to his beloved friend and brother and spoke: 
“Saumitri, let this flurry in preparation of my consecration, let it all now be 
directed toward stopping it. You must take care that our mother Kaikeyi to 
whom my consecration was a source of such heartache, be anxious no 
more. Not for a moment, Saumitri, can I disregard the anxious sorrow that 
has sprung up in her heart. 

[6-11] “I do not recall ever doing the slightest thing, intentionally or 
unintentionally, to displease my mothers or father. But let my father—a 
truthful man, true to his word, ever striving for truth—be freed from the 
fears he has of what other people might say. For if this rite were not called 
off, he too would suffer mental torment, to hear his truthfulness impugned, 
and his torment would then torment me. So call off the consecration 
ceremony, Laksmana. PAs soon as you have done so, I wish to leave here 
for the forest. By my immediate banishment the princess will achieve her 
goal and be able to consecrate her son, Bharata, without any hindrance. For 
only after I have gone into the wilderness, dressed in barkcloth garments 
and hides, wearing a crown of matted hair, will Kaikeyi find peace of mind. 

[12-16] “Since my mind is made up and my heart is set on it, I should 
not cause further pain. I shall go into banishment without delay. It is 


nothing but destiny, Saumitri, that we must see at work in my exile and in 
the revocation of the kingship, which had been awarded to me. Otherwise, 
why should Kaikeyi be so determined to harm me were this intention of 
hers not fated and ordained by destiny? You know yourself, dear brother, 
that never in the past have I drawn any distinction among our mothers, nor 
did she ever differentiate between her son and me. I cannot credit anything 
but fate for those words of hers, those hard and brutal words that meant the 
revocation of the consecration and my exile. 

[17-22] “How could she, a princess, so good-natured and virtuous, speak 
to my harm in the presence of her husband, like some common woman? 
What cannot be explained must surely be fate, which clearly no creature can 
resist; for how complete has been the reversal that has befallen her and me. 
aWhat man has the power to contest his fate, Saumitri, when one cannot 
even perceive it except from its effects? ‘Happiness and sadness, fear and 
anger, gain and loss, birth and death—all things such as these must surely 
be the effects of fate. I have no regret even though my consecration has 
been thwarted, and neither must you. Comply with my wishes and at once 
put a stop to the rite of consecration. It is not our younger mother Kaikeyi, 
Laksmana, who should be blamed for preventing my becoming king. 
People overmastered by fate say things they never wanted to. You must 
know that fate has such power.” 


Sarga 20 

[1-4] While Rama was speaking in this way, Laksmana kept his head 
lowered the whole time and listened with his mind poised, it seemed, 
midway between joy and sorrow. But then that bull among men knit a 
frown between his brows and heaved a sigh like a great serpent seized with 
anger in its lair. His frowning face was terrible to see—it looked like the 
face of a raging lion. He shook his hand as an elephant shakes its trunk, 
from side to side, up and down, and let his head fall on his chest. 

[S—9] sLooking askance at his brother, from the corner of his eye, he 
said: “Now is not the time for panic, the source of this sheer folly. Could a 
man like you talk this way were he not panicked, fearful of losing people’s 
respect because of some infraction of righteousness? You are a bull among 
kshatriyas, as powerful as fate is powerless. How in the world can you 
blame fate, a contemptible, feeble thing? How is it you harbor no suspicion 


of those two evil people? Don’t you know, my righteous brother, that there 
are cunning people who wear the guise of righteousness? A thing the whole 
world would find despicable is under way as someone other than you is to 
be consecrated. I despise that ‘righteousness,’ my king, which has so altered 
your thinking, and about which you are deluded. 

[10—12] “Even if you think it fate that framed this plot of theirs, still you 
must reject it. I cannot approve of this course at all. For it is only the weak 
and cowardly who submit to fate; heroic men, strong of heart, do not 
humble themselves before fate. A man who is able to counter fate with 
manly effort does not give up for all that fate may frustrate his purposes. 

[13-19] “No! Today the people will see the power of fate and the power 
of man. Today the disparity between the two will be clearly revealed. Today 
they will see fate averted by my manly power, just as they saw your royal 
consecration blocked by fate. By my manly power I will turn back fate that 
is running wild, like a careering elephant beyond control of the goad, in a 
frenzy of rut and might. Not all the world guardians, Rama, nor the entire 
three worlds—much less our father—can prevent your consecration today. 
Those who conspired to banish you to the wilderness, your majesty, will 
themselves be exiled to the wilderness for fourteen years. I shall crush 
Father’s and that woman’s hopes of making her son the king by blocking 
your consecration. The power of fate in aid of one fallen within my mighty 
grasp will be no match for my terrible power and the sorrow it will wreak. 

[20—23] “Later on, many years from now, my brother, when your sons in 
turn are protecting the subjects, then you can go to live in the forest. For, 
according to the ways of the royal seers of old, living in the forest 1s 
prescribed only after entrusting one’s subjects to one’s sons, to protect as 
though they were their very own sons. If, perhaps, you are unwilling to 
assume the kingship without the king’s wholehearted support, righteous 
Rama, for fear of a revolt against your kingship, I swear to you, my heroic 
brother: may I never come to share in the afterworld of heroes if I do not 
guard the kingship for you as the shore guards the ocean. 

[24-29] “Have yourself consecrated with the holy implements; busy 
yourself with that. I shall be able all on my own to repulse any kings by 
force. These two arms are not merely for the sake of beauty, nor is this bow 
merely for adornment; this sword is not for the sake of ornament nor are 
these arrows just for filling a quiver. All four things exist for subduing my 


enemies, and I am not very eager that anyone be thought my match. With 
my sword held ready, its blade sharp and lustrous as flashing lightning, I 
count no one my match, be he Indra himself, wielder of the vajra. Soon the 
earth will be impassable, knee-deep in the trunks, flanks, and heads of 
elephants, horses, and men hacked off by the strokes of my sword. Like 
clouds with lightning playing about them, like mountains engulfed in 
flames, elephants will drop to the ground today under the blows of my 
sword. 

[30-36] “When I stand before them with my bow held ready, with my 
armguards and finger guards strapped on, how could any of those men 
fancy himself a man? Shooting now one man with many, now many men 
with one, I will ply my arrows in the vitals of men, horses, and elephants. 
This very day the power of my all-powerful weapons shall prevail to strip 
the king of his power and make it over to you, my lord. This very day these 
arms of mine, well suited for wearing sandalwood paste, sporting bracelets, 
lavishing wealth, and protecting friends as well, will do their job, Rama, 
repulsing those who stand in the way of your consecration. Just tell me, 
which of your enemies should I separate this very day from his fame, his 
loved ones, and his life? Just instruct me what to do to bring the land under 
your control. I am your servant.” Wiping Laksmana’s tears away and 
comforting him all the while, the heir of the Raghava dynasty said: “You 
must understand, dear brother, that I am resolved to obey my father’s 
command, for such is the way of the virtuous.” 


Sarga 21 

[1-6] Once Kausalya saw that Rama was resolved to follow his father’s 
orders, she spoke to him, her most righteous son, her words choked with 
tears: “How will he who has never known sorrow, who is righteous and 
speaks kindly to all creatures, how will the son I bore to Dasaratha live by 
gleaning grain? When his servants and slaves are eating delicacies, how can 
the master eat fruit and roots in the forest? Who would believe it, who 
would not be seized with terror, to hear that virtuous Raghava, the king’s 
beloved, is being exiled? If you leave me here, a raging fire of grief, unlike 
any other, will consume me as the many-colored flames of fire consume a 
thicket when winter is past. How would a cow not follow her calf if it 
wanders off? I must follow you, my son, wherever you may go.” 


[7-10] When he heard what his mother had said in her deep sorrow, 
Rama, bull among men, addressed her with these words: “Deceived by 
Kaikeyi, and with me withdrawn to the wilderness, the king will surely not 
survive if you too should desert him. For a woman to desert her husband is 
wickedness pure and simple. You must not do so despicable a thing, not 
even think it. As long as my father and lord of the world, Kakutstha, lives, 
he must be shown obedience, for that is the eternal way of righteousness.” 

[11-16] Thus addressed by Rama, Kausalya recognized what was proper. 
“So be it,” she replied, though without joy, to tireless Rama. At this, Rama, 
champion of righteousness, once more addressed his mother in her deep 
sorrow: “Both you and I must do as Father bids. He is king, husband, 
foremost guru, lord, and master of us all. Once I have passed these nine 
years and five in the great wilderness, I shall stand again at your bidding, 
with the deepest joy.” Addressed in this fashion, Kausalya, in deep agony, 
her face flooded with tears, responded: “Rama, I cannot bear to remain 
among my co-wives. Take me too, Kakutstha, to the wilderness like a wild 
doe if, out of regard for your father, your heart is set on going.” 

[17-23] As she was weeping in this way, Rama wept too, and said: “As 
long as she lives, a woman’s one deity and master is her husband. And 
today the king, our master, is exercising his mastery over you and me. 
Bharata is righteous too, and speaks kindly to all creatures. He will respect 
your wishes, for he has always been earnest in doing what is right. Once I 
have departed, you must take care to ensure that the king does not trouble 
himself in the least with grief for his son. Even the most excellent of 
women, one who earnestly undertakes vows and fasts, will come to a bad 
end if she does not respect her husband’s wishes. A woman must show her 
husband obedience and earnestly strive to please and benefit him. Such is 
the way of righteousness discovered long ago, revealed in the veda, and 
handed down in the world. And for my sake you must likewise reverence 
the brahmans, who are true to their vows, my lady. In this way, you will 
pass the time, awaiting my return. Your fondest wish will be fulfilled when 
I return, if the champion of righteousness should remain alive.” 

[24—25] When Kausalya had been addressed in this way by Rama, 
tortured by grief for her son, her eyes dimmed by tears, she replied to him: 
“Go, my mighty son, and be very careful. May good fortune attend you 
always.” When the queen saw how determined Rama was to live in the 


forest, she made her prayers for him from the bottom of her heart and 
prepared to bestow her blessings on his journey. 


Sarga 22 

[1-6] "Rama’s mother restrained her anguish, and, having sipped some 
water so that she was once again pure and in better spirits, she began to 
utter her blessings for him: “May the saddhyas bless you and the Visvedevas, 
the Maruts and the great seers. May Dhatr, the creator, and Vidhatr, the 
arranger, bless you, Pusan, Bhaga, and Aryaman too. May the years and 
seasons bless you always, the months and half-months, the nights and days 
and hours. May your learning, fortitude, and righteousness protect you 
everywhere, my son. May the blessed god Skanda, Soma, and Brhaspati 
protect you. ‘May the Seven Seers and Narada guard you everywhere, my 
wise son, and so may all the constellations, and all the planets with their 
presiding deities, as you wander in a sage’s garb through the great forest. 

[7-11] “May you not be troubled by leaping monkeys or scorpions, by 
gnats or flies in the woods, or by snakes or insects in the jungle thickets. 
May the huge elephants not harm you, my dear son, nor the lions, tigers, 
bears, boars, or fierce, horned buffalo. May the other types of ferocious 
creatures that feed on human flesh not injure you, my son, for these fervid 
prayers I now offer them. May your way be safe, may your courage prevail, 
may all good things be plentiful, Rama. Go with my blessings, dear son. 
May my blessings protect you hour by hour from all the things on earth, in 
the sky or in heaven that might beset your path. And may Brahma, the 
sustainer of creatures and lord of all the worlds, the seers and the rest of the 
gods guard you while you are living in the forest.” 

[12-14] Thus did the glorious large-eyed woman worship the hosts of 
gods with garlands and incense and fitting hymns of praise, saying: “May 
you have the same good fortune as thousand-eyed Indra, to whom all gods 
bow, when he slew the demon Vrtra. May you have the same good fortune 
Vinata secured for Suparna when he went in quest of the nectar.” 

[15-20] Next, she made an amulet out of the auspicious herb of proven 
worth, the visalyakarani, healer of arrow wounds, and whispered vedic 
mantras over it. The illustrious woman had him bow his head, kissed him 
on the forehead, and embraced him, saying: “Go in happiness, Rama my 
son, and may you achieve success. How happy I shall be to see you, my 


child, back again in Ayodhya, healthy, successful, and firmly established in 
the house of the king. I have worshiped the hosts of gods, Siva and all the 
others, the great seers, the malignant spirits, great asuras, and serpents. 
When you have gone to the forest, Raghava, may they, and every quarter of 
space, ever promote your welfare.” And so, her eyes brimming with tears, 
she concluded her blessings for his journey, as custom required. Then she 
reverently circled Raghava, took him in her arms, and pressed him to her 
bosom again and again. After the queen had reverently circled him, glorious 
Raghava again and again pressed his head to his mother’s feet. He then 
proceeded to Sita’s residence, ablaze with his own royal splendor. 


Sarga 23 

[1-6] After reverently paying obeisance to Kausalya, Rama, blessed by his 
mother, made ready to depart for the forest, keeping firmly to the path of 
righteousness. Along the royal highway crowded with men, the prince went, 
illuminating it and melting the hearts of the people, it seemed, with all his 
virtues. Poor Vaidehi had heard nothing of all this; she still believed in her 
heart that Rama was to be consecrated as prince regent. She knew the rites 
for the gods and had performed them in deep delight. And knowing what 
royal regalia to expect, she waited for the prince. As Rama entered his 
residence—still decorated and thronged with delighted people—he lowered 
his head a little, in shame. Sita started up and began to tremble as she 
looked at her husband who was consumed with grief, his senses numb with 
anxious care. 

[7-10] When she saw how his face was drained of color, how he sweated 
and chafed, she was consumed with sorrow. “What is the meaning of this, 
my lord?” she asked. “Today was surely the day for which the learned 
brahmans had forecast the conjunction of Pusya, the majestic constellation 
ruled by Brhaspati. Why are you so downcast, Raghava? The hundred- 
ribbed parasol with its hue of white-capped water is not throwing its shade 
upon your handsome face. Nor is your face, with eyes like the hundred- 
petaled lotus, being fanned by the pair of splendid flywhisks, the color of 
the moon or the hamsa. 

[11-17] “And I see no eloquent panegyrists, bull among men, singing 
your praises in delight, no bards or genealogists with their auspicious 
recitation. Nor have the brahmans, masters of the vedas, sprinkled your 


head and poured honey and curds upon it, as custom requires. No one 
wishes to follow in your train, not the officials, nor the heads of guilds in 
their finery, nor the people of the city and provinces. How is it the splendid 
Pusya chariot does not precede you, with its team of four swift horses with 
their trappings of gold? I see no sign of the royal elephant, revered for its 
auspicious marks and resembling a mountain black with clouds. It is not 
leading your procession, my mighty husband. Nor do I see your escort, my 
handsome and mighty husband, proceeding with the gold-wrought throne 
held before them. What can all this mean, when your consecration is 
already under way? Never before has your face had such a color, and I see 
no sign of delight.” 

[18-21] Such were her anxious words, and the delight of the Raghus 
replied to her: “Sita, my honored father is banishing me to the forest. O 
Janaki, you are the daughter of a great House, you know what is right and 
always practice it. Listen to the course of events that has brought this upon 
me. Once, long ago, when Kaikeyi had found favor with him, my father, 
King Dasaratha, a man true to his promise, granted her two great boons. 
Today, when my consecration was already under way at the instigation of 
the king, she pressed him for them. vSince he had made an agreement, he 
was compelled by righteousness. 

[22—25] “For fourteen years I must live in the Dandaka wilderness, while 
my father will appoint Bharata as prince regent. Therefore, I have come to 
see you before I leave for the desolate forest. You are never to boast of me 
in the presence of Bharata. Men in power cannot bear to hear others praised, 
and so you must never boast of my virtues in front of Bharata. You must not 
ever expect to receive any special treatment from him. Life with him will be 
possible only by constant acquiescence. I will safeguard my guru’s promise 
and leave this very day for the forest. Be strong, my sensible wife. 

[26-29] “When I have gone to the forest where sages make their home, 
my precious, blameless wife, you must earnestly undertake vows and fasts. 
You must rise early and worship the gods according to custom and then pay 
homage to my father, Dasaratha, lord of men. And my aged mother, 
Kausalya, who is tormented by misery, deserves your respect as well, for 
she has subordinated all to righteousness. The rest of my mothers too must 
always receive your homage. My mothers are all equal in my eyes for their 
love, affection, and care. 


[30-34] “*xAnd what is most important, you must look on Bharata and 
Satrughna, respectively, as your brother and your son, for they are dearer to 
me than life itself. You must never show opposition to Bharata, for he is 
now both king of the country and master of our House. Kings show their 
favor when they are pleased with good conduct and sedulously attended to 
—and if they are not, they grow angry. Lords of men will repudiate their 
sons, their own flesh and blood, if they serve them ill, and will adopt even 
strangers, should they prove capable. My beloved, I am going to the great 
forest, and you must stay here. You must do as I tell you, my lovely, and not 
give offense to anyone.” 


Sarga 24 

[1-5] When she had been addressed in this fashion, Vaidehi, who always 
spoke kindly to her husband and deserved kindness from him, grew angry 
just because she loved him, and she said: “My lord, a man’s father, his 
mother, his brother, his son, and his daughter-in-law all experience the 
effects of their own past deeds, and each one suffers an individual fate. But 
only a wife, bull among men, must share her husband’s fate. Therefore I too 
have been ordered to live in the forest. It is not her father or mother, not her 
son or friends or herself, but her husband, and he alone, who gives a woman 
permanent refuge in this world and after death. So if you must leave this 
very day for the trackless forest, Raghava, I will go in front of you, 
softening the thorns and sharp kusa grass. 

[6-9] “Cast out your anger and resentment, like so much water left after 
drinking one’s fill. Do not be reluctant to take me, my mighty husband. 
There is no evil in me. The shadow of a husband’s feet in any circumstances 
surpasses the finest mansions, flying palaces, or even flying through the 
sky. My mother and father instructed me in all these different questions. I 
do not have to be told now the proper way to behave. I shall live as happily 
in the forest as if 1t were my father’s house, caring for nothing in the three 
worlds but to be faithful to my husband. 

[10—14] “I will obey you always and practice self-discipline and chastity. 
What pleasures I shall share with you, my mighty husband, in the honey- 
scented woods! O Rama, bestower of honor, you have the power to protect 
any other person in the forest. Why then not me? You need not doubt that I 
can survive on nothing but fruit and roots; I shall not cause you any trouble 


by living with you. I long to see the streams and mountains, the ponds and 
forests, and nowhere shall I be afraid with my wise husband to defend me. I 
want to see the lotus ponds in full bloom, blanketed with hamsas and 
karandavas, happy in your company, my mighty husband. 

[15—19] “What pleasures I shall share with you, my large-eyed husband, 
what bliss for me to be with you like this, even were it to be for a hundred 
thousand years! If I were to be offered a place to live in heaven itself, 
Raghava, tiger among men, I would refuse it if you were not there. »I will 
go to the trackless forest teeming with deer, monkeys, and elephants, and 
live there as if in my father’s house, clinging to your feet alone, in strict 
self-discipline. I love no one else; my heart is so attached to you that were 
we to be parted I am resolved to die. Take me, oh please grant my request. I 
shall not be a burden to you.” Yet, despite what Sita said, the best of men, 
who so cherished righteousness, was still unwilling to take her, and in order 
to dissuade her, he began to describe how painful life in the forest is. 


Sarga 25 
[1-3] While Sita was speaking in this manner, the righteous prince, who 
knew what was right and cherished it, attempted to dissuade her: “Sita, you 
are the daughter of a great House and have always been earnest in doing 
what is right. You must stay here and do your duty, not what your heart 
desires. My frail Sita, you must do as I say. There are so many hardships in 
the forest. Listen to me and I shall tell you. 

[4—8] “Sita, you must give up this notion of living in the forest. The 
name ‘wilderness’ is given only to the wild regions where hardships 
abound. It is, in fact, with your welfare at heart that I am saying this. The 
forest is never a place of pleasure—I know—but only of pain. There are 
lions that live in mountain caves; their roars redoubled by mountain 
torrents, are a painful thing to hear—the forest is a place of pain. At night, 
worn with fatigue, one must sleep on the ground on a bed of leaves, broken 
off of themselves—the forest is a place of utter pain. And one has to fast 
there, Maithili, to the limit of one’s endurance, wear clothes of barkcloth, 
and bear the burden of matted hair. 

[9-15] “The wind is so intense there and the darkness too. One is always 
hungry, and the dangers are so great—the forest is a place of utter pain. 
There are many creeping creatures, of every size and shape, my lovely, 


ranging aggressively over the ground—the forest is a place of utter pain. 
There are snakes too, that live in the rivers, moving as sinuously as rivers, 
and they are always there obstructing one’s way—the forest is a place of 
utter pain. Moths, scorpions, worms, gnats, and flies continually harass one, 
my frail Sita—the forest is wholly a place of pain. There are thorn trees, 
sharp kusa and kasa grasses, my lovely, and the forest is a tangle of their 
branches and blades—the forest is a place of utter pain. So no more of your 
going to the forest, you could not bear it. The more I think about it the more 
I see how many hardships the forest holds.” When great Rama had thus 
made up his mind not to take her to the forest, Sita did not reply to him at 
once, but then in bitter sorrow she replied. 


Sarga 26 

[1-5] When Sita heard what Rama had said, she was overcome with sorrow. 
With tears trickling down her face, she answered him in a faint voice: “Do 
you not know that what you call the hardships of life in the forest would all 
be luxuries if your love accompanied them? By the order of our elders I 
must go with you, Rama. I would die here and now if parted from you. But 
if I were by your side, Raghava, not even Sakra, lord of the gods, could 
harm me for all his might. A woman whose husband has left her cannot go 
on living, regardless of what advice you give me, Rama. 

[6-10] “Besides, my wise husband, long ago in my father’s house I 
heard the brahmans prophesy that someday I should have to live in the 
forest. The twice-born can read the signs on a person’s body, my powerful 
husband, and from that moment at home, when I heard what they foretold, I 
have constantly yearned to live in the forest. The prediction that I should 
have to live in the forest must someday be fulfilled. And it is with you that I 
would go there, my love, not otherwise. I will go with you and carry out the 
prediction. The moment has arrived; let the prophecy of the twice-born 
brahman come true. I know that in living in the forest there is indeed much 
pain, my mighty husband, but it is only those who are unprepared that 
suffer from it. 

[11—16] “When I was just a girl in my father’s house, I happened to hear, 
in the presence of my mother, all about forest life from a holy mendicant 
woman. And, in fact, I have begged you many times before to let us go and 
live together in the forest, my lord, so much do I desire it. Please, Raghava, 


I have been waiting for the chance to go. I want nothing more than to serve 
my hero as he lives in the forest. If from feelings of love I follow you, my 
pure-hearted husband, I shall have no sin to answer for, because my 
husband is my deity. My union with you is sacred and shall last even 
beyond death. There is a holy scripture, my high-minded husband, which 
glorious brahmans recite: ‘When in this world, in accordance with their 
own customs and by means of the ritual waters, a woman’s father gives her 
to a man, she remains his even in death.’ 

[17-22] “What then is the reason you are set against taking me away 
from here, your own wife, a woman of good conduct and faithful to her 
husband? I am devoted and faithful to my husband. I have always shared 
your joy and sorrow, and now I am so desolate. You must take me, 
Kakutstha. Your joy has always been mine to share, and your sorrow. If you 
refuse to take me to the forest despite the sorrow that I feel, I shall have no 
recourse but to end my life by poison, fire, or water.” Though she pleaded 
with him in this and every other way to be allowed to go, great-armed Rama 
would not consent to taking her to the desolate forest. And when he told her 
so, Maithili fell to brooding, and drenched the ground, it seemed, with the 
hot tears that fell from her eyes. And even as Vaidehi brooded in this way, 
pondering how to change his mind, anger took hold of her. But Kakutstha 
did not lose his self-composure and tried his best to appease her. 


Sarga 27 

[1-4] Although Rama tried to appease her, Maithill, daughter of Janaka, 
addressed her husband once more in the hopes of living in the forest. Sita 
was deeply distraught, and out of love and indignation she began to revile 
broad-chested Raghava: “What could my father, Vaideha, the lord of 
Mithila, have had in mind when he took you for a son-in-law, Rama, a 
woman with the body of a man? How the people lie in their ignorance. 
Rama’s ‘great power’ is not at all like the power of the blazing sun, maker 
of day. 

[S—10] “On what grounds are you so reluctant, what are you afraid of 
that you are ready to desert me, who has no other refuge? Do you not know, 
my mighty husband, that I bow to your will, that Iam as faithful to you as 
Savitri was to Satyavant, Dyumatsena’s son? Were I to go with you, 
blameless Raghava, I would not even think of looking at any man but you, 


unlike some women who disgrace their families. But like a procurer, Rama, 
you are willing of your own accord to hand me over to others—your wife, 
who came to you a virgin and who has been a virtuous woman all the long 
while she has lived with you. You must not leave for the forest without 
taking me. Let it be austerities, or the wilderness, or heaven, but let it be 
with you. 7As I follow behind you I shall no more tire on the path than on 
our pleasure beds. 

[11-15] “The kusa and kasa grass, the reeds, the rushes, and thorn trees 
will feel just like cotton or a soft pelt to me on the road with you. The dust 
raised by heavy winds that will settle on me, my love, I shall look upon as 
the costliest sandalwood paste. As I roam through the deep forest, there will 
be meadows for me to rest in, and to rest on couches spread with blankets 
could not give more pleasure. The leaves and roots and fruits you gather 
with your own hands and give me, however much or little there is, will taste 
like nectar to me. There will be fruits and flowers in their seasons to enjoy, 
and I shall not think with longing of my mother or father or home. 

[16-20] “And while you are there, you will not know any grief or 
displeasure on my account. I shall not be a burden. To be with you is 
heaven, to be without you hell. Knowing how deep my love is, Rama, you 
must take me when you go. But if you will not let me go to the forest when 
I am so set on it, I will take poison this very day, sooner than come under 
the sway of those who hate us. Afterward I could not survive in any case, 
my lord, because of the sorrow of being deserted by you. Better for me to 
die that very instant. For I could not bear the grief of it even for a moment, 
much less ten years of sorrow, and three, and one.” 

[21-23] Thus consumed with grief, she lamented long and piteously. 
Crying out in anguish, she shrieked and embraced her husband with all her 
might. His many words had wounded her, as poison arrows would a cow 
elephant. And the tears she had held in so long burst forth like a flame from 
a kindling stick. Water, clear as crystal, springing from her torment, came 
gushing from all around her eyes, like water from a pair of lotuses. 

[24—27] She was nearly insensible with sorrow when Rama took her in 
his arms and comforted her with these words: “If its price were your 
sorrow, my lady, I would refuse heaven itself. No, I am not afraid of 
anything, any more than is the self-existent Brahma. But without knowing 
your true feelings, my lovely, I could not consent to your living in the 


wilderness, though I am perfectly capable of protecting you. Since you are 
determined to live with me in the forest, Maithili, I could no sooner 
abandon you than a self-respecting man his reputation. 

[28-33] “But it is mghteousness, my smooth-limbed wife, the 
righteousness good men in the past have practiced, that I am set on 
following today, as its radiance follows the sun. And righteousness is this, 
my fair-hipped wife: submission to one’s mother and father. I could not bear 
to live were I to disobey their command. My father keeps to the path of 
righteousness and truth, and I wish to act just as he instructs me. That is the 
eternal way of righteousness. Follow me, my timid one, be my companion 
in righteousness. Go now and bestow precious objects on the brahmans, 
give food to the mendicants and all who ask for it. Hurry, don’t delay.” 
Realizing that her husband had acquiesced in her going, the lady was elated 
and set out at once to make the donations. Illustrious Sita was delighted, her 
every wish fulfilled by what her husband said, and in high spirits, the lovely 
woman set off to give money and precious objects to all who upheld 
righteousness. 


Sarga 28 

[1-4] Mighty Rama then spoke to Laksmana, who came and stood before 
him, his hands cupped in reverence, begging that he might be allowed to go, 
in the very lead: “Saumitri, were you to go with me now to the forest, who 
would support Kausalya and illustrious Sumitra? The mighty lord of the 
earth, who used to shower them with all they desired, as a rain cloud 
showers the earth, is now caught up in the snare of desire. And once the 
daughter of King Asvapati gains control of the kingdom, she will not show 
any goodwill to her co-wives in their sorrow.” 

[S—10] Addressed gently in this fashion by Rama, Laksmana, who was 
eloquent and knew proper speech, replied to him: “Your own power, my 
mighty brother, will no doubt ensure that Bharata scrupulously honors 
Kausalya and Sumitra. The noble Kausalya could support a thousand men 
like me, for she has acquired a thousand villages as her living. I will take 
my bow and arrows and bear the spade and basket. I will go in front of you, 
leading the way. I will always be there to bring you roots and fruits and 
such other produce of the forest as is proper fare for ascetics. You shall take 


your pleasure with Vaidehi on the mountain slopes while I do everything for 
you, when you are awake and when you are asleep.” 

[11-14] Rama was pleased with his words, and he replied: “Go, 
Saumitri, and take leave of all your friends. And those two divine, 
awesome-looking bows that great Varuna himself bestowed on Janaka at the 
grand sacrifice, the two impenetrable suits of divine armor, the two quivers 
with their inexhaustible arrows, and the two swords—bright as the sun and 
plated with gold—were all deposited with due reverence in our preceptor’s 
residence. You must collect those armaments, Laksmana, and come back at 
once.” 

[15—20] So, resolved to live in the forest, he bade farewell to his friends 
and to the guru of the Iksvakus, and gathered up those all-powerful arms. 
“aAnd with due reverence Saumitri, the tiger of the Raghus, displayed to 
Rama all that divine weaponry, which was adorned with garlands. When 
Laksmana had come back, Rama, joyfully and with full self-possession, 
said to him: “You have come, dear Laksmana, at the very moment I desired. 
I want your help, slayer of enemies, in giving away whatever wealth I 
possess to the poor brahmans, to the foremost of the twice-born brahmans 
who live here in firm devotion to my gurus, and, in particular, to all of my 
dependents. Fetch at once the foremost of the twice-born brahmans, noble 
Suyajna, Vasistha’s son. I will leave for the forest after paying homage to 
him and all the other twice-born men of learning.” 


Sarga 29 
[1-3] Acknowledging his brother’s most just and welcome order, Laksmana 
left and immediately entered Suyajfia’s house. The priest was in the fire- 
sanctuary, and, after greeting him, Laksmana said, “My friend, come visit 
the dwelling of the man who is doing what no man has ever done.” After 
performing the evening sandhya rites, he left straightaway with Saumitri 
and entered Rama’s lovely, majestic house. 

[4—9] On the arrival of Suyajfia, the master of the vedas who shone like a 
fire ablaze with the offering, Raghava and Sita cupped their hands in 
reverence and approached him. Kakutstha honored Suyajfia with gifts— 
magnificent armbands fashioned of gold, sparkling earrings, gems strung on 
golden chains, bracelets and wristbands, and many other precious objects. 
And then, at Sita’s urging, Rama said to him: “Take this necklace and 


golden chain to your wife, my dear friend. Here is a jeweled belt too, which 
Sita wishes to give you. She also wishes to bestow upon you this couch 
with exquisite coverlets, adorned with a variety of gems. And I have an 
elephant named Satrumjaya, given to me by my maternal uncle and worth a 
thousand others. I make you a gift of him, bull among the twice-born 
brahmans.” 

[10-17] When Suyajfia had been addressed in this fashion by Rama, he 
accepted all those gifts and conferred gracious blessings on Rama, 
Laksmana, and Sita. Rama then addressed his kind, attentive brother 
Saumitri with kind words, just as Brahma might address Indra, lord of the 
thirty gods: “*’Saumitri, summon those two eminent brahmans Agastya and 
Kausika and, in homage, shower precious objects on them, as crops are 
showered with rain. And as for the learned preceptor of the Taittirlyas—the 
master of the vedas who devotedly serves Kausalya with his blessings— 
present that twice-born brahman with a palanquin and slave-girls, Saumitri, 
as well as silken garments to his heart’s content. And you must give 
precious objects, garments, and money sufficient to content Citraratha, the 
noble adviser and charioteer, who has lived with us so long. Also present 
him with a thousand draft animals, two hundred oxen, and a thousand cows, 
Saumitri, to provide for his culinary needs.” Then Laksmana himself, tiger 
among men, gave the riches as ordered to the lordly brahmans, just as might 
Kubera, bestower of wealth. 

[18-22] Now, after Rama had bestowed such great wealth on each and 
every one of his dependents, he spoke to them as they stood before him 
choked with tears: “Both Laksmana’s dwelling and the house belonging to 
me may be occupied until I return.” After speaking with all his sorrowful 
dependents, he turned to the keeper of the treasury and said: “Have my 
treasure brought.” His dependents then fetched all his treasure. And the 
tiger among men, with Laksmana’s help, had the treasure distributed to the 
needy twice-born brahmans, young and old alike. There came a sallow 
twice-born brahman then, by the name of Trijata Gargya, all the way up to 
the fifth courtyard without anyone stopping him. 

[23—27] When he came before the prince, Trijata said: “Glorious prince, 
I am impoverished and have many children. I must live by constant 
gleaning in the forest. Please have regard for me.” Rama then replied to him 
jokingly: “There are still one thousand cows I have not yet bestowed. You 


shall have as many as you can cover by hurling your staff.” In a frantic 
rush, he girded up the rag around his loins and, brandishing his staff 
impetuously, hurled it with every ounce of his strength. Rama then said to 
Gargya, seeking to placate him: “You must not be angry, truly. This was 
only a joke on my part.” Then the great sage Trijata, along with his wife, 
accepted the herd of cows and pronounced blessings on the great prince 
conducive to fame, strength, joy, and happiness. 


Sarga 30 

[1-4] Now, after the two Raghavas and Vaidehi had bestowed vast wealth 
upon the brahmans, they went to see their father. How brilliant they looked 
when they took up their formidable weapons, which Sita had ornamented 
and hung with flower garlands. The wealthy townsfolk went up to the roofs 
of their palaces and mansions and to the tops of many-storied buildings and 
watched despondently. The streets were so thronged with people as to be 
impassable, and so they went up to the roofs of their palaces and in 
desolation gazed down at Raghava. 

[S—9] When the people saw Rama going on foot and without the royal 
parasol, their hearts were crushed with grief, and they said many different 
things: “The prince, whom a vast army of four divisions used to follow as 
he went forth, is all alone now, with only Laksmana and Sita to follow 
behind him. Though he has known the taste of kingly power and has always 
granted the wishes of the needy, in his veneration for righteousness he 
refuses to let his father break his word. People on the royal highway can 
now look at Sita, a woman whom even creatures of the sky have never had 
a glimpse of before. Sita is used to cosmetics and partial to red sandalwood 
paste, but the rain, the heat, and the cold will soon ruin her complexion. 

[10-12] “ccSurely it is some spirit that has possessed Dasaratha and 
spoken today, for the king could never bring himself to exile his beloved 
son. How could a man force his own son into exile, even an unvirtuous son, 
let alone one who has vanquished the world simply by his good conduct? 
Benevolence, compassion, learning, good character, restraint, and 
equanimity—these are the six virtues that adorn Raghava, the best of men. 

[13-14] “Therefore the people are sorely hurt by any injury to him, like 
aquatic creatures when the water dries up in the hot season. When the lord 
of the world is hurt, so is all the world, as the fruit and flowers of a tree are 


hurt by an injury to its root. Let us at once take our wives and our kinsmen, 
and—like Laksmana—follow Raghava as he goes forth, wherever he may 
go. 

[15-20] “Let us abandon our gardens, our fields and homes, and follow 
righteous Rama, to share his sorrow and joy. Let us unearth our buried 
treasure, remove our stores of grain and our wealth, and take all our 
valuables. And when the household gods have abandoned them, and their 
courtyards are falling into disrepair and the dust settling thick upon them, 
let Kaikeyi take possession of the dwellings we have left behind. Let the 
wilderness to which Raghava is going become our city, and the city we 
abandon turn into a wilderness. Let all the animals leave their haunts, the 
snakes their lairs, the birds and beasts their mountain slopes, and take 
possession of what we have abandoned.” 

[21—24] Such were the various comments different people were making, 
and Rama heard them, but still he did not alter his resolve. “4And even when 
Rama saw the people in their anguish, not the least anguish touched him— 
he was smiling instead as he walked on, eager to see his father, eager to 
carry out his father’s order faithfully. Rama, the great son of Dasaratha 
Aiksvaka, on the point of leaving for the forest, caught sight of the 
anguished Sumantra, and only then did he come to a halt, in order to gain 
admittance to his father. Because he so cherished righteousness, Raghava 
had his mind firmly made up to enter the forest on his father’s order. With a 
glance at Sumantra, he said, “Announce my arrival to the king.” 


Sarga 31 
[1-8] Dispatched by Rama, the charioteer, his senses numb with misery, 
entered at once. He saw the lord of men heaving sighs. The wise charioteer 
gazed at him grieving over Rama in deep mental turmoil. He then 
approached with his hands cupped in reverence, and said: “Tiger among 
men, your son is here waiting at the door. He has given away all his wealth 
to the brahmans and his dependents. Let Rama, who always strives for 
truth, come and see you, please. He has taken leave of all his friends and 
now wishes to see you. He is about to depart for the great forest. Lord of the 
world, grant him audience, a man whom all kingly virtues encircle as beams 
encircle the sun.” The truthful and righteous lord of men, like the ocean in 
profundity and as free from taint as the sky, replied: “Sumantra, bring all 


my wives to me. I wish to see Raghava in the company of all my wives.” 
Sumantra then went straight into the inner apartments and said to the 
women, “The king, your husband, summons you. Go to him at once.” 

[9-11] When Sumantra had addressed them in this fashion by order of 
the king, all the women proceeded to their husband’s chamber in 
compliance with his command. Half seven hundred ladies with coppery 
eyes, who held firm to their vows, gathered around Kausalya and slowly 
made their way. When the king and lord of the earth observed that his wives 
had come, he said to the charioteer, “Sumantra, now bring my son.” 

[12-17] Then, together with Rama, Laksmana, and Maithili, the 
charioteer at once came forward into the presence of the lord of the world. 
Seeing his son at a distance approaching with his hands cupped in 
reverence, the tormented king in the midst of his womenfolk started up 
suddenly from his throne. At the sight of Rama the lord of the people ran 
impetuously forward, but, broken by sorrow, he fell to the ground in a faint 
before he reached him. Rama flew to him at once, as did the great chariot- 
warrior Laksmana, as the lord of men lay insensible with sorrow and lost in 
grief. And suddenly in the king’s chamber there broke out a shrill cry of 
“Alas, alas! Rama!” on the part of thousands of women, their cry made all 
the louder by the jingling of their jewelry. Rama and Laksmana both took 
him in their arms, and, with Sita’s help, they laid him on a couch, all three 
of them in tears. 

[18—23] After a moment the lord of the earth, overwhelmed by a sea of 
grief, regained consciousness. Then Rama cupped his hands in reverence 
and said to him: “I ask leave of you, your majesty, for you are lord of us all. 
I am about to set out for the Dandaka forest. Look kindly on me and give 
your leave also to Laksmana. Sita too shall follow me to the forest. Neither 
of them could be dissuaded despite the many sound arguments I offered. 
Have done with grieving, bestower of honor, and give leave to us all, to 
Laksmana, Sita, and me, as Prajapati, lord of creatures, once gave his 
children leave.” Raghava waited intently for the lord of the world to grant 
him permission to live in the forest. The king looked at him and said: 
“Raghava, I was deceived by Kaikeyi into granting a boon. Imprison me 
now and become king of Ayodhya yourself.” 

[24—816*—27] When Rama had been addressed in this way by his father, 
the lord of men, he, foremost of those who uphold righteousness, cupped 


his hands in reverence and in full command of his words replied to him: 
“You shall be lord of the earth, your majesty, for countless years to come, 
and I will live in the wilderness. You must not on my account act 
untruthfully. After I have passed the nine years and five of life in the 
forest, I shall once again clasp your feet, lord of men, when the promise has 
been fulfilled.” The king wept in anguish at the snare of truth in which he 
was caught. But under silent pressure from Kaikeyt, he said at last to his 
beloved son: “Go in safety, my child, and may no harm befall you. May 
your way be safe and free from all dangers, and may it lead you to good 
fortune, prosperity, and back home once more. But by no means must you 
go now, this evening, my son. Spend the night in the company of your 
mother and me. Tomorrow morning, with all your desires satisfied, you may 
set out.” 

[28-32] When Rama heard the words of his anguished father, he was 
desolate, and so was his brother Laksmana. He replied: “Who will confer 
upon me tomorrow the benefits I should have tonight? I prefer, to any 
objects of desire, merely to depart. I abdicate all claim to this treasure-laden 
earth, its kingdom and people, its stores of grain and wealth. Let it be made 
over to Bharata. So put an end to your sorrow, do not let tears overwhelm 
you. The indomitable lord of rivers, the ocean, remains forever unperturbed. 
It is not kingship or comfort or even Maithili that I desire, but that you be 
truthful, bull among men, not false. 

[33-38] “I abdicate the city, the kingdom, and the entire land. Let it all 
be made over to Bharata. I will obey your command and leave for my long 
stay in the forest. Let Bharata hold absolute rule over the land I abdicate— 
this kindly land with its firm boundaries, its mountain ranges, towns, and 
woodlands. Let it be as you have said, lord of men. Never to the same 
degree have I set my heart on great objects of desire or on my own pleasure, 
your majesty, as on your command, which men of learning always endorse. 
Put an end to your sorrow on my account, my blameless father. If it meant 
entangling you in falsehood, my blameless father, I would reject sovereign 
kingship, reject all objects of desire, all comforts, Maithili, and even life 
itself. The truth of your vow must be preserved. For once I enter the forest 
with its variegated trees, I shall be happy eating fruits and roots and 
observing mountains, rivers, and lakes. Therefore, you should be happy as 
well.” 


Sarga 32 

[1-8] Tormented by his own promise, Dasaratha Aiksvaka, sighing deeply 
again and again, in an urgent voice tearfully said this to Sumantra: 
“Charioteer, I want an army, a force of the full four divisions, to be 
provisioned with every luxury and marshaled at once as escort for Raghava. 
Let there be eminent courtesans to adorn the prince’s retinue and prosperous 
merchants with choice wares to display. You must handsomely pay all his 
dependents and all those whose acts of strength have pleased him and 
assign them to his suite as well. Killing deer and elephants, drinking forest 
liquor, and viewing the different rivers, he will not think with longing of the 
kingdom. The entire contents of my granary and treasury are to go with 
Rama while he lives in the desolate forest. His life in the forest will be 
pleasant, what with holding sacrifices at holy places, conferring fitting 
priestly stipends, and consorting with seers. Great-armed Bharata shall 
protect Ayodhya. Let majestic Rama be sent off with every object of 
desire.” 

[9-13] While Kakutstha was speaking in this fashion, Kaikeyt was 
gripped by fear. Her mouth went dry and her voice was choked. "Pale and 
frightened, Kaikeyi spoke out, “My good man, Bharata will not take charge 
of a kingdom stripped of its wealth, like a cup of wine drained to the dregs, 
an empty kingdom bare of all objects of enjoyment!” While Kaikeyi was 
speaking so viciously in this way, abandoning all shame, King Dasaratha 
answered his large-eyed wife, “Will you yoke me to a burden, malicious 
woman, and beat me even as I bear it?” But Kaikeyi’s fury was only 
redoubled, and she said to the king: “It was in your lineage that Sagara 
dispossessed his eldest son, who was known as Asamafya. This one, Rama, 
must leave in the same way.” Thus addressed, King Dasaratha merely 
replied, “Damn you!” And although all the people were ashamed of her, she 
paid them no mind. 

[14-18] Then an aged minister named Siddhartha, an honest man 
esteemed by the king, addressed Kaikeyt: “But that evil-minded Asamaiya 
took pleasure in seizing children playing on the road and then hurling them 
into the waters of the Sarayii. When the people of the city saw this, they 
were all enraged and told the king, ‘Increaser of the realm, you must choose 
one: either Asamafya or us.’ The king asked, ‘What has happened to cause 
this fear of yours?’ and the citizens responded to the king’s inquiry with 


these words: ‘When our little children are out playing, this madman hurls 
them into the Sarayti and enjoys it to no end in his insanity.’ 

[19-22] “When he heard what the people said, the lord of men 
renounced his malevolent son in his desire to please them. It was thus 
righteous King Sagara renounced him. But what evil has Rama done that he 
should be dispossessed like that?” After listening to Siddhartha’s speech, 
the king, in a failing voice and in words fraught with grief, said to Kaikeyt: 
“T will accompany Rama today, renouncing altogether the kingdom, 
pleasure, and wealth. And with King Bharata may you long enjoy the 
kingdom to your heart’s content.” 


Sarga 33 

[1-5] When Rama had heard the minister’s speech, he, familiar with proper 
deference as he was, addressed Dasaratha deferentially: “I have given up 
pleasures, your majesty, and shall live in the wilderness on things of the 
wild. I have given up all attachments; what use then have I of an escort? 
Would a man who gives away a prize elephant cling to the cinch-belt? Why 
would he concern himself with the rope after giving up the splendid 
elephant? So it is for me too, best of men and lord of the world. What use 
have I for a many-bannered army? I must refuse it all. Let them bring me 
only barkcloth garments. And have them bring me a small basket too, and a 
spade, before I go to the forest to dwell there for fourteen years.” 

[6-8] Kaikeyi herself then brought the barkcloth garments to Raghava, 
shamelessly ordering him, “Put them on!” before the crowd of people. The 
tiger among men took a pair of them from Kaikeyi, and, putting aside his 
delicate garments, he dressed himself in the clothes of a sage. Laksmana 
too, then and there, removed his lovely clothing and put on the garb of an 
ascetic, right before his father. 

[9-13] Then Sita, who was dressed in silks, seeing the barkcloth garment 
that was meant for her to wear, was frightened, like a spotted doe at the 
sight of a trap. Disconcerted and embarrassed, she took it up. Then she said 
to her husband, the very image of the king of gandharvas, “How do the 
sages who live in the forest put on barkcloth?” She picked one up in her 
hand and held it to her neck and stood there, the daughter of Janaka, 
awkward and ashamed. At once Rama, foremost of those who uphold 
righteousness, came to Sita and, with his own hands, fastened it over her 


silks. Dressed in barkcloth, she stood there as if defenseless, though her 
defender was at her side, while the people all cried out, “Damn you, 
Dasaratha!” 

[14-19] Dasaratha Aiksvaka heaved a burning sigh as he said to his 
wife: “Kaikeyi, Sita must not go in garments of bark and Ausa grass. Surely 
it suffices you, evil creature, that Rama is being exiled. Must you heap these 
vile crimes on top of that?” With this, the king hung his head and sat still, 
and Rama addressed him once more before leaving for the forest: 
“Righteous Father, Kausalya here, my illustrious mother, is an aged woman 
of noble character, and she does not reproach you, my lord. She has never 
known adversity before, and bereft of me she will be plunged into a sea of 
grief. Show her higher regard, please, granter of boons. Equal of great 
Indra, this mother of mine dotes on her child. Please, take care that she not 
be tortured with grief when I am in the forest, that she does not lay down 
her life and go her way to the house of Yama, god of death.” 


Sarga 34 

[1-7] Upon hearing Rama’s words and seeing him dressed in the garb of a 
sage, the king, along with all his wives, was stricken senseless. He was so 
broken by sorrow that he could not look at Raghava, so sick at heart that he 
could not address him to his face. The great-armed lord of the earth fell 
unconscious for a moment, and then in sorrow he began to lament, thinking 
only of Rama: “I think that in the past I must have injured many living 
things or made many childless; since such a thing has befallen me. Before 
one’s fated hour has come life cannot slip from the body, for Kaikeyi has 
tortured me and still I am not dead—I who see before me my own son, who 
resembles the purifying fire, taking off his delicate garments and dressing in 
the clothes of an ascetic. The people too are tortured, and all because one 
woman, Kaikeyi, resorted to this deception in the pursuit of her own ends.” 

[8—13] After speaking in this fashion, his eyes dimmed by tears, he cried 
out, “Rama!” only once, and then could speak no more. But when, after a 
moment, he regained his senses, the lord of the earth, his eyes filled with 
tears, said to Sumantra: “Harness the finest horses to a royal carriage and 
return; you must convey my illustrious son out of this country. Such, I 
guess, must be the reward the virtuous earn by their virtues, if this good and 
heroic prince is exiled to the forest by his mother and his father.” 


Acknowledging the king’s command, Sumantra left at a quick pace. He 
harnessed the horses to the decorated carriage and then returned. Cupping 
his hands in reverence, the charioteer informed the prince that the carriage 
was standing ready, ornamented with gold and harnessed with excellent 
horses. 

[14-18] The king hurriedly summoned the officer in charge of the 
treasury. He was a meticulous and altogether honest man, with an accurate 
knowledge of times and places. “Go at once,” he told him, “and fetch 
precious garments and choice ornaments for Vaideht, calculating against the 
number of years.” Thus addressed by the lord of men, he went at once to the 
treasure room, brought all of that, and presented it to Sita. Noble Vaideht, 
on the point of leaving for the forest, adorned her noble limbs with the 
sparkling jewelry. And in her rich adornment, Vaidehi cast a deep luster 
over the chamber—it was like daybreak when Vivasvant, the sun, rises and 
spreads its splendor over the sky. 

[19-21] Kausalya, her mother-in-law, then took Maithili in her arms, 
kissed her on the forehead, and then said to the virtuous princess: “When 
women who have been constantly gratified with things to please them do 
not hold their husbands in respect when they have fallen low, they are 
regarded as wicked women in the eyes of all the world. You must not feel 
disdain for my son in his banishment. He is your deity, whether he be rich 
or poor.” 

[22—28] Sita knew her words were in harmony with what was right and 
good, and, with her hands cupped in reverence, she faced her mother-in-law 
and replied: “I will act exactly as my noble lady instructs me. I fully 
understand how to behave toward my husband; I have learned well. My 
lady ought not to liken me to wicked people. I could no more leave the path 
of righteousness than its radiance can leave the moon. Without strings a lute 
cannot be played, without wheels a chariot cannot move, and without her 
husband a woman finds no happiness, though she may have a hundred sons. 
There is a limit to what a father can give, a limit to what a mother or son 
can give, but a husband gives without any limit. What wife would not 
revere him? I for my part understand this; | am a high-born woman who has 
learned right from wrong. My lady, how could I be disdainful? A husband is 
a woman’s deity.” As Kausalya listened to Sita, the words touched the good 
woman’s heart, and she suddenly burst out in tears of joy and sorrow. 


[29-31] Then Rama, who understood best of all the meaning of 
righteousness, cupped his hands in reverence and approached his mother 
where she stood in the place of honor among the others. And he said to her: 
“Do not be sorrowful, mother. Have regard for my father. My stay in the 
forest will soon be over. The nine years and five will pass for you like a 
night’s sleep, and you will see me in the company of my loved ones, having 
come home safe and sound.” 

[32-36] These few sensible words were all he said to the woman who 
bore him. Then he turned his gaze and looked at his other three hundred and 
fifty mothers. They were just as deeply anguished, and, with his hands 
cupped in reverence, the son of Dasaratha addressed them with these 
righteous words: “If in our living together I ever showed you any rudeness, 
however unwittingly, please forgive me for it. I bid you all farewell.” But 
even as Raghava was speaking in this fashion, a scream broke out like the 
crying of kraunca hens from the wives of the lord of men. The palace of 
Dasaratha, where once muraja and panava drums rumbled like storm 
clouds, was now filled with lamentation and wailing, so bitter was the 
sorrow of this calamity. 


Sarga 35 

[1—8] In desolation Rama, Sita, and Laksmana clasped the feet of the king. 
Then, cupping their hands, they reverently circled him. After taking leave 
of him, Sita and righteous Raghava, distraught with grief, did obeisance to 
his mother. Directly after his brother, Laksmana did obeisance to Kausalya 
and then clasped the feet of his own mother, Sumitra. As great-armed 
Laksmana Saumitri paid reverence to his mother, she wept and kissed him 
on the forehead, and, with his welfare at heart, she said to him: “You are 
determined to live in the forest out of deep loyalty to your loved ones. Do 
not be inattentive, my son, when your brother Rama is making his way. He 
is your one refuge in times of both adversity and prosperity, my blameless 
son. The way of righteousness good people follow in the world is just this: 
submission to the will of one’s elders. Remember, too, the conduct that has 
been the age-old custom of this House: liberality, consecration for sacrifice, 
and readiness to give up one’s life in battle. Look upon Rama as Dasaratha, 
look upon Janaka’s daughter as me, look upon the woods as Ayodhya. Go in 
happiness, my dear son.” 


[9-11] Then Sumantra, who understood deference, cupped his hands in 
reverence and with deference, addressed Kakutstha as Matali might address 
Vasava: “Bless you! Be pleased to mount the carriage, glorious prince, and 
I will at once convey you wherever you tell me, Rama. For you must now 
commence the fourteen years of life in the forest, which the queen has 
forced upon you.” 

[12-16] When fair-hipped Sita had finished ornamenting herself, with a 
cheerful heart she boarded the carriage that stood gleaming like the sun. 
Sumantra placed inside the driver’s box the brothers’ collection of weapons, 
their armor, and the leather basket, and when he saw they both had boarded 
with Sita, he briskly urged on the superb horses, as swift as the wind. As 
Raghava set out for his long stay in the great wilderness, a wave of stupor 
passed through the city, overwhelming the army and the people. There was 
turmoil and confusion in the town, the elephants became wild and unruly, 
and the horses clangored noisily. 

[17-23] The town was in utter agony. The people—young and old alike 
—began to run straight toward Rama, as men tormented by summer’s heat 
run toward water. Hanging on to the chariot’s sides and back, they raised 
their tearful faces, and in their bitter sorrow they all cried out: “Charioteer, 
draw in the horses’ reins, go slowly, slowly! Let us look upon Rama’s face, 
for soon it will be lost to our sight. Surely the heart of Rama’s mother must 
be made of iron if it does not break as her godlike child is going off to the 
forest. Vaidehi has accomplished her purpose—she follows her lord like a 
shadow, earnest in doing what is right, and can no more leave him than 
sunlight can leave Mount Meru. Ah, Laksmana, you have achieved your 
goal; you will have the chance to serve your kind-spoken, godlike brother 
all the while. This is a great achievement for you, a great blessing, the way 
to heaven, that you are following after him.” As they said these things, their 
tears welled up and they could not hold them back. 

[24—26] Then, in his desolation, the king, accompanied by his desolate 
wives, emerged from the palace, crying, “Let me see my beloved son!” 
Before him could be heard a mighty din of women crying, like the wailing 
of cow elephants when their great bull is captured. Rama’s father, majestic 
King Kakutstha, now looked as pallid as the full, hare-marked moon 
dimmed at the hour of eclipse. 


[27-31] Then, behind Rama, a tumultuous clamor broke out among the 
men as they saw the king collapsing under his heavy sorrow. “Oh Rama!” 
some of the people wailed, and others cried out, “Oh R&ma’s mother!” 
while all the women of the inner apartments lamented over the crying king. 
Rama glanced back and saw his mother and the dazed and wretched king 
trailing behind him. But he was caught up in the snare of righteousness and 
could not gaze at them openly. They were on foot who should have ridden, 
who had known only comfort and did not deserve such suffering. And when 
he saw them, he exhorted the charioteer, crying out, “Go faster!” For the 
tiger among men could not bear the heartrending sight of his father and 
mother; it was like a goad tormenting an elephant. 

[32-38] Kausalya ran weeping after the carriage, crying, “Rama, Rama! 
Oh Sita, Laksmana!” He glanced back often at his mother, who seemed 
almost to be dancing. With the king crying, “Stop!” and Raghava, “Go on! 
Go on!” Sumantra’s very heart seemed caught between two wheels. But 
Rama said to him: “If the king should rebuke you, you can tell him you did 
not hear him. For to prolong his suffering would the worst thing of all.” He 
did as Rama told him, and, taking leave of the people, the charioteer urged 
on the already racing horses. After the king’s people had reverently circled 
Rama, they turned back, but their hearts did not, nor the rush of their tears. 
To the great king Dasaratha his ministers then said, “A person one hopes to 
see returning should not be followed out too far.” The king heeded what 
they said, for it conformed with every virtue, and then, despondent and 
wretched, his body bathed in sweat, he halted with his wives, gazing out 
after his son. 


Sarga 36 
[1-6] As the tiger among men was departing, his hands cupped in 
reverence, a loud cry of anguish broke out from the women of the inner 
apartments: “Where can our defender be going, he who was the recourse 
and refuge of this weak, defenseless, and miserable people? He never grows 
angry, whatever the insult, he avoids giving cause for anger, he calms the 
angry and shares every sorrow—where is he going? The mighty prince who 
treats us as he treats his own mother, Kausalya—where can the great man 
be going? Kaikeyt hounded the king until he drove him into the forest. 
Where can the guardian of this people, of the entire world, be going? The 


king must be mad to exile Rama to a life in the forest, a righteous prince, 
devoted to truth and who is loved by every living soul on earth.” 

[7-11] Thus did all the queens, like cows who have lost their calves, 
weep in the torment of their sorrow and shrilly wail. Already inflamed with 
grief for his son, the lord of the earth grew yet more sorrowful, still hearing 
the dreadful cry of anguish from the women of the inner apartments. No 
agnihotra rites were offered, and the sun vanished. Elephants let their 
fodder drop, cows would not suckle their calves. The constellation 
Trisanku, the planets Mars, Jupiter, and Mercury too, all took ominous 
positions athwart the moon. The stars lost their radiance, the planets lost 
their glow, and the constellation Visakha shone, clouded by smoke, in the 
sky. 

[12—17] A wave of despair swept suddenly over all the people of the city, 
and no one gave any thought to nourishment or amusements. The faces of 
the people on the royal highway were awash with tears. No one showed any 
sign of delight; all were lost in grief. The cool breeze stopped blowing, the 
hare-marked moon no longer looked serene, the sun did not warm the 
world, the universe was in chaos. Husbands became indifferent to their 
wives, children became indifferent, and brothers too. All turned their back 
on everyone else and gave their thoughts to Rama alone. As for Rama’s 
friends, they were all bewildered; crushed by the weight of their grief, they 
could not arise from where they lay fallen. Abandoned by the great prince, 
Ayodhya, with all its hosts of soldiers and herds of horses and elephants, 
was tormented by a heavy weight of fear and began to quake dreadfully and 
resound, just as the earth would, mountains and all, if abandoned by Indra, 
smasher of citadels. 


Sarga 37 
[1-5] Now, as Rama was departing, he raised a cloud of dust, and as long as 
it was visible, the best of the Iksvakus could not turn his eyes away. As long 
as the king could see his beloved, righteous son, he seemed to stand firm on 
the ground just to have him in sight. But once the lord of the earth could no 
longer see even Rama’s dust, in anguish and despair he fell to the ground. 
His wife Kausalya came up and stood by his right arm, and to his left side 
came Kaikeyi, whose only love was for Bharata. The king, a man of 


prudence, righteousness, and courtesy, stared at Kaikeyi, his senses reeling, 
and said: 

[6-11] “Kaikeyt, do not touch me, you evil woman, I do not want to see 
you. You are not my wife, you have no relationship to me. And your 
dependents have nothing to do with me, nor I with them. In pure selfishness 
you repudiated righteousness, and I repudiate you. Once I took your hand 
and led you round the marriage fire, but now I renounce it all, both in this 
world and the next. And if Bharata should be pleased at securing sovereign 
kingship, may any funeral offering he makes never reach me.” "As the lord 
of men lay coated with dust, Queen Kausalya helped him up and, racked 
with grief, began to lead him home. As if he had intentionally slain a 
brahman, or held his hand in a fire, the righteous king burned with remorse 
to think of his son living a life of asceticism. 

[12-18] Turning back again and again, he collapsed in the ruts of the 
carriage, and his figure, like the many-rayed sun’s at the hour of eclipse, 
lost all its splendor. Tortured with sorrow, he began to lament as he thought 
with longing of his beloved son. He imagined his son to be returning to the 
city, and said: “I see the tracks in the road made by the splendid horses 
carrying my great son, but I cannot see him. No, surely he is now resting 
somewhere, at the foot of a tree, where he will sleep with a log or a stone 
for his pillow. Wretched and caked with dirt, he will heave a sigh as he 
arises from the ground, like the bull of an elephant herd emerging from a 
mountain stream. Men who live in the forest will probably be watching as 
long-armed Rama, the protector of the world, gets up and pushes on like 
one who lacks a protector. I hope you are satisfied, Kaikey1; now you must 
live in the kingdom as a widow. For, without the tiger among men, I cannot 
bear to live.” 

[19-21] As the king lamented in this way, he reentered the best of cities 
surrounded by a mass of people the way a mourner enters a cremation 
ground. The squares and courtyards were empty, the shops and temples 
closed, the thoroughfares nearly deserted, the people haggard, feeble, and 
racked with sorrow—such was the sight that met the king’s eyes. But his 
thoughts were for Rama alone, and, lost in lamentation, he entered his 
dwelling, like the sun passing behind a cloud. 

[22—28] In the absence of Rama, Vaidehi, and Laksmana, his palace 
resembled a great, placid lake from which Suparna has snatched all the 


serpents. “Take me at once to the dwelling of Kausalya, Rama’s mother,” 
the king demanded, and the watchmen at the gate took him. He entered 
Kausalya’s chamber and lay upon the couch, and his mind began to reel. 
Looking around, the great and mighty king reached out his arms and cried 
at the top of his voice: “Oh Raghava, you have abandoned me! How 
fortunate those good men who will be alive at the hour when Rama comes 
back and who will see him and embrace him. I cannot see you, Kausalya! 
Oh please touch me with your hand. My sight has followed after Rama and 
has not yet returned.” Seeing the lord of men on the couch lost in brooding 
about Rama, the queen sat down close beside him, in the greatest anguish. 
She heaved a deep sigh and then began to lament bitterly. 


Sarga 38 

[1-5] Kausalya gazed at the lord of the earth as he lay on the couch 
prostrate with grief. Racked with grief for her son, she spoke: “Now that 
Kaikeyi, like a fork-tongued viper, has spit her venom on Raghava, the tiger 
among men, she will behave like a snake that has shed its skin. Now that 
she has had her way and exiled Rama, the charming creature will apply 
herself to further terrorizing me, like a vicious serpent in the house. If only 
Rama could have lived at home though it meant his begging in the city 
streets! You had the freedom to grant such a boon, which at the worst had 
made my son a slave. But you let Kaikeyi at her own sweet pleasure throw 
Rama from his place and assign him as a portion for rdksasas, the way a 
sacrificer at the half-month rites throws a portion away for them. 

[6-10] “My mighty son, the great-armed bowman with a step like a king 
of elephants, is probably now entering the forest with his wife and 
Laksmana. They have never known the sorrows of the forest, but you 
yielded to Kaikeyi and abandoned them to a life in the forest. What can be 
their lot? Stripped of everything of value and exiled at the very hour of their 
triumph, how are these three wretched young people to live with nothing 
but fruits and roots to eat? If only it were now the hour that mercifully will 
end my grief, when I set eyes on Raghava again with his wife and brother. 
When will Ayodhya hear that the two mighty brothers have come back and 
once again be a glorious city, crowded with delighted people, garlanded 
with high-flying banners? 


[11-16] “When will the city see those tigers among men returned from 
the forest and exult in delight like the ocean on a full-moon night? When 
will the great-armed mighty prince enter the city of Ayodhya with Sita on 
the carriage ahead of him, like a cow before her bull? When will people by 
the thousands go out onto the royal highway to scatter parched grain upon 
my two foe-taming sons as they make their entrance? When will maidens 
proffer flowers and fruits to the twice-born brahmans and reverently circle 
the city in delight? When will he come back to me—my righteous son, 
young as a deathless god yet with an old man’s wisdom and boyishness that 
warms my heart? I guess, my mighty husband, yes, it must no doubt be that 
once upon a time, when calves were thirsting to drink, I ruthlessly hacked 
off the udders of the cows, their mothers. 

[17-20] “And so now, tiger among men, I who love my child so have 
been made childless by Kaikeyt, as brutally as a lion might do to a cow with 
her young calf. For I have but one son—he is gifted with every virtue, a 
master of all learning—and without my son I cannot bear to live. I have not 
the least bit of strength to live in this world if I cannot see my beloved and 
mighty great-armed son. Here, see, a fire kindled by grief for my son has 
burst forth and is ravaging me, as the earth is ravaged in summertime by the 
rays of the blazing, holy sun, maker of day.” 


Sarga 39 

[1-5] While Kausalya, the foremost of women, was lamenting in this 
fashion, Sumitra, standing firm by what was right, addressed her with these 
righteous words: “My noble lady, your son is the very best of men and truly 
virtuous. What need have you to lament like this and weep so wretchedly? 
You should never grieve over Rama, my lady, so excellent a son. Powerful 
as he is, he left, surrendering the kingship, to ensure that his great father 
might be true to his word. He took his stand by righteousness as the learned 
scrupulously practice it, and which has its rewards everlastingly, even after 
death. Blameless Laksmana will be a blessing to the great prince. He has 
always behaved with perfect propriety toward him, and he shows 
compassion to all creatures. 

[6-10] “Although Vaidehi is fully aware of how painful life in the 
wilderness is, although she has known only comfort, still she is following 
your righteous son. What gain has your mighty son failed to reap, who is 


waving the banner of his fame throughout the world by his self-restraint and 
devotion to truth? Clearly the sun will recognize Rama’s purity and 
incomparable grandeur, and will not dare to burn his body with its rays. A 
pleasant breeze will attend on Raghava, blowing through the woodlands, 
gracious at all seasons, with temperate warmth or coolness. As the 
blameless prince sleeps at night, the moon—like a father—will clasp him in 
its embrace, caress him with cool beams, and refresh him. 

[11-16] “Then, too, the mighty prince was given divine weapon-spells 
by Brahma, when he saw him slay in battle the lord of danavas, 
Timidhvaja’s son. Together with these three—Prthivi, goddess of the earth, 
Vaidehi, and Sri, goddess of royal fortune—Rama, bull among men, will 
soon be consecrated. Your eyes will soon drop joyful tears for the one you 
watched depart with tears of sorrow falling. Soon you will see your child 
and his loved ones greeting you, and you will shed tears of gladness like a 
string of clouds in the rains. Your son will soon return to Ayodhya to grant 
you every boon. He will soon bow down and clasp your feet with his firm 
and gentle hands.” When Rama’s mother, the wife of the god among men, 
had listened to the words of Laksmana’s mother, her deep-seated grief 
suddenly dissipated, like a cloud in the autumn when it holds but little 
water. 


Sarga 40 

[1-4] Now, as the great prince Rama, who always strove for truth, was 
setting out to make his life in the forest, the people who were devoted to 
him followed after him. They would not stop following Rama’s carriage 
even though the multitude of his loved ones and the king had been forced to 
turn back. For to those who lived in Ayodhya, the glorious and virtuous 
prince was as well loved as the full moon. His subjects kept pleading with 
him, but Kakutstha, to ensure his father’s truthfulness, pressed on toward 
the forest. 

[S—10] Rama gazed at his people with affection, as if to drink them in 
with his eyes. And he spoke to them affectionately as though they were his 
children: “Let the love and respect the residents of Ayodhya feel for me be 
transferred in full to Bharata, as a kindness to me. Bharata, the delight of 
Kaikeyi, is of exemplary conduct, and he will do all that is required to 
ensure your welfare and happiness. Though only a boy, he has an old man’s 


wisdom, though gentle he is endowed with all the virtues of a hero. He will 
be a fit master for you and will shield you from all danger. He possesses all 
the virtues a king requires, and he has been recognized as prince regent. 
Then, too, as I myself have instructed you, you must obey your master’s 
order. And finally, if you would do me a kindness, please take care that the 
great king does not suffer when I have gone to live in the forest.” 

[11-15] But the more committed to righteousness Dasarathi showed 
himself to be, the more the subjects desired to have him as their lord. By 
their virtues Rama and Saumitri seemed to bind and draw to them the 
desolate, tearful people of the city. Now, certain twice-born brahmans who 
were elders on three counts—by their years, wisdom, and authority—began 
to cry out from afar, their heads trembling with age: “Ho there, ho! you 
purebred horses speeding away with Rama. Stop, turn back! Be good to 
your master. You should be carrying your master back, not away from the 
city to the forest.” When Rama perceived the anguished outcry raised by the 
aged twice-born brahmans, he alighted at once from the carriage. 

[16-20] Then Rama, together with Sita and Laksmana, proceeded on 
foot, with measured tread, his heart set wholly on the forest. For the twice- 
born brahmans were on foot, and Rama looked with pity on them. He so 
cherished propriety that he could not ride off and leave them. Seeing that 
Rama only continued on, the twice-born brahmans were disconcerted and in 
deep agony they said to him: “The entire twice-born brahman order will 
follow you, who are deferential to brahmans, and these sacred fires will 
accompany you, borne on the shoulders of the twice-born. Just see the 
white umbrellas given to us at the vajapeya rite, which are following along 
behind you like hamsas when the rains have ended. 

[21—25] “Since you never received your royal parasol, we will shade you 
with these, our own vdjapeya umbrellas, when the sun’s rays are scorching 
you. We have always turned our minds to the study of the vedic mantras, 
but now our minds are made up on your account, dear boy, to turn to a life 
in the forest. Our greatest treasure, the vedas, lies stored in our hearts; our 
wives shall stay at home protected by their chastity. This resolution of ours 
will not be reconsidered; we have made up our minds to go with you. But as 
you have always been the one who has shown regard for righteousness, will 
any regard now be paid to what is right? We have bowed our heads, white- 
haired as the hamsa and covered now with dust from prostrating on the 


ground; we have pleaded with you to return, you who have always done 
what is proper. 

[26-30] “For many of us twice-born brahmans who have come here have 
already commenced sacrifices. Their consummation depends on your 
returning, dear child. All living things, moving and unmoving, are filled 
with devotion for you. Show your devotion to these devotees who are 
pleading with you. “Even the trees, unable to follow you as their roots 
prevent their movement, seem to be mourning as the gusting wind uplifts 
their branches. And the birds as well have stopped flitting about and 
foraging for food. They sit in one place in the trees, pleading, 1t seems, with 
you, who have always taken pity on all creatures.” And even as the twice- 
born brahmans sent up this mournful wail in order to turn Raghava back, 
the Tamasa River came into view to aid, so it seemed, in stopping him. 


Sarga 41 

[1-8] Now, when Raghava had reached the lovely bank of the Tamasa, with 
a glance at Sita he spoke these words to Saumitri: “Night has now come to 
the forest, the very first of our dwelling in the forest. But bless you, 
Saumitri, please do not be sad. Look, the woodlands are desolate, but all 
around they seem to weep: birds and beasts are hidden within them, each 
gone to its own lair. Surely the city of Ayodhya, my father’s capital, will 
grieve tonight, every man and woman, for us who have gone away. But I 
know that righteous Bharata will comfort my father and mother, speaking 
words in harmony with what is right, beneficial, and desirable. I have been 
reflecting all the while on Bharata’s good-heartedness, and I no longer feel 
grief for my father, Laksmana, or even for my mother. You have done your 
duty in accompanying me, tiger among men. But let me also seek your help 
in looking after Vaidehi. I myself, however, will take nothing but water 
tonight. This is what I prefer, though all kinds of forest fare are at hand.” 

[9-15] When he had addressed Saumitri in this fashion, Raghava turned 
to Sumantra and said, “Do not neglect the horses, dear friend.” Sumantra 
then tethered the horses as the sun was setting and, after giving them 
abundant fodder, waited in attendance. Once Rama had worshiped the 
gracious twilight and had seen that nightfall was at hand, the charioteer— 
with Saumitri’s help—made a bed for Rama. Escorted by Saumitri, Rama 
saw the bed of leaves made ready near the bank of the Tamasa, and he and 


his wife then lay down. Once Laksmana saw that his brother had fallen 
asleep with his wife, he recounted for the charioteer Rama’s many virtues. 
Saumitri remained awake all night long, and, even as the sun rose, he was 
still speaking of Rama’s virtues with the charioteer on the bank of the 
Tamasa. There, at some distance from the Tamasa where herds of cattle 
crowded the bank, Rama spent the night with the people. 

[16-21] And when, on rising, Rama of blazing energy observed the 
people, he said to his brother Laksmana of auspicious marks: “Look at them 
now, Laksmana, asleep under the trees. They care only for us, Saumitri, 
with no regard even for their own homes. Such is their resolve to turn us 
back that the townsfolk would sooner throw their lives away than abandon 
it. So, while they are still asleep, we must quickly board the carriage and 
depart, taking a path free from danger. Henceforth, no resident of the city of 
the Iksvakus should now, or ever, have to sleep at the foot of a tree out of 
loyalty to me. Princes should spare their townsfolk any troubles that are 
theirs alone. Surely they must not involve the residents of the city in their 
own troubles.” 

[22-25] Laksmana replied to Rama as if he were Righteousness 
incarnate standing before his very eyes, and said, “I agree, my wise brother. 
We should board at once.” Then, in haste, the charioteer harnessed the 
splendid horses to the carriage and, with his hands cupped in reverence, 
directed Rama to it. But in order to confuse the townsfolk, Rama said to the 
charioteer: “Board the carriage, Sumantra, and head northward. Hasten 
onward for a while, then circle back on the carriage. You must take care to 
ensure that the townsfolk do not know where I have gone.” 

[26-33] Upon hearing Rama’s words, the charioteer acted accordingly, 
and, on returning, he directed Rama to the carriage. Raghava boarded with 
all his equipment and crossed the swift-flowing, eddying Tamasa. Once 
across, the great-armed, majestic prince entered upon a broad pathway, a 
gracious one free from obstacles and the threat of dangerous beasts. When 
the night had brightened into dawn and the townsfolk found themselves 
without Raghava, their minds were stunned, and they were paralyzed by a 
crushing grief. Drenched in tears of grief, they searched high and low, but 
to their bitter sorrow they caught not a glimpse of Rama. For a short while 
they followed the track, and when it gave out, a wild despair swept over 
them. When the tracks of the chariot gave out, the sensible among them 


turned back, thinking: “What can this mean? What are we to do? Fate has 
crushed us.” Then all of them, with weary hearts, returned the way they had 
come to the city of Ayodhya, where all good people were still in a state of 
shock. 


Sarga 42 

[1-4] Thus did the residents of the city return after following Rama, but all 
their strength seemed to have gone, and they were left insensible. They then 
went to their own dwellings and there, surrounded by their wives and 
children, they all broke out in weeping, and their faces were bathed in tears. 
No one felt any delight or gladness. Merchants did not display their wares, 
no goods were set out to catch the eye. Householders prepared no meals. 
People felt no joy at finding something long thought lost, or in obtaining 
vast wealth. Mothers felt no joy at delivering a firstborn son. 

[S5—10] In one house after another the women wept when their husbands 
came home, and, in the anguish of their sorrow, they berated them with 
words as piercing as elephant goads: “What good are homes or wives or 
wealth, what good are sons or pleasures to those who have lost the sight of 
Raghava? The one decent man in the world is Laksmana, who, with Sita, is 
following Rama Kakutstha and serving him in the forest. How blessed are 
those streams, lakes, and lotus ponds where Kakutstha will bathe, plunging 
into the pure water! The woodlands and the lovely groves will adorn 
Kakutstha, and so will the broad-banked streams and_ steep-sloped 
mountains. Every hill or grove Rama visits will treat him like a welcome 
guest and not fail to offer him hospitality. 

[11—15ab] “The mountains will be crowned with many-colored blossoms 
and bear clusters of bouquets when Rama comes, and out of compassion 
they will display for him choice fruits and flowers even out of season. They 
will afford him views of waterfalls as well, one after the other, and the trees 
on the summits will gladden Raghava. Where Rama goes there is nothing to 
fear, and no one ever comes to grief; for he is a great-armed hero and the 
son of Dasaratha. So let us follow Raghava before he gets too far away 
from us. How pleasant the shadow of the feet of such a great master as he; 
for he is the one defender of this people, he their one recourse and refuge. 
We shall attend on Sita, and you on Raghava.” 


[15cd—19] Such were the things the townsmen’s wives told their 
husbands. And in the anguish of their sorrow they continued: “Raghava will 
see to it that you are safe and sound in the wilderness, and Sita will do the 
same for us, the womenfolk. Who could find any joy in living here, where 
the people are filled with longing, a place so cheerless, so unpleasant and 
dispiriting? If, with our one defender gone and—against all that is right— 
the kingship should come into Kaikey1’s hands, we would have no further 
use for living, much less for children or riches. Kaikeyi, that disgrace to her 
family, renounced both her son and her husband for the sake of kingly 
power. Why then should she be expected to spare anyone else? 

[20—24] “We will not remain in the kingdom as servants to Kaikeyi, so 
long as she lives, or we do. We swear it on our sons. Who could live at ease 
under that unrighteous, wicked woman, so heartless that she forced into 
exile the son of the lord of kings? For with Rama banished, the lord of the 
earth will not long survive. And once DasSaratha is dead, total devastation 
will clearly follow. You wretched men of little merit! Better for you to mix 
poison and take it now. For either you follow Raghava or you shall never be 
heard from again. Rama, his wife, and Laksmana have been treacherously 
banished, and all of us delivered up to Bharata like livestock to the 
butcher.” 

[25-26] Thus did the townsmen’s wives lament throughout the city. 
They cried out in agony, as if they feared the approach of death. The women 
were as anguished on Rama’s account as if a son of theirs or a brother had 
been exiled. Desolate they lamented and madly wept, for he meant more to 
them, in fact, than their own sons. 


Sarga 43 
[1-6] Now, through the remainder of that same night, Rama, tiger among 
men, traveled a great distance, mindful of his father’s command. As he 
traveled, gracious night departed. Then, after worshiping the gracious 
morning twilight, he pushed on to the frontier of the realm. Drawn by his 
splendid horses, he proceeded swiftly—though it seemed so slow to him— 
observing the villages with their wide-spaced boundaries and the forests all 
in flower. And he heard the people who made their homes in the villages 
crying: “A curse upon King Dasaratha for succumbing to the power of 
passion! Ah! Kaikey1 is a vicious and evil woman always doing evil, a 


heartless woman who has gone beyond all limits. Today she has done a 
heartless deed in exiling the prince to a life in the forest, so righteous a 
prince, so wise, compassionate, and steadfast.” 

[7-11] Such were the words of the people who made their homes in the 
villages, and the heroic lord of Kosala heard them as he passed beyond the 
land of Kosala. He then crossed the Vedasruti, a river running with 
auspicious water, and continued on toward the region where Agastya lived. 
He traveled a very long time and then crossed the Gomati, a chilly river 
flowing to the sea, its shores teeming with cows. After fording the Gomatt 
with his swift horses, Raghava crossed the Syandika River, which 
resounded with the cries of hamsas and peacocks. Rama pointed out to 
Vaidehi the land King Manu long ago bestowed upon Iksvaku, a rich land 
encircled by vassal kingdoms. 

[12-15] And often the majestic bull among men would address his 
chariot driver in a voice like the impassioned call of the hamsa, saying: 
“When shall I return, charioteer, and once again go hunting in the flowering 
forest beside the Sarayu, and be reunited with my mother and father? iI so 
long to hunt in the forest beside the Sarayi. That is a pleasure without equal 
in the world, one the hosts of royal seers have always prized.” Of these and 
other matters Aiksvaka addressed the charioteer in his sweet voice as he 
continued on his way. 


Sarga 44 
[1-5] After passing through the broad and lovely land of Kosala, 
Laksmana’s great-armed eldest brother reached Srfigaverapura. There 
Raghava saw the Ganges, the heavenly river that goes by three paths, its 
auspicious water unclogged by weeds; a holy river frequented by seers. It 
was resounding with the cries of hamsas and sdrasa cranes and the calls of 
cakravakas and was swarming with dolphins, crocodiles, and snakes. As the 
great chariot-warrior gazed over its wave-capped eddies, he said to the 
charioteer Sumantra: “We shall spend the night here. There, not far from the 
river, iS a towering ingudi tree with luxuriant flowers and _ shoots. 

Charioteer, we shall spend the night there.” 
[6-10] Laksmana and Sumantra replied, “As you wish,” and the two 
then turned the horses toward the ingudi tree. Upon reaching that lovely 
tree, Rama, the delight of the Iksvakus, alighted from the carriage with his 


wife and Laksmana. Sumantra alighted as well, and, after unhitching the 
splendid horses, he cupped his hands in reverence and stood in attendance 
on Rama at the foot of the tree. Now, the king of that region was named 
Guha, a friend of Rama and precious to him as life itself. He was of the 
Nisada tribe, a powerful man and famed as their chief. He had heard that 
Rama, tiger among men, had come into his realm, and accompanied by his 
aged ministers and kinsmen, he approached him. 

[11-15] Seeing that Guha, overlord of the Nisadas, was waiting at a 
distance, Rama went out with Saumitri to meet him. Guha embraced 
Raghava in anguish, and said: “This land, no less than Ayodhya, belongs to 
you. What may I do for you, Rama?” At once he had the guest-offering 
brought along with an assortment of choice foods and drinks, and he said: 
“IT bid you welcome, great-armed prince. This entire land belongs to you. 
We are servants, you the master. Come, our kingdom is yours to rule. There 
is food at hand, solid, soft, and liquid, and sweet things to lick as well as 
comfortable beds and fodder for your horses.” 

[16-22] As Guha was speaking, Raghava replied, “You honor and 
delight us in every way by your coming here on foot and your display of 
affection.” He clasped him tightly in his well-shaped arms and added: “How 
fortunate to see you, Guha, you and your kinsmen, in good health. All is 
well with you, I hope, with your kingdom, your treasury, and your allies. I 
must, however, refuse everything you have so kindly made ready, for I am 
not in a position to accept. You must know that I am now a forest ascetic, 
dressed in Ausa grass, bark, and hides, subsisting on fruits and roots, and 
wholly devoted to righteousness. I need only fodder for the horses, nothing 
more. My honored friend will do me great homage with that alone. For 
these horses are cherished by my father, King DaSaratha, and it will be 
hospitality enough for me if they are well cared for.” 

[23-27] Guha then straightaway ordered water and fodder for the horses. 
“Fetch it at once,” he told his men. Wearing an upper garment of barkcloth, 
Rama then performed the evening sandhya rites and took as his only 
refreshment the water Laksmana brought himself. Afterward, as Rama lay 
upon the ground, Laksmana washed his feet and his wife’s, and then 
withdrew, taking up a position beside the tree. Saumitri was engaged in 
conversation by the charioteer and Guha, who also kept vigilant watch over 
Rama, his bow at the ready. And so the great prince, a man who had never 


before known pain, but only pleasure, the wise and glorious Dasarathi lay 
there as the night dragged slowly by. 


Sarga 45 

[1-7] As Laksmana Raghava stood there wide awake on his brother’s 
behalf, Guha, burning with sorrow, said to him: “Here, dear boy, is a 
comfortable bed made ready on your behalf. Come, prince, rest in comfort 
upon it. My people are all accustomed to hardship; you, however, are 
accustomed to comfort. We will remain awake tonight to guard Kakutstha. 
There is no one on earth dearer to me than Rama. | am telling the truth, and 
by my truth I swear it to you. Whatever hope I may have in this world for 
great glory, for the full acquisition of righteousness, or even wealth, I have 
by reason of his grace. And as for me, bow in hand and surrounded on all 
sides by my kinsmen, I will protect my dear friend Rama as he lies asleep 
with Sita. I have wandered the forest all my life and nothing happens here 
without my knowing of it. Moreover, we are prepared to withstand even a 
vast army of four divisions.” 

[8—11] Laksmana then replied to him: “With you protecting us here, 
blameless Guha, with righteousness alone in view, we could have nothing to 
fear. But how, while Dasarathi is lying on the ground with Sita, could I find 
sleep—or any happiness in life? ‘Look at him, Guha, resting at ease with 
Sita on a bed of straw, a man whom all the gods and asuras could not 
withstand in battle. This is the only one of DaSaratha’s sons to resemble him 
in every trait—a son obtained by means of austerities, vedic mantras, and 
all kinds of exertions. 

[12—18] “With him in exile the king will not long remain alive. The earth 
will surely soon be widowed. The women must have cried out their last 
shrill cries and ceased in exhaustion. The din, I expect, has ceased in the 
king’s palace, sir. I have little hope that Kausalya, the king, or my own 
mother will even live out this night. And even if my mother should live on 
to look after Satrughna, Kausalya’s sorrow is such that she, who bore this 
one heroic son, will perish. Caught up in the king’s calamity, the city, which 
once brought gladness with its pleasant aspect, will perish with all its loyal 
people. And my father, who never got the wish that just eluded him and 
never installed Rama in the kingship, will perish as well. And when that 


moment comes and they purify the lord of the earth with all the rites for the 
dead, they will have attained their goal. 

[19-24] “Then they will stroll at their ease through my father’s capital, 
through its lovely squares and well-ordered thoroughfares; with all its 
mansions and palaces, with the fairest courtesans to lend it beauty, with its 
teeming chariots, horses, elephants; resounding with the sound of musical 
instruments, stocked with every luxury, thronging with delighted and 
prosperous people, dotted with orchards and gardens, a place of crowded 
fairs and festivals. If only we might return to Ayodhya when our stay in the 
forest is over to find him well and his promise fulfilled.” And so the night 
passed with the great prince standing there mourning, racked with sorrow. 
And while the good prince was uttering these forthright words, Guha wept 
in deep compassion, crushed by the calamity and tormented by heartache, 
like an elephant tormented by a raging fever. 


Sarga 46 

[1-5] When the night had brightened into dawn, broad-chested, glorious 
Rama spoke to Laksmana Saumitri of auspicious marks: “The sun, bringer 
of light, is rising and the blessed night has gone. And there, dear boy, the 
jet-black bird, the kokila, is calling. You can hear the sound of peacocks 
crying in the forest. Let us cross the Jahnavi, dear Laksmana, the swift river 
flowing to the sea.” Heeding Rama’s words, Saumitri, the delight of his 
friends, took leave of Guha and the charioteer and then stood before his 
brother. 'Then, after strapping on their quivers and buckling on their 
swords, the two Raghavas took up their bows and went with Sita down to 
the Ganges. 

[6-10] Their charioteer now deferentially approached righteous Rama 
and, cupping his hands in reverence, asked, “What then am I to do?” “Go 
back,” Rama replied. “You have done enough for me. We shall relinquish 
the carriage and proceed to the great forest on foot.” Finding himself 
dismissed, the charioteer Sumantra was anguished and replied to Rama 
Aiksvaka, tiger among men: “There is no one in the world who could ever 
have expected this, your having to live in the forest with your brother and 
wife, like some common man. I guess there is no reward for chastity or 
vedic study, for lenience, or uprightness, if such a calamity has befallen 
you. 


[11-15] “Living in the forest with Vaideht and your brother, mighty 
Raghava, you will achieve as high an end as if you had conquered the three 
worlds. But surely we are lost, Rama, even you have deceived us. For we 
must come under the power of the evil Kaikeyi, and only sorrow will be our 
lot.” And as the charioteer Sumantra was speaking in this way to the prince, 
who was precious to him as life, he gazed at Rama, who was so far from 
home and was racked with sorrow. For a long while he wept. When his 
tears dried, the charioteer sipped water, and when he was thus purified, 
Rama addressed him gently but repeatedly, telling him: “I do not know of 
any friend the Iksvakus have to equal you. It is you who must see to it that 
King Dasaratha not grieve for me. 

[16-19] “The lord of the world is aged, his heart has been crushed by 
grief, and a heavy burden of desire weighs him down. That is why I tell you 
this: whatever orders the great lord of the earth may give in his desire to 
please Kaikeyi must be obeyed without demur. For it is to this end that the 
lords of men take up the rule of kingdoms, that their will may never be 
opposed in anything they require. So you must take care, Sumantra, that the 
great king’s displeasure is not provoked and that he does not languish under 
SOITOW. 

[20-24] “The king has never known sorrow before; he is aged, noble, 
and self-controlled. First do obeisance to him and then address him in my 
name as follows: ‘I do not grieve at all, nor do Laksmana and Maithili, that 
we have been cast out of Ayodhya or that we must live in the forest. Once 
the fourteen years have passed, we will come back home, and you shall 
look upon each of us again, Sita, Laksmana, and me.’ After speaking to the 
king, Sumantra, you must inquire of Kaikeyi and all the other queens after 
their health, each one in turn. And tell Kausalya for me that Sita, Laksmana, 
and I, her noble son, send her respectful greetings. 

[25-28] “Then you must say to the great king: ‘You must send for 
Bharata at once. And as soon as Bharata returns he must be installed in 
office with the approval of the kings. Once you have taken Bharata in your 
arms and consecrated him as prince regent, sorrow for our suffering will no 
longer oppress you.’ And you must tell this to Bharata: ‘You are to treat 
your mothers—all of them without distinction—exactly as you treat the 
king. Just as you draw no distinction between Kaikeyi and Sumitra, so you 
must draw none at all with regard to Queen Kausalya, my mother.’ ” 


[29-35] Although he was stricken with grief at being sent back by Rama, 
Sumantra listened attentively to everything he said and then affectionately 
replied to Kakutstha: “If, emboldened by my affection, I do not speak as a 
subordinate should, attribute it to my deep devotion and forgive me for 
what I say. How shall I return without you, dear Rama, to a city that, at 
parting from you, went mad with such grief as one feels for a son? Think 
how the people were, merely seeing Rama aboard my carriage. ""When the 
city sees my carriage with Rama gone, it will fall to pieces. The city will be 
desolated when it sees the carriage empty. It would be as 1f, out of its whole 
army only a single charioteer survived, while all its brave warriors were 
slain in battle. Even when, back then, you still stood before them, the 
people felt sick at heart just to imagine you, in their mind’s eye, living far 
away. The cry of anguish the townsfolk raised when you set forth will be 
increased a hundredfold when they observe me alone in the carriage. 

[36-40] “And what am I to tell the queen? ‘I have taken your son to your 
brother’s family, so do not agonize?’ Would I not have to say something 
like this, untruthful as it is? For how can I tell the truth when it is so 
painful? These splendid horses, it is true, respond to my command, but they 
are used to drawing you and your kinsmen. How will they draw the carriage 
when you are not in it? If, despite my pleading, you insist on leaving me, I 
will drive the carriage into a blazing fire the moment you abandon me. 
There will be creatures in the forest that will disturb your austerities, 
Raghava, and I could chase them off with the carriage. 

[41-45] “Thanks to you I have known the joy of tending your carriage, 
and I hope and pray that thanks to you I may also know the joy of life in the 
forest. Please be gracious, I wish to wait upon you in the wilderness. My 
one wish is to have the pleasure of hearing you say, ‘Wait upon me.’ And 
while I am living in the forest I will obey you with bowed head. I am ready 
to give up everything, Ayodhya and even the world of the gods itself. I 
cannot in any case enter Ayodhya without you, any more than a man of evil 
conduct can gain entrance to the capital of great Indra. And the horses too, 
heroic Rama, will attain their highest destiny if they can render you any 
service while you live in the forest. 

[46-48] “My fondest wish is that, when your stay in the forest has come 
to an end, I may convey you back to the city in this very same carriage. In 
your company the fourteen years in the forest will pass like so many 


minutes, otherwise, they will feel like so many centuries. You have always 
cherished your servants, and I am a devoted servant simply following the 
path his master’s son has taken, only following the proper course. Please, 
do not abandon me.” 

[49-54] As the desolate Sumantra was begging him, over and over, in 
every way he knew, Rama, who always felt compassion for his servants, 
gave this reply: “I know the profound devotion you bear me, and how you 
cherish your master. But you must hear the reason I have for sending you 
back to the city. When my younger mother Kaikeyi sees that you have 
returned to the city, she will be convinced I have truly gone to the forest. 
And if the queen is satisfied that I have gone to live in the forest, she will 
no longer harbor suspicions that the righteous king has spoken falsely. This 
is my first consideration—that my younger mother should gain the kingdom 
for her son, and that it may thrive under Bharata’s protection. As a kindness 
to me and to the king, you must go back to the city with the carriage and 
faithfully deliver each and every message imparted to you.” 

[55-59] When Rama had thus addressed these words to the charioteer, 
he comforted him again and again. Then, in a manful and purposeful tone, 
he addressed Guha, saying: “I will mat my hair and then depart. Please 
fetch me some sap of the banyan tree.”’ Guha at once brought the sap to the 
prince, and Rama matted his own and Laksmana’s hair with it. And as the 
brothers Rama and Laksmana stood there dressed in barkcloth and bearing a 
crown of matted hair, they resembled a pair of seers. Having entered with 
Laksmana upon the way of forest hermits and adopted their vow, Rama said 
to his friend Guha: “Never neglect your army, Guha, nor your treasury, 
stronghold, or populace. For nothing is deemed as hard to preserve as the 
position of a king.” 

[60-64] The delight of the Iksvakus then dismissed Guha and with 
determination departed swiftly with his wife and Laksmana. Now, at the 
riverbank, the delight of the Iksvakus spied a boat. Eager to cross the swift- 
flowing Ganges, he said this to Laksmana: “You must carefully board the 
boat that is standing ready, tiger among men, after which you must take the 
hand of virtuous Sita and help her board.” Upon hearing his brother’s 
command and not actually opposing it, the self-controlled prince first 
helped Maithili aboard and then boarded himself. Only then did Laksmana’s 


eldest brother, blazing with energy, board himself, followed by some of 
Guha’s kinsmen, at the urging of the overlord of the Nisadas. 

[65-69] After bidding farewell to Sumantra, Guha, and his army, Rama 
took his seat in the boat and urged on the boatmen. They in turn urged on 
the boat, which, guided by the helmsman and propelled by the rush of their 
strong oars, moved swiftly out across the water. When they reached the 
middle of the Bhagirathi, faultless Vaideht cupped her hands in reverence 
and addressed the river with these words: “Here is the son of the great king, 
wise DaSaratha. O Ganges, please let him carry out his orders under your 
protection. After living in the woodlands a full fourteen years, may he 
return once again with his brother and me. 

[70-74] “And then, O blessed goddess Ganges, when I have come back 
safely, I will sacrifice to you in gladness for making all my wishes come 
true. O goddess, you are the river that goes by three paths; you behold the 
world of Brahma and also appear in our world as the wife of the god of the 
ocean. I pay you homage, goddess, I sing your praises, lovely one. When 
the tiger among men has safely returned and secured the kingship, I will 
give the brahmans a hundred thousand cows, garments, and exquisite food 
in hopes of pleasing you.” Addressing the Ganges in this fashion, the 
faultless and courteous Sita soon reached the southern bank. 

[75-79] When they reached the shore, the bull among men, slayer of his 
foes, left the boat and prepared to set out with his brother and Vaideht. The 
great-armed prince said to his brother, the delight of Sumitra: “Go in front, 
Saumitri, let Sita follow behind you. I shall go last, to protect you and Sita. 
But all the same, today Vaidehi will come to know the pain of life in the 
forest.” Now, as Rama swiftly reached the further shore of the Ganges, 
Sumantra had watched continuously, but when the distance grew too great, 
he turned his gaze away, and in shock and misery he shed bitter tears. 
Meanwhile, on the further bank the brothers killed four large animals—a 
boar, a nilgai, a chital, and a great black antelope. Famished, they ate the 
meat hurriedly, and at sunset made for a tree beneath which they could 
camp. 


Sarga 47 
[1-4] Once they reached the tree, Rama, the most pleasing of men, 
performed the evening sandhya rites and then said to Laksmana: “This is 


the first night we shall spend outside our country without Sumantra, but 
please, do not be sad about it. From now on we must remain constantly 
vigilant at night, Laksmana, for the safety and well-being of Sita depends 
on the two of us. We shall have to spend this night as best we can, Saumitri. 
We shall have to settle down upon the ground itself strewn only with what 
we gather for ourselves.” 

[S5—10] Later, as Rama, a prince accustomed to a sumptuous bed, lay on 
the ground he began to talk with Saumitri, and these were the heartfelt 
words he spoke: “Surely, Laksmana, the great king is sleeping most 
miserably tonight while Kaikeyt must be content since her desires have 
been satisfied. But is it not possible that Queen Kaikeyi, when she sees 
Bharata back home again, might take the great king’s life, for the sake of 
his kingship? And being old, with no one to protect him and parted from 
me, what will he do? For he is consumed with desire and so completely 
under the control of Kaikeyi. Reflecting on this calamity and the fickleness 
of the king’s mind, I have come to the conclusion that the urgings of desire 
far outweigh both statecraft and righteousness. For what man, even a fool, 
would forsake his own obedient son on account of a woman, as Father 
forsook me, Laksmana? 

[11-15] “Kaikeyi’s son, Bharata, and his wife must indeed be joyful. 
Like an emperor, he will have the happy land of Kosala all to himself. 
Indeed, with Father well on in years and me withdrawn to the wilderness, 
he will be the sole ruler of the entire kingdom. Whoever forsakes 
righteousness and statecraft and follows the urgings of desire will soon 
come to grief, just like King Dasaratha. I am convinced, dear brother, that 
Kaikeyi came among us just to bring about Dasaratha’s death, my 
banishment, and Bharata’s accession to the kingship. Is it not possible that 
even now, in the flush of her good fortune, Kaikeyi may be tormenting 
Kausalya and Sumitra on my account? 

[16—20] “May Queen Sumitra never live in sorrow on my account. You 
must go straight back from here to Ayodhya in the morning, Laksmana. I 
shall go on alone with Sita to the Dandakas, and you will be there to protect 
Kausalya, who is now without a protector. For Kaikeyi is petty, and in her 
hatred she may do something reckless. And you must commit my mother to 
the care of Bharata, who knows what is right. It must be that in some 
previous birth my mother separated women from their sons, Saumitri, and 


so this has befallen her. And now Kausalya, who nurtured me long and 
raised me with great difficulty, has been separated from me at the very 
moment of her reward for that. Damn me! 

[21—26] “May no one who parts her hair ever bear such a son, Saumitri, 
since I have given my mother grief without end. Laksmana, I think even her 
sarika, her pet mynah, is a greater source of joy than I; for that bird at least 
will be there to cry out, ‘O Parrot, bite the enemy’s foot.’ What good am I, 
tamer of your foes, a son who does nothing to help her as she grieves in her 
misfortune? She might as well be childless. Bereft of me, my unfortunate 
mother, Kausalya, has been plunged into a sea of grief and lies there racked 
by bitter sorrow. In my rage, Laksmana, all by myself I could overpower 
Ayodhya or even the whole earth with my arrows. But truly valor is useless. 
I fear the danger of unrighteousness, blameless Laksmana, and I fear what 
other people might say. That is why I do not have myself consecrated at 
once.” 

[27-33] These and many other pitiful words of lamentation did Rama 
utter that night, in that desolate place. Then he fell silent, his face bathed in 
tears. When Rama had ceased his lamentation and lay like a damped-down 
fire or a sea becalmed, Laksmana tried to comfort him. “It is true, Rama, 
best of warriors, that the city of Ayodhya will be gloomy tonight now that 
you have departed, like the night when the moon is gone. But it is to no 
avail, Rama, that you torment yourself like this. You are only disheartening 
Sita, and me too, bull among men. Neither Sita nor I could live an instant 
without you, Raghava. We would be like a pair of fish plucked out of the 
water. No, without you, slayer of enemies, I would not care to see Father 
now, nor Satrughna, Sumitra, or heaven itself.” Raghava, slayer of enemies, 
listened to Laksmana’s earnest words, and at last, recognizing it as the way 
of righteousness, and out of respect, he granted him permission to live in 
the forest for all the years to come. 


Sarga 48 
[1-7] After passing the gracious night under the great tree, they set out from 
there when the bright sun rose. Plunging into the great forest, they headed 
toward the place where Bhagirathi, the river Ganges, joins the Yamuna. 
And here and there, as the glorious party made their way, they saw different 
types of landscape and charming regions such as they had never seen 


before. Rama took the safest path, observing the different sorts of trees, and 
as day was drawing to a close he spoke to Saumitri: “Look at the smoke, 
holy Agni’s banner, rising above Prayaga. I think the sage Bharadvaja must 
live nearby, Saumitri. Surely we have reached the confluence of the Ganges 
and Yamuna, for you can hear the sound of water dashing against water. 
Here are logs hewn by foresters, Bharadvaja’s dependents, and there you 
can see the different sorts of trees around his ashram.” 

[8—10] The brothers went on at an easy pace bearing their bows, and as 
the sun, maker of day, was hanging low they came to the sage’s abode at the 
confluence of the Ganges and Yamuna. The deer and birds were frightened 
as Rama entered the ashram. Proceeding along the path, he soon came upon 
Bharadvaja. With Sita following behind, the mighty brothers arrived at the 
ashram and stood some distance off, eager to meet the sage. 

[11-15] The illustrious sage soon completed the agnihotra rite, and the 
moment Rama saw him, he cupped his hands in reverence and did 
obeisance to him together with Saumitri and Sita. Laksmana’s elder brother 
then identified himself to him: “Holy one, we are Rama and Laksmana, 
sons of Dasaratha. And this is my wife, Vaidehi, the lovely daughter of 
Janaka. The faultless woman is following me to the desolate groves of 
asceticism. When our father banished me, Saumitri, my beloved younger 
brother, firm in his vows, accompanied me to the forest. On my father’s 
orders, holy one, we are to enter a grove of asceticism. There we will 
strictly follow the way of righteousness, living only on roots and fruits.” 

[16-20] Upon hearing the words of the wise prince, the righteous sage 
presented him with a cow, the guest-offering, and water. Then, sitting with 
deer and birds and sages all around him, the sage welcomed his visitor 
Rama and offered him hospitality. Raghava accepted his hospitality and 
took a seat, and then Bharadvaja addressed him with these righteous words: 
“So at last I see that you have come here, Kakutstha. I have heard about 
this, about your unwarranted exile. This is an isolated spot, here at the 
confluence of the two great rivers. It is a sacred and delightful place, and 
you should stay here comfortably.” 

[21-23] Addressed in this fashion by Bharadvaja, Rama Raghava replied 
with fitting words, for the welfare of all was his chief concern: “Holy one, 
not far from here live people of both town and province, and they will come 
to visit Vaidehi and me. For this reason I cannot consent to our living here. 


Please think of some good site for an ashram, holy one, in a secluded place, 
one that will delight Janaka’s daughter Vaidehi, who deserves every 
comfort.” 

[24-30] The great sage Bharadvaja, hearing Raghava’s fitting words, 
answered him in a way that carried conviction: “Some twenty miles from 
here, my son, is a mountain where you may live. It is a sacred place 
frequented by great seers and with a lovely view on all sides. Langurs range 
about it, and it is frequented by monkeys and apes. It is known as Citrakuta, 
and it resembles Mount Gandhamadana. As long as a man beholds the 
peaks of Citrakiita, he meditates on blessed things and does not turn his 
mind to evil. Many seers have passed their hundred autumns there and, by 
means of their austerities, have ascended to heaven with skull-white heads. 
It is an isolated place to live, one that I think will please you; or you may 
live here with me, Rama, for the duration of your stay in the forest.” Thus, 
Bharadvaja, wise in the ways of righteousness, received his dear guest 
Rama, his wife, and brother, and fulfilled their every desire. 

[31-36] And when holy night came on, Rama stayed at Prayaga in the 
company of the great seer, conversing about various matters. But when 
night had brightened into dawn, the tiger among men came before 
Bharadvaja, a sage of brilliant powers, and said: “Last night, holy one, we 
made our dwelling here, in your ashram. Now, truthful sage, please give us 
leave to depart.” Now that they had passed the night, Bharadvaja replied: 
“Go, then, to Citraktita, a place rich in honey, roots, and fruits. There on 
every side you will see herds of elephants, Raghava, and herds of deer that 
range through the expanses of forest. You should establish your ashram 
when you reach that auspicious mountain resounding with the calls of 
koyasti and kokila and charming with the deer and many elephants in rut.” 


Sarga 49 
[1-6cd] After spending the night there, the princes, tamers of their foes, 
paid obeisance to the great seer and proceeded off toward the mountain. As 
the great sage observed them setting out, he followed behind, as a father 
would follow his children, and he began to speak: “Now, when you reach 
the swift-flowing Kalindi, the daughter of the sun, make a raft there and 
cross the river. There you will come upon a great banyan tree with lush 
green leaves, called Syama. It has grown dense with its many trunks and is 


frequented by perfected beings. About two miles beyond it, Rama, you will 
see a dark thicket, a mixture of palasa and badari trees and Yamuna 
bamboo. That is the way to Citraktta. I have traveled it many times, for it is 
pleasant and easy, and quite safe from forest fires.” 

[6ef-10] After showing them the way, the great seer turned back. When 
the sage had gone, Rama said to Laksmana, “How fortunate we are, 
Saumitri, that the sage has shown us such compassion.” Conversing in this 
fashion, the brothers, tigers among men, proceeded in high spirits to the 
Kalindi River, placing Sita in front of them. They lashed together logs to 
fashion a large raft, and Laksmana cut some wood to make a comfortable 
seat for Sita. Next, Rama Dasarathi helped her to board the raft, and as he 
did so she was a bit embarrassed, his beloved wife, a woman as marvelous 
as the goddess Sri. 

[11-15] Then on the raft they crossed the Yamuna, daughter of the sun, a 
swift-flowing, wave-wreathed river with trees growing thick along her 
banks. Once across they abandoned the raft, and, setting out from the 
Yamuna forest, they reached the cool, green-leafed banyan tree called 
Syama. Sita walked respectfully around the tree with her hands cupped in 
reverence and said, “O that I may see Kausalya again and illustrious 
Sumitra.” Proceeding some two miles farther, the brothers Rama and 
Laksmana killed many animals such as are permissible to consume and ate 
them in a grove by the Yamuna. They then passed the time pleasantly in that 
lovely grove resounding with flocks of peacocks and teeming with 
elephants and monkeys. Then, no longer despondent, they repaired to a spot 
where the riverbank was level and found a suitable place to pass the night. 


Sarga 50 

[1-5] When night had passed, Laksmana dozed off, but straightaway the 
delight of the Raghus gently roused him, saying: “Saumitri, listen to the 
sweet sounds the forest creatures are making. Let us be off, slayer of 
enemies, it is time for us to depart.” Even though his brother had roused 
him the very moment he was dozing off, Laksmana at once shook off his 
sleep and lassitude as well as the nagging fatigue of travel. They all rose 
and sipped the auspicious water of the river and then set out on the path to 
Citrakita that had been described by the seer. As Rama set out in the early 
morning with Saumitri, he began to speak to lotus-eyed Sita, saying: 


[6-10] “Look, Vaidehi, the kimsuka trees are in full blossom now that 
winter is past. Garlanded with their red blossoms, they almost seem to be on 
fire. And look at the bhallataka trees in bloom, untended by man, how they 
are bent over with fruits and leaves. I know I shall be able to live here. 
Look as well at the honeycombs, Laksmana, amassed by honeybees on one 
tree after another. They hang down as large as buckets. Over here a natyitha 
is calling, and in answer to it a peacock cries through delightful stretches of 
forest richly carpeted with flowers. And see, there is Citraktita, the 
mountain there with the towering peak, teeming with herds of elephants and 
echoing with flocks of birds.” 

[11-15] And so the brothers and Sita proceeded on foot and reached the 
delightful mountain, charming Citrakita. And upon reaching the mountain, 
where birds of every description came flocking, he said: “This will be our 
dwelling for now. We shall enjoy ourselves here, dear brother. Fetch wood, 
dear Laksmana, firm, fine wood, and build us a dwelling, for my heart is set 
on living here.” Upon hearing his words, Saumitri, tamer of his foes, went 
and brought different kinds of trees and built a leaf hut. Then Rama 
addressed him, his single-mindedly obedient brother, once again: “Bring the 
flesh of a black antelope, and we shall offer sacrifice to our home.” 

[16—22] Powerful Laksmana Saumitri then killed a black deer, one fit for 
sacrifice, and then cast it into a well-kindled fire. When Laksmana saw that 
it was cooked, well broiled, its bleeding staunched, he said to Raghava, 
tiger among men: “The black deer has been roasted black, with all its limbs 
intact. You, who are skilled, may now sacrifice it to the gods, my godlike 
brother.” Rama bathed and then, intently and with expertise, he intoned the 
mantras most skillfully and made a plentiful offering for averting evil. 
Then, just as the hosts of the gods enter their assembly hall Sudharma, 
together they entered that charming, leaf-thatched hut, well built in a 
suitable spot protected from the wind, to take up their dwelling. It was a 
splendid forest too, teeming with many kinds of birds and beasts, where 
trees grew dense with brilliant clusters of flowers and the cries of wild 
animals echoed. And they enjoyed themselves in perfect happiness there— 
all the while controlling their senses. Now that Rama had arrived at pleasant 
Mount Citrakita and the river Malyavati, with its gentle fords where beasts 
and birds would congregate, he felt a gladness and delight that made him 
forget the sorrow of exile from his city. 


Sarga 51 

[1-5] Meanwhile, racked with bitter sorrow, Guha had stood talking for a 
long time with Sumantra until Rama had reached the southern shore, and 
then he returned home. Given leave to depart, Sumantra harnessed the 
splendid horses, and, in profound dejection, proceeded directly to the city of 
Ayodhya. Fragrant forests came into view, streams and ponds, then villages 
and cities, but he sped past them all. Then, on the third day, at dusk, the 
charioteer reached Ayodhya, and it was a joyless sight that met his eyes. 
The city was silent and seemed deserted, and as he looked at it in deep 
dejection, Sumantra was overcome by a rush of grief and anxiously 
brooded: 

[6-9] “Can it be that the entire city, with its elephants and horses, its 
people, and their lord, has been consumed by the fire of grief, in sorrow for 
Rama’s suffering?” Lost in these anxious thoughts, the charioteer hurriedly 
entered. But as the charioteer Sumantra was advancing, men began to run 
toward him by the hundreds and thousands, asking, “Where is Rama?” He 
told them: “I took leave of Raghava at the Ganges. The great and righteous 
prince dismissed me, and so I returned. The three of them have crossed the 
river.” When the people heard this, their faces filled with tears, they sighed, 
“Alas!” and cried out, “Alas, Rama!” 

[10-15] And he heard what they said as they gathered in various groups: 
“Now we are lost indeed, for we shall never see Raghava here again.” “We 
will never again meet righteous Rama at feasts or sacrifices, at weddings or 
great assemblies, since he will not be there.” “Like a father Rama watched 
over the city, pondering what was advantageous for the people, what would 
please them and bring them happiness.” Along the row of inner shops he 
heard the lamentation of the women where they sat by their windows, 
suffering with grief for Rama. In the middle of the royal highway, 
Sumantra, hiding his face, went straight to Dasaratha’s palace. Alighting 
swiftly from the carriage, he entered the king’s compound and passed in 
turn through the seven courtyards, which were crowded with men of 
importance. 

[16—20] Here and there in the mansions he could hear the hushed 
comments of DaSaratha’s wives, who were grief-stricken over Rama, as 
they whispered: “The charioteer went away with Rama and now has come 
back without him. What can he possibly say to Kausalya in her grief? As 


hard as it is for Kausalya to live, it must be, I guess, no easier to die, if she 
is still alive despite her son’s departure.” Hearing the talk of the king’s 
wives—and it was all too true—he quickly entered the palace that seemed 
engulfed in flames of grief. He made his way through the eighth courtyard, 
and there in the pale white chamber he saw the king desolate and 
anguished, tormented with grief for his son. 

[21-27] Sumantra advanced to where the lord of men was sitting. Doing 
obeisance to him, he delivered Rama’s message just as it had been told to 
him. The king listened in silence, and then, his mind reeling, he fell to the 
ground in a faint, overwhelmed by grief for Rama. Pain swept over the 
women of the inner apartments as the lord of the earth grew faint. And as 
the king fell to the floor, they lifted up their arms and wailed. With 
Sumitra’s help, Kausalya raised up her fallen lord, and then she said: 
“Tllustrious king, here, returned from his sojourn in the forest, is the 
messenger come from the prince who has done the impossible. Why do you 
not address him? Or are you at last ashamed, Raghava, of the calamitous 
thing you have done? Stand up, and set things right. Grief will render you 
no aid. Kaikeyi, for fear of whom you dare not ask the charioteer about 
Rama, is not here, my lord; you may speak freely.” 

[28-30] When Kausalya had spoken in this fashion to the great king, she 
suddenly fell to the floor, sick with grief, the rest of her words drowned in 
her tears. When the women saw Kausalya fall lamenting to the ground and 
looked at their lord, they all broke out in shrill weeping. And as the din 
arising from the inner apartments reached them, men young and old alike 
and all the women broke out in weeping, so that once again every quarter of 
the city was thrown into confusion. 


Sarga 52 
[1-5] When the king had revived and recovered from his faint, he 
summoned the charioteer to learn what had happened to Rama. The 
charioteer approached in desolation, his body coated with dust, his face 
bathed in tears—an old man deeply suffering like an elephant newly 
captured, like an elephant bull heaving sighs, pensive and beside himself 
with grief. The king addressed him in deep anguish: “Where is my 
righteous son living? Must he resort to the foot of a tree? Raghava has 
known every comfort, charioteer, what must he now eat? How can the son 


of the guardian of the earth lie down upon the earth like some helpless 
wretch? Foot soldiers, chariots, and elephants used to follow Rama 
wherever he went. How can he have gone off to live in the desolate forest? 

[6-9] “Wild animals prowl through it, black snakes infest it. How can 
the two young men and Vaidehi have gone to the forest? How could the 
princes and poor Sita, so delicate a young woman, have left the carriage, 
Sumantra, and proceeded on foot? You at least have found fulfillment, 
charioteer, in seeing my sons entering the forest as the two Asvins might 
enter onto Mount Mandara. What were Rama’s words, Sumantra, what were 
Laksmana’s and Maithilt’s when they reached the forest? Tell me, 
charioteer, where Rama sat, where he slept, what he ate.” 

[10-17] Pressed in this way by the lord of men, Sumantra the charioteer 
answered the king and in a sob-choked, breaking voice said: “Raghava 
cupped his hands in reverence and bowed his head, great king, and in 
perfect keeping with righteousness he said to me: ‘Charioteer, in my name 
you must fall at the feet of my great and celebrated father, and pay him the 
homage he deserves. In my name, charioteer, you must ask the women of 
the inner apartments after their health, all of them without exception, and do 
obeisance to them according to rank. And you must ask my mother, 
Kausalya, after her welfare and do obeisance to her, telling her, “My lady, 
ever venerate the feet of my lord as if he were a god.” Ask Bharata after his 
welfare and tell him in my name, “You must observe proper conduct toward 
each and every one of our mothers.” And tell him further, the great-armed 
prince, the delight of the Iksvaku House, “When you become prince regent, 
you must defer to Father, who remains the king.’ So glorious Rama spoke 
to me, great king, and as he did the tears rolled in a flood from his eyes as 
red as lotuses. 

[18-22] “But Laksmana was furious, and heaving a sigh he said: ‘For 
what crime has the prince been exiled? Whether it was the granting of a 
boon or some other selfish motive that led to Rama’s banishment, in any 
event an evil thing has been done. I can see no reason whatsoever for Rama 
to have been abandoned. The banishment of Raghava was a rash act, a 
perverse act of folly, that must provoke protest. I for one can no longer 
regard the great king as my father. Raghava shall now be brother, father, 
master, and every kinsman to me. How could anyone in the world feel 


loyalty to you after doing such a thing, after abandoning the prince, whom 
all the world loves and who 1s devoted to the welfare of all the world?’ 

[23-26] “Poor JanakT stood heaving sighs, great king, motionless and 
oblivious as though a spirit possessed her. The illustrious princess, who has 
never known adversity before, only wept in her sorrow and could not speak 
to me at all. She gazed up at her husband and her mouth went dry, and as 
she watched me leaving she suddenly burst into tears. That is just how it 
was—Rama standing still, his hands cupped in reverence, his face bathed in 
tears, protected by Laksmana’s arms; and poor Sita weeping as she gazed at 
the king’s carriage, and at me.” 


Sarga 53 

[1-5] “Now, as I was about to return, the horses would not take the road, 
and they shed hot tears as Rama set out to the forest. I cupped my hands in 
reverence to both princes and boarded the carriage, ready to set out despite 
the sorrow I felt for them. ™But I waited the whole day there with Guha in 
hopes that Rama might yet send word for me. Throughout your realm, great 
king, even the trees are tormented by Rama’s calamity; they have wilted, 
flower, bud, and branch. No creatures are moving about, no beasts stirring 
forth. The forest is overcome with grief for Rama, and its murmur has been 
stilled. 

[6—13] “In the lotus ponds the blossoms have closed their petals, lord of 
men, and the waters have grown turbid. The lotuses have withered, and the 
fish and sky-going birds have hidden themselves. Blossoms that grow in 
water and flowers that grow on land now no longer look beautiful, while 
fruits have little of the fragrance they once possessed. No one welcomed me 
as I entered Ayodhya. The men, not seeing Rama, heaved sighs incessantly. 
From mansions, many-storied buildings, and palaces the women observed 
the carriage come, and they raised cries of woe, tormented at losing the 
sight of Rama. °°More anguished than ever before, the ladies looked at one 
another dimly, through large and once-bright eyes that rushing tears had 
overwhelmed. I could detect no disparity in the anguish felt by friends, 
enemies, or neutrals. The people have lost all delight, the elephants and 
horses are desolate, the city languishes amid the cries of anguish and 
reverberates with sighs, joyless and tormented by Rama’s banishment. It 


almost seems to me, your majesty, as if Ayodhya, like Kausalya herself, had 
been bereft of her only son.” 

[14-20] When he heard the charioteer’s report, the king replied in a most 
desolate, sob-choked voice: “Kaikeyi, a woman of evil family and evil 
designs, forced me, and I failed to seek the advice of elders skilled in 
counsel. I failed to take counsel with my friends, my ministers, and wise 
brahmans. It was on my own, in delusion, for the sake of a woman, that I 
did the rash thing I have done. Or, on the other hand, charioteer, this great 
calamity was something destined to be, that had to come about somehow, in 
order to bring ruin upon this House. If I have ever done you a kind deed, 
charioteer, you must bring Rama back to me at once—and hurry, for my life 
depends upon it. If only my express command might even yet make 
Raghava turn back! I shall not be able to live another moment without 
Rama. But then, my great-armed son must have traveled far away by now. 
So please, place me on the carriage and swiftly bring me within sight of 
Rama. 

[21-26] “Where is Laksmana’s eldest brother, the great bowman with 
pearly teeth? Oh please, I must see him and Sita if I am to live. If I cannot 
see Rama, those coppery eyes of his, those great arms, the jeweled earrings 
that he wears, I shall go to the abode of Yama, the god of death. What 
greater sorrow can there be than this, that in the state to which I am 
reduced, Raghava, the delight of the Iksvakus, I cannot see Rama here 
before me. Alas, Rama! Alas, younger brother of Rama! Alas, poor 
Vaidehi! You did not know I would die helplessly in sorrow. Too wide, my 
lady, is this ocean of grief, too wide for me to cross alive. What misfortune 
to be denied the chance to see them, Raghava and Laksmana, here and now 
when I so need to see them.” Thus did the glorious king lament until, 
suddenly, he fell back upon the couch in a faint. And as the king lamented 
in this fashion over Rama, before his mind went dark, the queen, Rama’s 
mother, hearing his words that were doubly piteous, was once again seized 
with terror. 


Sarga 54 
[1-3] Trembling constantly as though a spirit possessed her, Kausalya 
spoke to the charioteer from the ground where she lay almost lifeless: “Take 
me where Kakutstha is, and Sita and Laksmana. I cannot bear to live here 


without them for even an instant. Quickly turn the chariot around and take 
me as well to the Dandakas. If I cannot go after them, I too will go to the 
abode of Yama.” 

[4-10] The charioteer cupped his hands in reverence, and, in a breaking 
voice choked by rushing sobs, he tried to comfort the queen: “Put away 
your grief and confusion, and your consternation over this sorrowful event. 
Raghava himself is living in the forest free from any regrets. Laksmana too, 
by humbly serving Rama in the forest, with such self-restraint and sense of 
duty, is winning the heavenly world. Sita is making her dwelling in the 
forest, desolate place though it is, as if it were her home. She has entrusted 
her heart to Rama and is full of confidence and unafraid. I did not perceive 
that Vaidehi felt even the slightest despondency. She seemed to me almost 
accustomed to the hardships of exile. Sita takes the same delight in the 
desolate forests that she used to take when going out to the city gardens. 
Even though she is in the desolate forest, the delightful Sita with her face 
like the full moon is enjoying herself like a young girl, delighting in Rama 
and not at all despondent. 

[11-15] “For her heart belongs to him, and her life depends on him. 
Ayodhya itself, with Rama gone, would be far more of a wilderness to her. 
On the road Vaidehi inquires about the villages and cities she sees, the 
courses of rivers, and the different kinds of trees. No journey or gusting 
wind, no distress or scorching heat can dim Vaideht’s moonbeam radiance. 
Sweet Vaidehi’s face has not suffered any change; it still resembles the 
hundred-petaled lotus, still looks as radiant as the full moon. Her feet, 
radiant as lotus cups, remain as rosy as liquid lac even now, when she must 
do without it. 

[16-20] “Even now, when she has cast off her jewelry out of love for 
him, beautiful Vaidehi moves as gracefully as if she were dancing with 
anklets sounding. In the forest when she spies an elephant, a lion, or tiger, 
she slips within Rama’s arms and so does not take fright. You must not 
grieve for them or for yourself; you must not grieve for the lord of the 
people. For theirs are exploits the world will keep alive in memory forever. 
They have shaken off their grief, and their hearts are joyful. They are 
keeping firmly to the path the great seers have taken; they find delight in 
the forest, eating forest fruits and making good their father’s promise.” Yet, 
for all the charioteer’s attempts to restrain the queen with such well- 


reasoned words, she was still tormented with grief for her child and would 
not stop moaning, “Raghava! My darling! My son!” 


Sarga 55 

[1-5] Kausalya wept for Rama, the most pleasing of men, gone to the forest 
in his adherence to righteousness. And she said in bitter anguish to her 
husband: “Your fame is great, widespread throughout the three worlds— 
Raghava is compassionate, they say, generous and kind spoken. How then, 
best of kings, could your two sons—together with Sita—have been made to 
suffer so? Raised in comfort, how will they both endure the sufferings of 
the forest? How indeed will Maithili, a woman in the bloom of youth, so 
delicate and used to comfort, endure the heat and the cold? Large-eyed Sita 
has always had savory dishes to eat, exquisitely seasoned. How will she eat 
the food of the forest, plain rice growing wild? 

[6-10] “The faultless woman has always heard agreeable sounds, the 
sounds of singing and musical instruments. How will she bear hearing the 
fearsome roaring of flesh-eating lions? Where must my mighty, great-armed 
son, who resembles the flagstaff of great Indra, be sleeping, resting his head 
upon his arm so like an iron beam? When will I see Rama’s handsome face 
again, lotus-hued, with hair so thick, his eyes like lotus petals, his breath 
scented like a lotus? Surely my heart is made of adamant; how otherwise, 
with him gone from my sight, would it not shatter into a thousand 
fragments? Even if Raghava should return in the fifteenth year, he would 
spurn both the kingship and the treasury, since Bharata will have possessed 
them. 

[11-15] “Once a younger brother has enjoyed the kingship like this, why, 
lord of the people, would the eldest and best brother not disdain it? A tiger 
will not eat the food another beast has fed upon. In the same way the tiger 
among men will scorn what another has tasted. One does not reuse in a 
sacrifice the oblation, clarified butter, rice cakes, kusa grass, or posts of 
khadira wood, once they have rendered their service. Similarly, this 
kingdom will have no value for Rama. It will have been consumed, like a 
cup of wine drained to the lees, like a sacrifice when the soma has been 
poured out. Raghava will not suffer an insult of this sort, any more than a 
powerful tiger suffers having its tail pulled. 


[16-21] “He is such a man, a bull among men, with the power of a lion 
and the glance of a bull. Yet his own father has destroyed him, just as a fish 
consumes its own offspring. If only you had kept to the age-old way of 
righteousness followed by the twice-born and set down in the sastras, 
before you exiled a son so earnest in righteousness. A woman’s first 
recourse is her husband, your majesty, her second is her son, her third her 
kinsmen. She has no fourth in this world. But you are no recourse for me, 
and Rama is off in the forest. I do not want to go to the forest; you have 
totally destroyed me. You have destroyed this kingship and this kingdom, 
and all the people of the city; you have destroyed your counselors and 
yourself, destroyed me and my son. Your son and your wife should be 
delighted now.” As he listened to the harrowing words she uttered, the king 
grew faint, overcome with sorrow. He plumbed the very depths of his grief, 
and there a memory was revived of something evil he once did. 


Sarga 56 

[1-6] Such were the harsh words that Rama’s mother in grief and anger 
forced the king to hear. He was overcome with sorrow and fell to brooding. 
And as he brooded there suddenly flashed upon his mind an evil deed he 
had once done, unintentionally, long ago, when he was shooting arrows by 
the sound of the target alone. This grief and his grief for Rama were driving 
him out of his mind. The mighty lord of the earth, consumed now by a 
double grief, said to Kausalya: “I beg your forgiveness, Kausalya! Here, I 
cup my hands in supplication. Always, even to strangers, you have been 
kindly and never cruel. And as you know, my lady, a woman who has 
regard for righteousness should hold her husband, whether he is virtuous or 
not, to be a deity incarnate. You have always kept to the ways of 
righteousness; you can tell good people from bad. Sorrowful though you 
are, you ought not to speak so unkindly to one more sorrowful still.” 

[7-10] As Kausalya listened to the pitiful words the king uttered in his 
desolation, tears began to fall from her eyes like fresh rainwater down a 
runnel. And as she cried she cupped her hands like a lotus and raised them 
to her head before the king. Confused and alarmed, she spoke, the syllables 
racing one after the other: “Forgive me, I bow my head, I fall before you to 
the ground and beg you. It hurts me so that you should beg me, my lord, 
and you ought not to hurt me. She is counted no real wife in this world or 


the next, my mighty lord, whose wise husband, deserving of her praise, 
must beg her forgiveness. 

[11-17] “I do know what is right, my righteous husband, I know you 
speak the truth. What I said was something uttered in the anguish of grief 
for my son. Grief destroys restraint, grief destroys all one has learned, grief 
destroys everything. No enemy is the equal of grief. An unexpected blow 
from an enemy’s hand might be withstood, but to withstand unexpected 
grief, however slight, is all but impossible. Only five nights all told have 
now passed with Rama living in the forest; but this grief that robs me of 
every delight makes it seem like five years. As I brood about him the grief 
grows here, in my heart, just as the waters of the ocean grow great with 
rivers ever rushing in.” Such were Kausalya’s heartfelt words, and while 
she was speaking, the sun’s rays began to fade, and evening came on. And 
the king, both gladdened by what Queen Kausalya said and overburdened 
with grief, yielded to sleep. 


Sarga 57 

[1—5] A short time later, his heart crushed by grief, King Dasaratha awoke 
and began to brood once more. Heartache over the exile of Rama and 
Laksmana once more swept over him, the equal of Vasava, as the eclipse 
demon’s darkness sweeps over the sun. It was at midnight, on that sixth 
night since Rama’s banishment to the forest, when King Dasaratha fully 
remembered the evil deed he had once done. He then addressed Kausalya, 
who lay there anguished with grief for her son: ““Whatever a person does, be 
it good or evil, my dear and precious wife, he receives in like measure, the 
direct result of the deeds he has done himself. One deserves to be called a 
fool who sets about a deed without understanding the gravity of its 
consequences, what he stands to gain or lose. 

[6-10] “A person who cuts down a mango grove and instead waters 
paldsa trees—made greedy for their fruit by the sight of their flowers— 
would be sorry when that fruit appears. I cut down a mango grove and 
watered palasa trees instead. When the fruit appeared, I had to give up 
Rama, and now, too late, I see my folly and I grieve. When I was a young 
prince, Kausalya, I earned a reputation as a bowman. It was said, ‘The 
prince can shoot by the sound of the target alone.’ But I did an evil deed, 
my lady, and it has now come home to me, this sorrow that I have brought 


upon myself. But just as a child might eat something poisonous out of 
ignorance, so I too was unaware of the consequences my shooting by sound 
would bear. We were not yet married, my lady, and I was still prince regent. 
The rains had come, the season that quickens lust and desire. 

[11-16] “After having drawn up the moisture of the earth and scorched 
the world with its rays, the sun had entered the dreadful southern region the 
dead inhabit. All at once the heat vanished, dark rain clouds appeared, and 
all creatures began to rejoice—frogs, sdranga birds, and peacocks. 
Engulfed by the rain that had fallen and continued to fall incessantly, the 
mountain with its sarangas looked like one vast body of water. At this most 
pleasant of seasons, I decided to get some practice, and, with bow and 
arrows and chariot, I set out along the Sarayi River. I was an intemperate 
youth, eager to kill a buffalo at the waterhole in the nighttime, an elephant 
coming down to the river, or some other wild animal. Suddenly, in the 
darkness, I heard a noise, beyond the range of vision, of a pitcher being 
filled in the water, but just like the sound an elephant makes. 

[17-21] “I drew out a shaft that glared like a poisonous snake. I shot that 
keen-edged arrow, and it darted like a poisonous snake. And there, just as 
day was breaking, a human voice, that of a forest dweller, rang out clearly, 
crying, “Ah! Ah!’ It was the voice of a young man as he fell into the water, 
calling out: ‘Why would someone shoot a weapon at a person like me, an 
ascetic? I came to the deserted river at night only to fetch water. Who has 
struck me with an arrow? What have I done to anyone? I am a seer who has 
renounced violence, who lives in the wilderness on things of the wild. Why 
should someone take up a weapon to kill a person like me? The one burden 
I carry is my matted hair, my garments are nothing but barkcloth and hides. 
What could anyone gain by killing me? What wrong could I have done 
him? 

[22—26] “ ‘No, he could have had nothing to gain for what he did. Pure 
malice must have prompted it. No one shall ever think well of him just as in 
the case of one who violates his guru’s bed. But it is not for the loss of my 
own life that I am grieving so. It is for two others I grieve when I am slain, 
my mother and father. For they are an aged couple and have long been 
dependent on me. When I am dead, dissolved into the five elements, what 
sort of life are they to lead? My aged mother and father and I all slain by a 
single arrow! Who can have been so reckless, so malicious as to strike us 


down all at once?’ When I heard that piteous voice, I who had always 
striven to do right, shuddered, and the bow and arrow slipped from my 
hands to the ground. 

[27-31] “Desolate to my innermost being, in the depths of misery, I went 
to the place and saw on the bank of the Saray an ascetic struck down by 
my arrow. He fixed me with his eyes—I was beside myself with terror— 
and he spoke these harrowing words as though ready to burn me up with his 
ascetic power: ‘What harm have I, living here in the forest, ever done to 
you, your majesty, that you should attack me when all I wanted was to fetch 
some water for my elders? The very same arrow that has pierced me to the 
quick has also struck down two aged blind people, my mother and my 
father. Both of them are blind and frail; they are thirsty and waiting for me. 
And now they will have to endure their parching thirst, as long as they can, 
on the strength of hope alone. 

[32-35] “ ‘I now see that there is no reward for austerity or learning, 
since my father does not know that I lie fallen upon the ground. And even if 
he knew, what could he do? He is helpless and unable even to move about, 
as helpless as one tree to save another that is being felled. So you yourself, 
Raghava, must go at once to my father and tell him, lest in his wrath he 
consume you as a raging fire consumes a forest. There is the footpath, your 
majesty, leading to my father’s ashram. Go and beg his forgiveness, lest he 
curse you in his rage. 

[36-39] “ ‘Please draw out the arrow from me, your majesty, the keen- 
edged shaft is tearing me apart at the quick, as a rushing water current tears 
a soft riverbank apart. I am not a twice-born brahman, your majesty; you 
may set your mind at ease. For I was born of a vaisya father and a sudra 
mother, lord of the land.’ So, pierced to the quick by my arrow, he spoke in 
his agony; and, as he lay doubled over, I drew out the shaft. I stared at him 
lying there by the Sarayi, his body drenched in water, as he lamented in his 
agony, all the while gasping from his mortal wound; and as I stared, my 
dear wife, I grew utterly sick at heart.” 


Sarga 58 
[1-4] “It was a great sin I had committed, however unintentionally. I hardly 
had my wits about me as all alone I put my mind to the question of how 
might it be righted. At last I took the pot filled with pure water and went 


along the path he had told me of, until I reached the ashram. There I saw his 
parents, a frail, blind old couple with no one to guide them, like a pair of 
birds whose wings have been clipped. They could not move about and were 
sitting there listless and helpless, talking about him, their one hope that I 
had robbed them of. 

[S—10] “Hearing the sound of my footsteps, the sage spoke: ‘Why did 
you take so long, my son? Bring the water at once. Your mother here was 
worried, my child, and all because you were playing in the water. Come 
into the ashram at once. If perhaps your mother or I have offended you in 
some way, my son, you should not take it to heart. For you are an ascetic, 
my child. You are the recourse for us who have no other, the eyes for us 
whose sight is gone. Our very lives are in your hands. Won’t you say 
something to us?’ The longer I looked at the sage, the more frightened I 
became, and in a choked voice, stammering and slurring the syllables, I 
spoke to him. With effort I managed to collect my thoughts and recover the 
power of speech. Then I began to tell him the frightful story of his son’s 
calamity: 

[11-17] “ ‘I am DasSaratha, a kshatriya, not the great one’s son. A 
sorrowful thing, which all good men would condemn, has happened by my 
own doing. Holy one, I came to the bank of the Sarayi, bow in hand, eager 
to kill some animal, an elephant perhaps, coming down to a pool. There I 
heard the sound of a pitcher being filled in the water and, thinking it an 
elephant, I shot an arrow at it. I went to the riverbank and there I saw an 
ascetic lying on the ground with an arrow piercing his heart and his life 
ebbing away. Holy one, I was aiming at a sound, meaning to kill an 
elephant. I released an iron arrow toward the water, and it struck your son. 
When the arrow was pulled out, he went to heaven, then and there, grieving 
for both of you holy ones, lamenting your blindness. It was unintentional, 
holy one, it was an accident that I struck down your son. Whatever awaits 
me now, may the sage forgive me!’ 

[18-23] “The mighty sage gasped when he heard these harrowing words, 
and broken with grief he spoke to me as I stood before him, his hands 
cupped in reverence: ‘If you had not told me yourself of this impious deed, 
your majesty, your head would have instantly burst into myriad fragments. 
If a kshatriya intentionally commits a murder—and the murder of a forest 
hermit at that—it topples him from his place, be he Indra himself, the 


wielder of the vajra. But since this act was unintentional, and for that 
reason alone, you shall live. Were it not so, the entire House of the 
Raghavas, not just you, would cease at once to be. Take us, your majesty, to 
the place,’ he said to me. ‘We want to see our son now, to have one last 
sight of him, his body spattered with blood and his hide garments in 
disarray, lying on the ground unconscious, under the sway of Dharmaraja, 
god of death.’ 

[24-30] “So all alone I led the sage and his wife to that place and 
brought the deeply grieving parents near to where they could touch their 
son. The wretched couple drew close, they touched their son and collapsed 
upon his body. And his father cried out: ‘My son, don’t you love me 
anymore? At least have regard for your mother then, righteous child. Why 
don’t you embrace me, my son? Speak to me, my tender child. Whom shall 
I hear late at night—how it used to touch my heart—so sweetly reciting the 
sastras or other works? And who, after performing the evening sandhya 
rites, having taken a ritual bath, and having offered oblations to the fire, 
eater of oblations, will sit down beside me, my son, to allay the grief and 
fear that anguish me? Who will bring me tubers and fruits and roots and 
feed me like a welcome guest—me an invalid, without leader or guide? And 
how, my son, shall I support your poor mother, blind and aged as she 1s, 
wretched and yearning for her son? 

[31-38] “ ‘Stay! Don’t, oh don’t go, my son, to the abode of Yama. You 
may go tomorrow, with your mother and me to lend you strength. For we 
too shall soon be going to the house of Yama, bereft of you and left helpless 
in the forest, wretched and anguished with grief. And then, when I see 
Vaivasvata, I will make this speech: “May Dharmaraja, god of death, 
forgive me, but this boy is needed to support his parents.” You were free of 
evil, my son, and were struck down by a man of evil deeds. By the power of 
this truth may you go straight to the worlds they win who fight under arms. 
Proceed to the supreme state those heroes reach, my son, who do not turn 
their backs in battle but die facing the foe. Go, my dear son, to the state 
attained by Sagara, by Saibya, Diltpa, Janamejaya, Nahusa, and 
Dhundhumara. Go, my dear son, to the state awarded to all holy men for 
their vedic study and austerities, to one who donates land, who keeps the 
sacred fires, who is faithful to his one wife; to those who make a gift of a 


thousand cows, who support their gurus, who lay their bodies down. For no 
child of this family ever goes to the state of the accursed.’ 

[39-43] “So he mourned there wretchedly, again and again, and then 
with his wife he set about making the funeral libation for their child. But 
just then the sage’s son appeared in a heavenly form earned by his own 
pious deeds, and for one brief moment he addressed these words of solace 
to his parents: ‘I have attained a high station because I took care of you. 
And both of you shall soon come into my presence.’ With this, the sage’s 
disciplined son ascended straightaway to heaven upon a heavenly chariot of 
wonderful construction. The ascetic and his wife hurriedly made the 
libation, and as I stood before him, my hands cupped in supplication, the 
mighty sage said to me: 

[44-51] “ ‘Slay me this very moment, your majesty; death holds no 
terror for me. For I had but one son and you have taken him from me with 
your arrow. Since it was unintentionally that you struck down my pure son, 
I will only lay a curse on you, though it is a grievous and very dreadful one: 
just as I now sorrow over my son’s calamity, so you too, your majesty, shall 
end your days grieving for a son.’ The words of the noble sage have thus 
come home to me, dear wife, for now I am to lose my life grieving for my 
son. PPIf only Rama could touch me or speak to me now just once. How 
unlike me it was, my lady, to do what I did to Raghava. I cannot see you 
with my eyes, Kausalya, my mind is failing. Already the messengers of 
Vaivasvata, the god of death, are here, hastening me on! What greater 
sorrow than this, that in the final moments of my life I cannot rest my eyes 
on righteous, truly valorous Rama. “They are not men, but gods who in the 
fifteenth year will see Rama’s face again, that lovely face with its flashing 
earrings. 

[52-57] “His eyes are like lotus petals, his brows perfect, his teeth 
perfect, and his nose lovely. How fortunate will those men be who will see 
Rama’s face, so like the lord of stars, the moon. How fortunate will be the 
men who will see my defender’s face so like the face of the autumnal moon 
or a full-blown lotus, and so fragrant. When Rama has ended his stay in the 
forest and returns to Ayodhya, what happiness for those who will see him, 
like the planet Venus moving forward on its course. The grief arising here 
in my very soul has left me helpless and insensible. In its wild rush it is 
Sweeping me away, as a raging river sweeps away its bank. Alas! Great- 


armed Raghava, the one relief of my agony!” With this last cry of grief 
King Dasaratha reached the end of his life. And so it came about, just after 
midnight, when he had finished his mournful tale, that the lord of men, a 
man of noble vision, anguished by the exile of his beloved son and afflicted 
with the most profound sorrow, breathed his last. 


Sarga 59 

[1-5] Night passed, and in the morning of the following day the panegyrists 
arrived to attend at the bedchamber of the king. The skillful servants 
approached as usual, women and eunuchs mostly, people of impeccable 
conduct. At the proper time and according to custom the bath attendants 
came, bringing golden pitchers of water scented with yellow sandalwood. 
And a group of women appeared, young maidens for the most part, bearing 
auspicious articles, refreshments and accoutrements. The women then 
assembled who waited in attendance on the bed of the Kosalan lord, and 
they went to awaken their master. 

[6-9] Suddenly they felt apprehensive as to whether the king was indeed 
alive; a shudder convulsed them and they began to tremble like blades of 
grass that stand against the current of a stream. Then, as the trembling 
women looked more closely at the king, their apprehension of evil became a 
certainty. The lovely women were desolate and sent up a shrill wail, like 
cow elephants in the wilderness when their bull is driven from his place. At 
the sound of their crying Kausalya and Sumitra awoke at once and came to 
their senses. 

[10-14] Kausalya and Sumitra looked at the king and touched him. 
Then, crying out, “Alas our lord!” they collapsed upon the floor. The 
daughter of the lord of Kosala lay writhing upon the ground, coated with 
dust, her brilliance dimmed like that of a star fallen from the sky. A place of 
panic and bewilderment, with throngs of heartbroken people, tumult and 
crying everywhere, and kinsmen anguished with grief; all its bliss shattered 
in an instant, with a desolate and frenzied look—such was the palace of the 
god of men when he had reached the end of his allotted span. Realizing that 
the glorious bull among kings had passed away, his wives gathered around 
him, weeping wildly and piteously in their sorrow and stretching out their 
arms in helpless lamentation. 


Sarga 60 


[1-5] Kausalya gazed at the dead king—he looked like a blazing fire 
suddenly extinguished, or the ocean emptied of water, or the sun gone dark 
—and her eyes filled with tears. "Broken now with a double grief, she 
clasped the head of the king and cried out to Kaikeyt: “You must be 
satisfied, Kaikeyi, for now you can enjoy the kingship unchallenged. Wasn’t 
this the one object you had in mind when you forsook the king, you vicious, 
wicked woman? Rama has gone away without me, and my husband has 
gone to heaven. Like someone left behind by a caravan in a trackless waste, 
I cannot survive. What woman who has lost her husband, her own deity, 
would want to live—other than Kaikeyi, who has lost the way of 
righteousness as well? 

[6-10] “A greedy person is oblivious to risks; he will eat even unripe 
fruit. And thus, at the instigation of the hunchback, Kaikeyt1 has destroyed 
the House of the Raghavas. When Janaka learns that the king, acting on an 
illicit order, has exiled Rama and his wife, he will suffer just as I do. Lotus- 
eyed Rama has gone away as if dead though living! And poor Sita too, 
daughter of the king of Videha, she who has never known hardship, will 
tremble all over at the hardships of the forest. At night Sita will hear the 
ghastly cries of birds and beasts and will shrink back into R&ama’s arms in 
terror. Her father is aged and has but one child. He will brood over Vaidehi. 
He too will be overpowered by grief and surely lose his life.” 

[11-15] As poor Kausalya lamented in the anguish of sorrow, her 
maidservants embraced her and led her away. The ministers then took the 
lord of the world and placed him in a vat of sesame oil, and thereupon they 
assumed all the royal duties, as they were empowered to do. The 
counselors, knowing all proper procedures, were reluctant to perform the 
final rites with no prince at court. And so for the meanwhile they kept 
watch over the lord of the earth. When the women learned that the advisers 
had laid the lord of men in the vat of oil, they broke out in lamentation, 
crying “Alas, he is dead!” Their faces streaming tears, weeping in their 
burning grief, they raised their arms up piteously and piteously lamented. 

[16-19] Like a night without stars, like a woman bereft of her husband, 
the city of Ayodhya without its great king was cast into gloom. The people 
were drenched in tears, the housewives were crying woefully, the public 
squares and private courtyards were empty, and the brilliance the city once 
had was gone. As heaven has no light without the sun, bringer of light, as 


night has none when the crowds of stars have paled, the city went dark 
when it lost its great king, and the people, choked with tears, crowded the 
streets and squares. Men and women had begun to gather in groups, reviling 
Bharata’s mother. They were anguished and could find no comfort in the 
city, now that the god of men was dead. 


Sarga 61 

[1-7] Once the night had passed and the sun had risen, the agents of the 
king, the twice-born brahmans, convened and went to the assembly hall. 
Markandeya and Maudgalya, Vamadeva and Kasyapa, Katyayana and 
Gautama and glorious Jabali—these twice-born brahmans and the ministers 
all gave voice to their different opinions. But in the end they turned to 
Vasistha himself, the foremost among them, the purohita of the king, and 
said: “The night passed sorrowfully for us; it seemed to last a hundred 
years, with our king dead of grief for his son. The great king has gone to 
heaven, Rama has withdrawn to the wilderness, and glorious Laksmana has 
gone with him. Both Bharata and Satrughna, slayers of their enemies, are in 
the land of the Kekayas, in the lovely city of Rajagrha, the home of 
Bharata’s grandfather. Let some other Iksvaku prince be appointed king 
here and now, lest our kingdom be without a king and thereby meet with 
destruction. 

[8—12] “For in a land without a king, the rumbling, lightning-wreathed 
clouds do not rain down their heavenly water upon the earth. In a land 
without a king, handfuls of grain are not sown. In a land without a king, no 
son submits to his father’s will, no wife to her husband’s. Where there is no 
king there can be no wealth; one cannot have a wife where there is no king. 
And there is yet further peril, for how can there be honesty where there is 
no king? In a land without a king, patrons take no delight in building 
assembly halls, lovely gardens, or sanctuaries. In a land without a king, the 
twice-born men who customarily sacrifice, the self-restrained brahmans 
rigorous in their vows, institute no sacred rites. 

[13-19] “In a land without a king, no festivals or celebrations are held, 
where actors and dancers come in troupes and which bring a kingdom 
prosperity. In a land without a king, litigants receive no satisfaction, while 
storytellers find no favor with audiences by their stories. In a land without a 
king, lovers and their ladies do not ride out to the countryside on swift 


horses. In a land without a king, the rich who live by farming and cattle 
raising do not sleep securely, with their doors wide open. In a land without 
a king, merchants traveling long distances with loads of goods for sale do 
not go their way in safety. In a land without a king, there wander no solitary, 
disciplined sages, those who lodge where nightfall finds them and 
contemplate the Self within themselves. In a land without a king, security is 
not maintained: without a king the army cannot withstand an enemy in 
battle. 

[20—25] “Like rivers without water, like a forest without vegetation, like 
cows without cowherds is a kingdom without a king. In a land without a 
king, no one can call anything his own. For men, like fish, incessantly seek 
to devour one another. Atheists too, who unscrupulously break all bounds, 
conform to decency only when royal punishment is there to check them. 
Ah, it would be like darkness, nothing at all remaining clear, were there no 
king in the world to separate good from evil. And even while our great king 
was alive, it was your word alone we dared not overstep, just as the ocean 
does not overstep its shore. Best of the twice-born, consider what awaits us: 
without a king the kingdom will become a wilderness. Name some other 
prince of the Iksvaku line and consecrate him yourself as our king.” 


Sarga 62 

[1-5] When he had heard the speech of the brahmans and the hosts of 
ministers and allies, Vasistha replied to them: “Bharata is living 
comfortably with his brother Satrughna in the city of Rajagrha, among his 
uncle’s family. So let swift messengers go at once on speeding horses and 
bring back the two mighty brothers. Why do we delay?” “Yes, let them go,” 
they all replied, and when Vasistha heard their response, he said: “Come, 
Siddhartha, Vijaya, Jayanta, ASoka, Nandana. Listen, I shall tell you all 
what must be done. 

[6-9] “You must take swift horses and proceed swiftly to the city of 
Rajagrha. You must keep your grief in check and tell Bharata the following 
on my authority: ‘The purohita asks after your health, as do all the 
counselors. Please hurry back, for there is urgent business to which you 
must attend.’ But do not go and tell him of this disaster that has befallen the 
Raghavas, do not tell him about Rama’s exile or the death of the king. 
Gather silk garments and choice ornaments as gifts for the king and 


Bharata, and depart at once.” Vasistha then dismissed the messengers and 
they hurried off. 

[10-15] They crossed the Ganges at Hastinapura after reaching the 
country of Paficala, and then headed west, pressing on through the middle 
of the Kuru jungle. They swiftly forded the Saradanda, a heavenly river 
running with clear water, the home of birds of every description and 
thronged with people. There they came upon the venerable and divine 
nikila tree, known as Satyopayacana, “Granter of Wishes,” and, after 
approaching it reverently, they entered the city of Kulinga. From there they 
arrived at Abhikala, passing on from Tejobhibhavana, and, proceeding 
through the middle of Bahlika, they made their way to Mount Sudaman. 
There the mountain known as Visnu’s Footprint came into view, as well as 
the Vipasa and Salmali Rivers. The road was long and their mounts 
exhausted, but the messengers pressed on with all haste to Girivraja, best of 
cities. In order to bring their master the news, to ensure the safety of their 
master’s House and his succession in the dynasty, the messengers wasted no 
time but hurried on and reached the city late in the night. 


Sarga 63 

[1-6] Now, the very night during which the messengers entered the city, 
Bharata had a terrifying dream. The son of the king of kings had this 
terrible dream just as night was ending, and it sorely troubled him. 
Observing how troubled he was, his affable companions tried to ease his 
distress by engaging him in conversation in the assembly hall. ssSome made 
music and sang, while others danced or staged dramatic pieces or told 
various kinds of jokes. But great Bharata Raghava took no delight in the 
conviviality of his affable friends. One close friend questioned Bharata as 
he sat in the midst of his friends, “Why are you not enjoying yourself, my 
friend, in the company of your companions?” 

[7-12] Bharata then replied to his companion who was speaking in this 
fashion: “Listen to the reason why this great desolation has come over me. I 
saw my father in a dream. He was filthy, his hair dishevelled, and he fell 
from a mountain peak into a foul pool of cowdung. I saw him floating in 
that pool of dung, drinking sesame oil from his cupped hands, and he 
seemed to be laughing all the while. Then he was eating rice and oil, his 
whole body was anointed with oil, and again and again he would plunge 


headfirst into the oil. And in the same dream I saw the ocean gone dry and 
the moon fallen onto the earth. A blazing fire was suddenly extinguished, 
the earth was split open, and all the trees dried up; the mountains smoked 
and crumbled. 

[13-18] “Then the king lay collapsed on a black iron throne; he was 
dressed all in black, and there were women mocking him, women part 
yellow, part black. And that righteous man, wearing red garlands and 
unguents, was speeding off toward the south on a chariot yoked with 
donkeys. “Such was the terrifying dream I had last night. Surely I myself, 
Rama, the king, or Laksmana is going to die. For when in a dream a man 
sets out in a carriage yoked with donkeys, it is not long before a wreath of 
smoke appears above his funeral pyre. It is because of this I am so desolate 
and do not respond to your courtesies. My throat feels as if it were drying 
up; I can find no peace of mind. I feel a loathing for myself and do not 
know the reason why. Observing the course of this nightmare, with all those 
images that never before had entered my mind, and thinking about the king 
and that unthinkable look he had, I am filled with a great fear, and it will 
not leave my heart.” 


Sarga 64 
[1-5] Even as Bharata was relating his dream, the messengers on their 
weary mounts entered the lovely city of Rajagrha with its unbreachable 
moats. They met with the king and the king’s son and were received with 
honor. Then, clasping the feet of the king, they spoke these words to 
Bharata: “The purohita asks after your health, as do all the counselors. 
Please hurry back, for there is urgent business to which you must attend. 
Here is a gift for the king worth two hundred million, great prince, and one 
for your uncle worth a full hundred million.” Bharata accepted it all and in 
return honored the messengers with all that they might desire. He then 
asked, out of deep loyalty to his loved ones: 

[6-10] “I trust that my father, King DaSaratha, is well and that Rama and 
great Laksmana are in good health, as well as noble Kausalya, wise Rama’s 
mother, who is earnest in righteousness, who knows the way of 
righteousness and ever looks to it? And I trust that my middle mother, 
Sumitra, who knows the way of righteousness, the mother of Laksmana and 
mighty Satrughna, is also in good health? And Kaikeyi too, my ever selfish, 


hot-tempered, and irascible mother, who fancies herself so wise, what has 
she to say to me?” Addressed by great Bharata in this fashion, the 
messengers most courteously replied, “All those whose welfare you desire, 
tiger among men, are faring well.” 

[11-16] Addressed in this way, Bharata said to the messengers: “I will 
ask leave of the great king, as you messengers are pressing me to make 
haste.” After having spoken in this way to the messengers and being 
pressed by them, Prince Bharata addressed his grandfather: “Your majesty, I 
must return to my father at the urging of the messengers. But I shall come 
back again whenever you may wish me to do so.” Being addressed in this 
fashion by Bharata Raghava, his grandfather the king kissed him on the 
forehead and replied to him with these heartfelt words: “Go, my child, I 
give you leave. Kaikeyi has a worthy son in you, slayer of your enemies. 
Please give your mother my best wishes, and your father as well. My best 
wishes also to the purohita, my child, and to the other principal twice-born 
brahmans as well as those two great bowmen, your brothers Rama and 
Laksmana.” 

[17-24] The king of Kekaya then honored Bharata with the gift of prize 
elephants, many-colored blankets, and hides, and gave him riches. Two 
thousand gold ornaments and sixteen hundred horses were the riches he 
bestowed in order to honor Kaikeyi’s son. And straightaway Asvapati lent 
Bharata his own ministers, estimable men, trustworthy and virtuous, to 
serve as his travel companions. His uncle gave him riches too: handsome 
elephants bred on Mount Airavata and Mount AindraSira, and swift donkeys 
that easily took the yoke. He also made him a present of dogs raised in the 
inner apartments, huge dogs with fangs for weapons and the strength and 
courage of tigers. Taking leave of his grandfather and his uncle Yudhajtt, 
Bharata boarded his chariot with Satrughna and set out. And servants yoked 
the camels, oxen, horses, and donkeys to the circle-wheeled chariots, more 
than a hundred of them, and followed in Bharata’s train. Thus did great 
Bharata set out with Satrughna, under the protection of an army and 
accompanied by the ministers whom his grandfather trusted like himself. 
And he left the king’s dwelling untroubled by enemies, as a perfected being 
might leave the world of Indra. 


Sarga 65 


[1-5] Heading east, mighty Bharata, the majestic delight of the Iksvakus, 
departed from Rajagrha and crossed the wide and westward-flowing 
Satadrii, a deep river capped with waves. Crossing the river at Eladhana, he 
reached Aparaparpata, proceeding on to eastern Salyakartana after crossing 
the Silavaha. The prince, honest, majestic, and ever true to his word, had 
the river in view until he passed the high mountains leading to the 
Caitraratha forest. Crossing the Kulinga, a deep and swift river bounded by 
hills, he finally rested his army upon reaching the Yamuna. There he rested 
the weary horses and cooled their limbs. Then, having bathed and drunk, he 
took a store of water and set out once more. 

[6-11] In his handsome chariot the handsome prince passed through the 
vast, uninhabited wilderness as the wind passes through the sky. Traversing 
the southern end of Torana, the son of Dasaratha reached Jambiiprastha and 
proceeded to the pleasant village of Variitha. Having spent the night there in 
the pleasant forest, he went on, heading eastward to the garden of Ujjihana, 
thick with privaka trees. But when he reached those privaka trees, Bharata 
took leave of the army, and, harnessing swift horses, he sped onward. He 
spent the night at Sarvatirtha, and, after crossing the Uttanaka and several 
other rivers on his mountain-bred horses, he arrived at Hastiprsthaka, where 
he forded the Kutika. At Lauhitya the tiger among men crossed the Kapivatt 
River, at Ekasala the Sthanumati, and the Gomati at Vinata. 

[12-21] At Kalinganagara, Bharata reached a forest of sd/a trees and 
drove on swiftly though his mounts were near exhaustion. He passed 
straight through the forest at night and at sunrise spied Ayodhya, the city 
King Manu built. The tiger among men had spent seven nights on the road, 
and at last he saw before him the city of Ayodhya. From within the chariot 
he addressed his charioteer: “There is Ayodhya in the distance, that glorious 
white-clay city with its blessed gardens, throngs of virtuous sacrificers, 
brahmans who are masters of the vedas, and prosperous subjects, all under 
the protection of the best of royal seers—but how unhappy it looks to me, 
charioteer. In the past, one used to hear a loud, tumultuous sound in 
Ayodhya of men and women all about, but I do not hear it now. At other 
times, all the gardens revealed men leaving off the sports they had played 
since dusk and hurrying home. But now, abandoned by the lovers, the 
gardens seem to be weeping. It looks to me as if the town has become a 
wilderness, charioteer. Prominent men are no longer to be seen, as in the 


past, going in and out on carriages, elephants, and horses. And I see various 
portents, ominous ones, evil and appalling, and my heart sinks at the sight.” 

[22—28] He entered by the Gate of Victory, his horses exhausted. The 
gatekeepers rose and with cries of “Victory to the king!” accompanied him 
in. In bewilderment Raghava returned the gatekeepers’ greeting, and then 
addressed ASsvapati’s weary charioteer: “We have heard how people looked 
in times past when they lost their king—and I see those looks here, 
charioteer, I see them all. The people I see in the town, men and women 
both, are unkempt, their eyes are filled with tears, and they have a desolate 
look, haggard, forlorn, and pensive.” Speaking in this vein to the charioteer, 
Bharata proceeded to the palace, heartsick at the ominous sights in 
Ayodhya. And as he gazed upon the city that once looked like Indra’s city— 
at the empty crossroads, streets, and houses, at the bars on the door-leaves 
red with dust—he was filled to overflowing with sorrow. He saw so many 
unsettling things, things he had never before met with in the city, that great 
Bharata hung his head, sick at heart and joyless, as he made his way into his 
father’s residence. 


Sarga 66 

[1-6] Not seeing his father there in his usual place, Bharata went to see his 
mother in hers. When Kaikeyt saw that her long-absent son had arrived, she 
sprang up in delight, leaving her golden seat. As soon as righteous Bharata 
entered his house, he noticed that the royal splendor was absent, and so he 
clasped his mother’s lovely feet. She drew glorious Bharata to her breast, 
embraced him and kissed him on the forehead, and then she began to 
question him: “How many days is it now since you left your grandfather’s 
residence? You must have flown along in your chariot. Are you not weary 
from the journey? Is your grandfather well, and your uncle Yudhajit? Did 
you enjoy your visit, my son? You must tell me everything.” 

[7-13] Questioned fondly in this fashion by Kaikeyt, lotus-eyed Bharata, 
the delight of the king, told his mother everything: “Last night was the 
seventh since I left Grandfather’s residence. Mother’s father is well, and so 
is my uncle Yudhajit. The king, the slayer of enemies, gave me riches and 
precious objects, but they were an encumbrance, and so I left them on the 
road and came on ahead. The messengers who carried the order of the king 
urged me to make haste. Now I have something to ask my mother, and she 


must please answer. This comfortable gold-worked couch of yours is empty. 
And the people of Iksvaku seem to me to have lost all delight. The king is 
usually here in Mother’s chamber. I have not yet seen him and so came here 
in hopes that I would. I should like to clasp my father’s feet. Please, 
Mother, answer me as I am asking you. Could he perhaps be in the chamber 
of my eldest mother, Kausalya?” 

[14-19] Infatuated by her lust for kingship, Kaikeyi replied to him—an 
artful mother to an artless son—announcing the grievous event as if it were 
good news: “Your father has followed the course all living creatures must 
follow.” When he heard these words, Bharata, an honest son of a righteous 
family, fell suddenly to the ground, shattered by the violence of his grief for 
his father. Enveloped in grief, sorrowing over the death of his father, mighty 
Bharata lamented, his mind reeling in confusion. And he said: “This couch 
of Father’s used to look so lovely to me. It does not look that way today, 
with the wise man gone from it.” Seeing her godlike son fallen on the 
ground, anguished and grief-stricken, Kaikeyi tried to help him up and 
spoke these words: “Come now, get up. Why are you lying there? Men like 
you—good men esteemed in the assembly—do not grieve, glorious prince.” 

[20-25] But he continued to weep for a long time and to roll about on 
the ground. Then, shrouded in his many sorrows, he said to his mother: “I 
had imagined the king was going to consecrate Rama or perform a sacrifice, 
and so I made the journey in delight. How differently it has all turned out! 
My very mind is torn apart, that I shall never again see my father, who 
always strove so earnestly for my happiness and welfare. Oh mother, of 
what illness did the king pass away before I could return? How fortunate 
are Rama and all the others who were present to perform the last rites for 
Father. But surely the great and illustrious king does not yet know I have 
come. Otherwise my dear brother would hurry here and bend down to kiss 
me on the forehead. Where is that hand so pleasant to the touch, the hand of 
my tireless dear brother, with which he would always brush away the dust 
from me? 

[26-31] “Have my arrival announced to him at once, to tireless Rama. 
That wise man is now father, brother, and every kinsman to me, and I am 
his servant. For in the eyes of a noble man who knows the way of 
righteousness one’s eldest brother is as one’s father. His are the feet I would 
clasp, for he is my only refuge now. But my lady, what did the truthful king, 


my father, say? I just want to hear what last message he might have had for 
me.” Questioned in this way, Kaikeyi replied straightforwardly: “The great 
king, the foremost of those who live in this world, went to the next world 
lamenting, ‘Rama!’ and “Alas, Sita, Laksmana!’ And when at last the law of 
time caught your father up, the way snares catch a great elephant, the last 
words he uttered were these: ‘Fortunate the men who will see Rama when 
he comes back with Sita, and see great-armed Laksmana when he comes 
home.’ ” 

[32-35] When he heard this, Bharata became still more distraught, for he 
anticipated yet another calamity. With an expression of deep distress he 
questioned his mother further, asking, “But where can the righteous prince 
have gone, the delight of Kausalya, with our brother Laksmana and Sita?” 
Questioned thus, his mother again answered straightforwardly. She 
promptly began to relate the grievous event, thinking it would be received 
as good news: “My son, the prince went off in barkcloth garments to the 
great Dandaka forest, with Vaidehi and Laksmana following after him.” 

[36-38] Bharata was alarmed when he heard this, for doubts had been 
raised about his brother’s conduct. Concerned for the greatness of his 
dynasty, he began questioning her further: “I trust that Rama did not seize 
the wealth of a brahman, or did not harm some innocent man, whether rich 
or poor? And I trust that the prince did not covet another man’s wife. Then 
why was he exiled to the Dandaka forest like one who has slain an unborn 
child?” 

[39-45] His capricious mother then began to tell exactly what she had 
done, with the same feminine disposition that had made her do it: “No, 
Rama did not seize the wealth of any brahman. He harmed no innocent 
man, rich or poor, and Rama would never so much as cast his eyes upon the 
wife of another man. It was I, my son. As soon as I learned of Rama’s 
consecration, I demanded that your father award you the kingship and exile 
Rama. Your father followed the proper course of action and did exactly that, 
and so Rama and Saumitri were sent away with Sita. Once his beloved son 
was gone from his sight, the glorious protector of the earth was crushed 
with such grief for his son that he died. So now you must assume the 
kingship, as you know to be right. It was on your behalf I did all this, in 
such a way. Therefore, my son, in concert with the principal twice-born 
brahmans—those who know the ritual precepts, under the lead of Vasistha 


—you must at once perform according to precept the last rites for the 
courageous king, and then have yourself consecrated to power over the 
wide earth.” 


Sarga 67 

[1-5] When Bharata learned that his father had passed away and his two 
brothers were in exile, he was consumed with sorrow and spoke these 
words: “What possible use have I for the kingship, stricken as I am and 
grieving, bereft of both my father and the brother who is like a father to 
me? You have heaped sorrow upon my sorrow, rubbed salt into a wound, by 
killing the king and turning Rama into an ascetic. Like the dark night of 
doom have you come to annihilate this House. My father had no idea he 
was holding a firebrand in his embrace. It will be a miracle if Kausalya and 
Sumitra survive this torture of grief for their sons—and all because of you, 
my very own mother! 

[6-10] “My brother is righteous and knows the proper way to behave 
toward his elders, and surely his behavior toward you was perfect, just as it 
was toward his own mother. My eldest mother, Kausalya, farsighted though 
she is, treated you like a sister in her adherence to the way of righteousness. 
And you have sent her accomplished son away in barkcloth garments, to a 
life in the forest! Can you feel no grief, evil woman? He is an accomplished 
and glorious hero who never contemplated evil. What possible purpose 
could you have had in sight to banish him in barkcloth garments? Was it all 
for the sake of kingship that you brought about this great misfortune? In 
your greed, I suppose, you never understood how I felt toward Rama. 

[11-15] “With those tigers among men, Rama and Laksmana, gone from 
my sight, by virtue of what power would I be able to protect the kingdom? 
Even the great, mighty, and righteous king himself would constantly retreat 
behind his mighty son, like Mount Meru behind its forest. What strength 
have I to bear such a burden? I am like a mere calf before a load only a 
great ox could draw. Even were I to acquire the power through stratagems 
or force of intellect, I would never grant you your wish—not you, a woman 
so greedy on behalf of her son. I will bring my brother back from the forest, 
the beloved of his people.” So great Bharata spoke—and how hard his 
words struck, the very opposite of what she had hoped—and he roared out 
once more in the anguish of his grief, like a lion inside a mountain cave. 


Sarga 68 

[1-5] Having reviled his mother in this way, Bharata, in the grip of a wild 
rage addressed her once more: “It is you who should be expelled from the 
kingdom, Kaikey1, you vicious, wicked woman! “And you should be 
abandoned in accordance with all that is right. May you weep your eyes out 
without me. What possible wrong could the king or perfectly righteous 
Rama have done you, that because of you they should now have found 
death and banishment, respectively? You are guilty of murdering the unborn 
by your destruction of this House. May you go to hell, Kaikeyi, and never 
come to share the afterworld of your husband. That you could be capable of 
such evil and so horrible a deed—renouncing the beloved of all the world— 
makes me fearful on my own account as well. 

[6-10] “Because of you, my father is gone and Rama withdrawn to the 
wilderness, and you have brought infamy upon me in the eyes of every 
living soul. O enemy of mine in a mother’s guise, malicious woman lusting 
for kingship! Never speak to me again, you depraved murderess of your 
husband! Kausalya and Sumitra and the rest of my mothers are afflicted by 
great sorrow, and it is all your fault, you defiler of our House! You are no 
true daughter of Asvapati, a wise and righteous king, but rather a raksasa 
woman born to lay your father’s House in ruins. Because of you, righteous 
Rama, constant in his devotion to truth, has been driven out to the forest, 
while Father has gone to heaven in his grief. 

[11-14] “This evil for which you have striven falls upon my head; for I 
am left without my father and abandoned by my brothers, to become an 
object of hatred to all the world. You have parted Kausalya from her son, a 
woman who has never departed from righteousness. What afterworld can 
you attain now, you evil-scheming creature? You can only go to hell. Are 
you not aware, cruel woman, that Rama—a man of restraint, the refuge of 
his kinsmen, the eldest son and his father’s one equal—arose from 
Kausalya’s very self? Limb from mother’s limb is a son born, and from her 
heart. That is why she loves him above all, because he is her very dearest, 
and not a mere kinsman. 

[15-19] “Once upon a time, so the story goes, righteous Surabhi, the 
cow held in high esteem by the gods, caught sight of two of her sons. They 
were ploughing the broad earth, in a state of stupor. Seeing her sons lying 
on the ground at midday, exhausted, she wept in grief for them, and her 


eyes were flooded with tears. Clear and fragrant her teardrops fell, and they 
touched a limb of the great king of the gods, Indra, as he was passing below 
her. Indra, wielder of the vajra, saw how the illustrious cow was consumed 
with grief, and the king of the gods was disquieted. He cupped his hands in 
reverence and addressed her: ‘No great danger threatens us from any 
quarter, does it? What is the cause of your grief? Tell me, all-beneficent 
COW.’ 

[20-24] “Addressed in this way by the wise king of the gods, Surabhi 
composed herself and eloquently replied: ‘Perish the thought! No, nothing 
threatens you from any quarter, overlord of the immortal gods. I am 
grieving only for two of my sons, who languish in their sorry plight. I see 
how haggard and desolate these two bullocks are, how the rays of the sun 
are burning them, and how the ploughman beats them, overlord of the gods. 
They were born of my body, and for me to see them so sorrowful and 
oppressed by burdens is agony. For there is nothing so dear as a son.’ The 
wish-granting cow had thousands of sons, and even so she grieved. How 
much more so will Kausalya grieve, who must live without Rama? 

[25—29] “This good woman has but one son, and you have made her 
childless. For this you shall reap sorrow forever, both in this world and 
when you die. As for me, there is no question but that I must make full 
amends to my brother and father, and so restore our glory. I will have 
Kausalya’s splendid son brought back and go myself into the forest where 
sages make their home.” When he had finished speaking in this fashion, he 
resembled an elephant in the wilderness driven with prods and goads, and 
he fell upon the ground in a rage, hissing like a snake. His eyes bloodshot, 
his clothes in disarray, all his jewelry cast aside, the enemy-slaying prince 
lay fallen on the ground like the flagstaff of Indra, Saci’s lord, when that 
god’s festival is over. 


Sarga 69 
[1-5] As great Bharata was crying out in this way, Kausalya, recognizing 
his voice, said to Sumitra: “Far-sighted Bharata, the son of that cruel 
woman Kaikeyi, has returned. I want to see him.” Having said this, she set 
out to where Bharata was, trembling and almost insensible, her face drained 
of color and her garment filthy. But at that very same time Rama’s younger 
brother Bharata was setting out to Kausalya’s residence, accompanied by 


Satrughna. And, when in their sorrow, Satrughna and Bharata spied 
Kausalya, they embraced her. For tormented by anguish and nearly 
unconscious, she had collapsed. 

[6-11] Then, in deep sorrow, Kausalya spoke to Bharata: “You lusted for 
the kingship and here you have it unchallenged—and how quickly Kaikey1 
secured it for you by her cruel deed. But what advantage did that cruel and 
scheming Kaikeyi hope to gain by driving out my son to live in the forest in 
barkcloth garments? Why doesn’t Kaikeyi at once drive me out as well to 
where my son Rama, my glorious Hiranyanabha, is staying? Then again, I 
should be happy to set out on my own to where Raghava is living, with only 
Sumitra to attend upon me and the agnihotra fire carried before us. But no, 
truly it is up to you to send me there yourself, to where my son, the tiger 
among men, is practicing austerities. For this vast kingdom is now yours; 
she has delivered it to you, with all its abundance of wealth and grain, all its 
teeming elephants, horses, chariots.” 

[12-17] As Kausalya lamented in this way, shrouded in her many 
sorrows, Bharata cupped his hands in reverence and addressed her: “My 
lady, why do you reproach me who am guiltless and knew nothing of this. 
You know how deep and enduring is my love for Raghava. May a man 
never come to think in harmony with the sastras if he approves of the 
departure of my elder brother Rama, the very best of men, who always 
keeps his word. May such a one come to serve the most wicked of men, 
may he pass urine facing the sun and kick a sleeping cow if he approves of 
my brother’s departure. May the unrighteousness attaching to a master who 
forces an onerous task upon his servant without remuneration attach to him 
if he approves of my brother’s departure. May the sin that beings incur in 
turning traitor to a king who has protected them like his own children be 
reckoned to his account if he approves of my brother’s departure. 

[18-23] “May the unrighteousness attaching to a king who levies a sixth 
portion in tax without guarding his subjects attach to him if he approves of 
my brother’s departure. May the sin men incur who promise priests their fee 
at a sacrifice and then cry off be reckoned to his account if he approves of 
my brother’s departure. May he never honor the code of the brave in battle 
where elephants, horses, and chariots are crowding and weapons flying 
thick if he approves of my brother’s departure. The subtle meaning of the 
sastras, which the wise impart with so much care, may the evil-hearted man 


forever lose if he approves of my brother’s departure. May he eat rice 
porridge, sesame porridge, and goat’s flesh to no purpose; may he show 
contempt for his gurus, a ruthless man who approves of my brother’s 
departure. May his children, his wife, and his servants huddle about him at 
home while he alone eats delicacies if he approves of my brother’s 
departure. 

[24—28] “May he be guilty of the sin charged to one who murders a king, 
a woman, a child, or an elder, or who abandons his dependents. May the sin 
charged to one who sleeps through both the morning and evening sandhya 
rites be reckoned to his account who sanctioned my brother’s going. May 
he be guilty of the sins of arson, violation of a guru’s bed, and treachery to 
allies. May he never show obedience to the gods, his ancestors, his mother 
or father, he who sanctioned my brother’s departure. And may he be 
excluded at once, this very moment, from the deeds practiced by the good, 
from the praises of the good, from the world of the good, if he approves of 
my brother’s departure.” 

[29-34] In this way, the prince tried to reassure Kausalya, bereft as she 
was of her husband and son, and then, in the anguish of his sorrow, he 
collapsed. Pronouncing severe curses in this fashion, Bharata then lay there 
insensible and consumed with grief as Kausalya addressed him: “This 
sorrow of mine, my son, has grown only greater. That you should 
pronounce such curses chokes the very breath of life within me. Thank god, 
my child, that your own thoughts never swerved from righteousness any 
more than those of Laksmana. If what you promise me is true, you shall 
attain the world of the virtuous.” And as great Bharata lamented in the 
anguish of his sorrow, his mind was in turmoil from all the confusion and 
besieged by grief. And as he went on wildly lamenting, he fell in a stupor to 
the ground. Heaving deep sighs all the while, he passed the night lost in 
grief. 


Sarga 70 
[1-5] As Kaikeyi’s son, Bharata, remained consumed with grief, Vasistha, 
most eloquent of seers, came and eloquently said to him: “Bless you, 
glorious prince, enough of this grief. It is time you performed the funerary 
rites for the lord of men.” Upon hearing Vasistha’s words, Bharata regained 
his composure, and, wise in the ways of righteousness, he commenced the 


performance of all the funeral rites. The protector of the earth was removed 
from the oily liquid and laid upon the earth. His face had a yellowish tinge, 
and he seemed to be asleep. His son then had DaSaratha laid upon a 
sumptuous bed encrusted with all kinds of gems, and he began to lament 
over him in deep sorrow, crying: 

[6-9] “Why did you take this decision, your majesty, when I was away, 
before I could return, after sending righteous Rama into exile with mighty 
Laksmana? Where are you going, great king, leaving your people in sorrow 
when the lion among men, tireless Rama, has already left them? Who is 
there, your majesty, to maintain the security of your city, now that you have 
gone to heaven, dear Father, and Rama has withdrawn to the forest? The 
earth has been widowed, your majesty; bereft of you it is cast into gloom. 
And the city looks to me like the night without a moon.” 

[10-17] And as Bharata lamented in this fashion, sick at heart, the great 
seer Vasistha addressed him once again: “The funeral rites must now be 
performed for the lord of the people. Let it all be done fully, great-armed 
prince, and without delay.” “So be it,” Bharata replied, heeding Vasistha’s 
command, and he urged all the sacrificial priests, the purohitas, and 
preceptors to make haste. The sacred fires of the lord of men had been 
placed outside the fire-sanctuary, and the sacrificial priests and other 
sacrificers fetched them in accordance with the ritual precepts. Disconsolate 
and choked with sobs, his attendants raised the lifeless king onto a litter and 
bore him out. Ahead of the king went people strewing the way with gold 
and silver and different kinds of garments. Others brought the resins of 
sandalwood and aloewood and sarala, padmaka, and devadaru wood and 
built the pyre. After placing various other fragrant substances on the pyre, 
the sacrificial priests laid the protector of the earth in its center. 

[18—23] The sacrificial priests made offering to the fire and intoned 
prayers for him, while the chanters of the Samaveda sang the hymns in 
accordance with the sdastras. In palanquins and carriages, according to their 
rank, his wives had come out from the city in the company of the elders. 
And as the flames engulfed the king and as the sacrificial priests walked 
leftward around him, the grieving women did likewise, with Kausalya at 
their head. At that hour could be heard a cry like the cry of Araunca hens as 
the anguished women by the thousands raised a piteous wail. Afterward, 
amid uncontrolled weeping and constant lamentation, the women went to 


the bank of the Sarayi and alighted from their carriages. After making the 
funeral libation, the king’s wives, the counselors, the purohitas, and Bharata 
tearfully reentered the city, where they sat upon the ground to pass the ten- 
day period of ritual death impurity. 


Sarga 71 

[1-5] When the ten-day period was over, the prince purified himself, and on 
the twelfth day he had the memorial srdddha rites performed. To the 
brahmans he gave precious objects, money, and abundant food—goat’s 
flesh and much white rice—and cows by the hundreds. And the prince 
bestowed male and female slaves, carriages, and grand houses upon the 
brahmans as the funerary gifts of the king. On the thirteenth day at the hour 
of dawn, great-armed Bharata went out to perform the ceremony of 
purification at the foot of his father’s pyre. Overwhelmed by grief, he began 
to lament. ’His throat choked with tears, he cried out in his deep sorrow: 

[6-10] “Oh dear Father, my brother Raghava, to whose care you 
committed me, is banished to the forest, and you have left me in an utter 
void! My king, my father, where have you gone? With her son, her sole 
refuge, banished to the forest, you have left mother Kausalya without a 
protector.” And when he saw the ash-brown circle where the charred bones 
lay, the place where his father’s body had met extinction, he gave way to 
despair and cried aloud. He was desolated by the sight of it and fell weeping 
to the ground, the way Sakra’s banner might fall from its halyard while 
being raised. His ministers all rushed to the aid of the pious prince, just as 
did the seers when Yayati fell at his final hour. 

[11-15] Seeing Bharata overwhelmed with grief, Satrughna likewise fell 
senseless to the ground, fondly remembering the protector of the earth. He 
was nearly out of his mind, and like a madman he began to lament in his 
profound sorrow. Recalling with every passing minute another of his 
father’s virtues, he cried: “Churned up in all its fury by Manthara, agitated 
by Kaikeyi as its sea monster, and the offer of the boon its overwhelming 
flood, a sea of grief has swallowed us! Where have you gone, dear Father, 
leaving Bharata to lament, a boy so delicate and young, whom you always 
treated so indulgently? Remember how you used to give us all so many 
delicacies to choose from, so many drinks, garments, and ornaments—who 
will do that for us now? 


[16—20] “If the earth does not dissolve at once, though bereft of you, 
great and righteous king, it never will, not even at the hour of universal 
dissolution. With Father gone to heaven and Rama withdrawn to the 
wilderness, what strength have I to live? I will enter the blazing fire, eater 
of oblations. Bereft of my brother and father, I will not enter an empty 
Ayodhya that Iksvaku once protected. No, I will enter a grove of 
asceticism.” When they heard the two brothers’ lamentation and reflected 
on their calamity, the attendants were all afflicted with an anguish even 
sharper than before. In their despair and exhaustion, both Bharata and 
Satrughna lay writhing on the ground like bulls with shattered horns. 

[21-25] But their father’s purohita, the wise Vasistha, maintaining his 
usual composure, helped Bharata to his feet and said to him: “There are 
three dualities to which every living thing without exception is subject. 
wwThey cannot be avoided, and so you must not act in this way.” 
Meanwhile, Sumantra helped Satrughna to his feet, consoling him and, 
knowing the true nature of things, explained how all living things are born 
and so must die. The two glorious tigers among men then stood, but they 
both looked like banners of Indra ruined by sun and rain. The sons wiped 
away the tears from their reddened eyes and mourned in desolation until, at 
the ministers’ urging, they turned to the remaining rites. 


Sarga 72 

[1-5] Now, as the grief-stricken Bharata was making the journey back, 
Laksmana’s younger brother Satrughna addressed him with these words: 
“Mighty Rama, the refuge of all creatures in sorrow, and of himself most of 
all, has been banished to the forest by a woman! And what of the powerful, 
the mighty Laksmana? Why did he not free Rama, even if it meant 
imprisoning Father? If he had fully weighed both sides of the issue, he 
would have imprisoned the king at the very first—a man who was under a 
woman’s power and bent on an evil course.” Now, as Laksmana’s younger 
brother Satrughna was speaking in this vein, the hunchback appeared at the 
front gate, all adorned with jewelry. 

[6-10] She was anointed with the essence of sandalwood and dressed in 
queenly garments, and, with her many-colored belts and sashes, she looked 
like a female monkey tied up with rope. Catching sight of the hunchback, 
the cause of all the trouble, a gatekeeper ruthlessly seized her, at the same 


time calling to Satrughna: “Here is the evil, malicious woman! It is her 
doing that Rama is in the forest and your father has given up his mortal 
body. Do with her as you see fit.””’ When he heard this, the devoted and 
sorrowing Satrughna cried out to all the servants of the inner apartments: 
“This is the woman who has brought such bitter sorrow upon my brothers 
and my father. Let her now taste the fruit of her malicious deed.” 

[11-15] And having said so, he violently seized the hunchback as she 
stood amidst her female companions, so that the house resounded with her 
cries. Her companions stared with wild consternation at the raging 
Satrughna and then fled in all directions. And they then all took counsel 
together, crying: “In the course of his mad attack he will annihilate us all. 
Illustrious Kausalya is compassionate, generous, and righteous. We must 
take refuge with her. She will ensure our safety.” His eyes coppery red in 
his fury, Satrughna, slayer of his enemies, dragged the howling hunchback 
across the ground. 

[16-19] And as Manthara was being dragged to and fro, her many- 
colored pieces of jewelry were shattered in fragments all over the ground. 
With the jewelry scattered about it the majestic palace seemed to shine all 
the more, like the sky in autumn. In his rage, the powerful bull among men, 
still holding her in his powerful grip, cried out harshly, reviling Kaikeyt. 
Satrughna’s bitter and sorrowful words plunged Kaikeyt even deeper into 
sorrow, and, terrified by his threats, she sought refuge with her son. 

[20-25] Bharata glanced at her and called out to the raging Satrughna: 
“If any creature is not to be slain it is a woman. Forbear! I would kill this 
woman myself, this evil, wicked Kaikeyi, were it not that righteous Rama 
would condemn me as a matricide. If righteous Raghava were to learn that 
even this hunchback were slain, he would surely never speak to you or me 
again.” Upon hearing Bharata’s words, Laksmana’s younger brother 
Satrughna checked his fury and released Manthara. Panting and anguished 
with sorrow, Manthara fell at Kaikeyi’s feet, lamenting wretchedly. 
Bharata’s mother looked at the hunchback and began gently to soothe her as 
she lay anguished and stunned from Satrughna’s abuse, staring like a 
trapped kraurica hen. 


Sarga 73 


[1-5] At dawn on the fourteenth day the deputies of the king convened and 
addressed Bharata: “Dasaratha, our most revered guru, has gone to heaven, 
having first banished Rama, his eldest son, and mighty Laksmana. O 
glorious prince, you must become our king this very day. Our kingdom is 
without a leader, and only by mere chance has it not yet come to grief. Your 
people and the guildsmen await you, Prince Raghava, with all the materials 
for the consecration in hand. You must assume the kingship, Bharata, the 
great office of your fathers and forefathers. Have yourself consecrated, bull 
among men, and protect us.” 

[6-13] The devoted Bharata then reverently circled all the articles for the 
consecration and made this reply to all the people: “It has always been the 
custom of our House that the kingship passes to the eldest son. You men are 
aware of this and ought not to ask such a thing of me. Rama, our elder 
brother, shall be the lord of the earth. As for me, I will live in the wilderness 
for the nine years and five. Let a great army be marshaled, complete with 
all four divisions; for I myself will bring my eldest brother, Rama, back 
from the forest. And all the consecration materials standing ready here I 
will carry in the vanguard as I go to the forest on Rama’s behalf. Then and 
there I will consecrate Rama, tiger among men, and bring him back in the 
vanguard, like a sacred fire from the sacrificial ground. I will never grant 
this woman her wish, she who but faintly resembles a mother. I shall live in 
the trackless forest, and Rama shall be king. Let a road be made by artisans, 
let the rough sections be leveled out, let guards accompany them, and men 
to scout out the trackless regions on the way.” 

[14-17] When the prince had ended this speech on behalf of Rama, all 
the people answered him with an earnest prayer for majesty, crying out, 
“May Sri of the Lotus ever attend upon you for what you have said here, 
you who wish to bestow the earth upon the eldest prince.” When the nobles 
heard the unsurpassed speech the prince had uttered for all to hear, tears of 
joy for him welled up in their eyes and ran down their cheeks. The ministers 
and members of the council had listened joyfully to his words. Their grief 
allayed, they said to him, “On your orders, best of men, the devoted people 
and companies of artisans shall be given instructions concerning the road.” 


Sarga 74 


[1-5] Then surveyors and men trained in measurement, powerful 
excavators who were zealous in their work; engineers, laborers, craftsmen, 
and men skilled in machinery; carpenters, road-levelers, woodcutters, well- 
drillers, pavers, cane-weavers, and capable guides all set out from the city. 
Proceeding joyfully to the appointed region, that vast flood of people 
resembled the great rushing tide of the sea under a full moon. The skilled 
road builders took their places each in his own contingent, and, with all 
their different kinds of tools, they set out in advance. 

[6-10] Through vines, creepers and shrubs, through stumps and boulders 
and all kinds of trees, the workers cut and built a road. In treeless areas 
some of them transplanted trees, while elsewhere some set to work 
chopping with axes, mattocks, and scythes. Other, stronger men, cleared the 
strong-rooted stalks of virana grass and the more impenetrable areas. Still 
others took dirt and with it filled dry wells and gaping holes, while some 
leveled out the tracts of land on every side. Men then bridged the areas that 
needed bridging, pounded those that needed pounding, and drained those in 
need of draining. 

[11-15] In a short time they enlarged the volume and shape of many 
streams so that they looked like so many oceans, and they built various 
kinds of reservoirs embellished with benches. The road for the army was 
paved and whitewashed, lined with blossoming trees, resounding with the 
calls of flocks of wild birds; it was adorned with banners, sprinkled with 
sandalwood water, ornamented with all sorts of flowers, and it shone with 
the brilliance of the Milky Way. Now, certain sites in the loveliest tracts 
where fruit grew rich and sweet were selected as rest areas for the great 
Bharata. The superintendents, diligently following the orders they had 
received, gave orders to beautify these places with special ornamental work 
until they looked like perfect ornaments. 

[16—21] Under auspicious constellations and at auspicious hours the 
experts laid the foundations for great Bharata’s rest areas. **The workers 
spread heaps of sand around the sites, built moats to encircle them, erected 
poles and crossbeams and bars. The sites were adorned with lovely lanes 
and garlanded with banners. Well-constructed thoroughfares ran through 
them all. And with their lofty, spire-topped mansions that seemed to wander 
lost in the sky, they resembled the city of Indra itself. Where the royal road 
met the Jahnavi—with its groves of different trees, its cool, clear water and 


shoals of large fish—it sparkled like the clear vault of heaven at night when 
the moon and crowds of stars embellish it. It was a lovely road every step of 
the way, built by master artisans. 


Sarga 75 

[1-6] As bright-faced dawn was breaking, bards and genealogists, masters 
of all the fine points of speech, came to sing the praises of Bharata and wish 
him good fortune. Beaten with golden drumsticks, the drum of the 
nightwatch resounded, while conches by the hundreds and high- and low- 
pitched instruments were sounded. The loud sound of musical instruments 
seemed to fill the heavens, though it only brought more lacerating grief to 
the grief-stricken Bharata. On awakening, he put a halt to the clamor, 
exclaiming, “I am not the king!” Then, turning to Satrughna, he said: “See, 
Satrughna, what a great wrong these people are doing because of Kaikeyi. 
And King Dasaratha is gone, leaving me all these troubles. This royal 
majesty, founded on righteousness, belonged to him, the great and righteous 
king. And now it is adrift like a ship on the water without a helmsman.” 

[7-11] Seeing Bharata wildly lamenting, the women all broke out in 
piteous, shrill weeping. He was still lost in lamentation as glorious Vasistha, 
the authority in all matters of kingship, made his way to the assembly hall 
of the lord of the Iksvakus. It was a lovely hall fashioned of gold and richly 
studded with jewels and gems, and it resembled the gods’ assembly hall, 
Sudharma, as the righteous family priest entered with his attendants. The 
master of all the vedas sat down upon a golden bench covered with a costly 
spread and gave his instructions to the heralds: “Go at once and diligently 
fetch the brahmans, kshatriyas, soldiers, ministers, and commanders of the 
troops. There is urgent business to which we must attend.” 

[12—14] Soon there arose a tumultuous din as the people began arriving 
on chariots, horses, and elephants. And as Bharata approached, the subjects 
called out their greetings to him just as they used to greet DaSaratha, the 
way the immortal gods greet Indra of the hundred sacrifices. The hall was 
like a pool filled with gems and shells and pebbles, its waters still despite 
the teeming fish and serpents. And the son of DasSaratha lent it such beauty 
as it had in the past, when DaSaratha himself was there. 


Sarga 76 


[ 1—7] »¥Crowded with hosts of nobles all favorably inclined toward Bharata, 
the assembly hall appeared to the wise Vasistha like the night of the full 
moon. As the nobles took their seats in proper order, the hall looked like a 
full-moon evening when the clouds have vanished. Observing that all the 
king’s subjects were represented in full, the purohita, knowing the ways of 
righteousness, commenced this gentle address to Bharata: “My son, King 
DaSaratha went to heaven in the performance of righteousness, after making 
over to you this prosperous land abounding in wealth and grain. Rama 
likewise held fast to truth, mindful of the righteous ways that virtuous men 
follow. He could no more cast aside his father’s command than can the 
rising hare-marked moon its light. Your father and brother have bestowed 
on you unchallenged kingship. You must take possession of it and gladden 
the ministers. You must have yourself consecrated at once. Let the 
sovereigns of the north and west and south, and the westernmost ones who 
live by the sea, deliver up vast riches to you.” 

[8—10] Hearing these words, Bharata was overwhelmed with grief. 
Knowing what was right and anxious to abide by it, he turned his thoughts 
to Rama. With words choked with tears and in a voice like the call of the 
kalahamsa, the young prince began to lament and to rebuke the purohita in 
the midst of the assembly, saying: “The kingship belongs to that wise prince 
who has practiced chastity, perfected his knowledge, and always striven for 
righteousness. How could a person like me dare seize it from him? 

[11-15] “How could a son born of DaSaratha usurp the kingship? The 
kingship, and I myself, belong to Rama. Please see to it that your advice is 
in keeping with righteousness. Righteous Kakutstha, the eldest son and the 
best, the equal of Diltpa and Nahusa, must obtain the kingship just as 
Dasaratha did. The other course is an evil one, followed only by ignoble 
men, and does not lead to heaven. Were I to take it I should become a 
disgrace to the House of the Iksvakus in the eyes of all the world. I do not 
condone the evil deed my mother has done. Though I am here and he in the 
trackless forest, I cup my hands in reverence and bow to him. | will go after 
R&ama—he is my king, the foremost of all who go on two feet. Raghava 
deserves not only this, but kingship over all three worlds!” 

[16-20] When they heard these mghteous words, the men of the 
assembly, whose thoughts were ever with Rama, all shed tears of joy. 
Continuing, Bharata said: “If I cannot bring my noble brother back from the 


forest, then in that very forest will I stay, just like my noble brother 
Laksmana. I will use every means in my power to compel him to return to 
the presence of you just, virtuous, and honorable noblemen.” With this, 
righteous Bharata, who so cherished his brother, turned to the skillful 
counselor Sumantra standing by his side and said: “Make haste and go, 
Sumantra! On my authority muster the army at once and give the command 
for the expedition.” 

[21-25] Addressed in this fashion by great Bharata, Sumantra went off 
in delight and gave all the orders as he had been directed and had hoped to 
do. The subjects and the marshals of the army were delighted to receive the 
command for an expedition to bring Raghava back. The soldiers’ wives too, 
when they learned of the expedition, were all delighted, and in each and 
every house they pressed their husbands to hurry. The marshals rallied the 
entire army, the soldiers, the horses, the fast oxcarts, and the chariots swift 
as thought. Bharata saw that the army was ready as he stood in the midst of 
his gurus. Turning to Sumantra, who was at his side, he said, “Hurry and 
bring my chariot.” 

[26-30] Sumantra received Bharata’s command in great delight and 
came forth with a chariot harnessed with splendid horses. Bharata Raghava 
was a courageous prince who held fast to truth and strove to act truthfully. 
His glorious guru was away in the great wilderness, and he was ready to go 
and beg his forgiveness. The words he spoke were fitting when he said: 
“Make haste, Sumantra, and go to the leaders of the army to have the troops 
marshaled. Rama is in the forest, and I mean to beg his forgiveness and 
bring him back for the welfare of the world.” Thus duly commanded by 
Bharata, the son of charioteers, his every wish fulfilled, gave instructions to 
all the leading subjects, to the heads of the army, and to all their many loved 
ones. And then the men of every household, the kshatriyas, vaisyas, siidras, 
and brahmans too, made haste and harnessed their camel-carts, their 
elephants, donkeys, and purebred horses. 


Sarga 77 
[1-5] Then Bharata, having arisen at an early hour, boarded his excellent 
chariot and set forth swiftly, eager to see Rama. Before him went all the 
counselors and purohitas in horse-drawn chariots that resembled the chariot 
of the sun. Nine thousand elephants marshaled according to custom 


followed Bharata, the delight of the House of the Iksvakus, as he 
progressed. And sixty thousand chariots and archers with every sort of 
weapon followed the glorious Prince Bharata as he progressed as well. One 
hundred thousand horses, each with a rider, followed the glorious Prince 
Bharata Raghava as he progressed. 

[6-10] Kaikeyi, Sumiutra, and illustrious Kausalya traveled in a 
resplendent carriage, delighted to be bringing Rama back. Throngs of 
nobles went along in hopes of seeing Rama and Laksmana. With delight in 
their hearts, they held animated conversation about him, saying: “When will 
we see Rama, dark as a storm cloud, great-armed, unshakable in valor and 
firm of vows, the one who allays the grief of the world? For the mere sight 
of Raghava will dispel our grief, as the rising sun, bringer of day, dispels 
the darkness of all the world.” The men of the city carried on such heartfelt 
conversation as this and embraced one another as they made their way 
along. 

[11-18] Every estimable subject, the merchants and all the others, set off 
in delight to find Rama. Jewelers and master potters, weavers and weapon- 
smiths, workers in peacock feathers, sawyers, bauble-makers, gem-cutters, 
workers in ivory, plasterers, perfumers, renowned goldsmiths, blanket- 
cleaners, bath attendants, valets, physicians, incense merchants and 
vintners, washermen and tailors, the headmen of villages and hamlets, 
actors with their women, and fishermen—all were making the journey. And 
thousands of brahmans all together, masters of the vedas esteemed for their 
conduct, followed Bharata in their oxcarts as he went. “Everyone was 
handsomely attired in clean clothing and anointed with pure coppery 
unguents, and on a great array of vehicles they slowly followed Bharata. 
Delighted and cheerful, the attendant army followed Kaikeyi’s son, Bharata, 
and soon it came to a halt. 

[19-23] Observing the army stop, and spying the Ganges with its 
auspicious waters, Bharata addressed all his advisers with these well- 
spoken words: “Have my army pitch camp anywhere it chooses. 
Straightaway tomorrow, when we are rested, we shall cross the great river. 
Meanwhile, as for myself, I wish to go down to the river and offer water to 
the departed king as part of his funerary rites.” And as he spoke in this 
fashion, the ministers all together replied with a word of assent. Then they 
ordered each group to pitch camp separately and wherever they pleased. 


When the army, magnificent with its equipment all arrayed, was encamped 
along the great river Ganges, Bharata took up his dwelling and began to 
ponder how to bring great Rama back. 


Sarga 78 

[1-5] Now, when the king of the Nisadas, saw the many-bannered army 
encamped along the river Ganges, he hastened to speak to his kinsmen, 
saying: “A great army has appeared here, as vast as the sea. I cannot 
imagine what its purpose might be, however much thought I give it. There 
is a huge battle standard upon a chariot, marked with a kovidara tree. Has 
someone come to take us fisherfolk captive, or to kill us? Or is it perhaps 
that Bharata, Kaikeyt’s son, is marching out to slay Rama Dasarathi, whom 
his father has exiled from the kingdom? Rama Dasarathi is both my master 
and my friend. We must champion his cause. Arm yourselves and take up 
positions here on the bank of the Ganges. 

[6-10] “All the fishermen are to take up positions along the river 
Ganges. Guard the river with your troops, provisioning yourselves with 
meat, roots, and fruits.” And he exhorted them further: “Let the younger 
fishermen arm themselves and take up their positions, a hundred each on 
five hundred boats. #*But should it turn out that Bharata is favorable toward 
Rama, this army of his may safely cross the Ganges today.” When he had 
spoken in this fashion, Guha, overlord of the Nisadas, took gifts and fish, 
meat, and honey-wine, and went forth to meet Bharata. Seeing him 
approach, the valorous charioteer’s son Sumantra, who knew proper 
deference, deferentially informed Bharata with the following words: 

[11—15] “Here is the chief surrounded by a thousand of his kinsmen. He 
is an old friend of your brother’s and knows the Dandaka forest well. 
Therefore you should permit Guha, the overlord of the Nisadas, to see you, 
Kakutstha. For he will undoubtedly know where Rama and Laksmana are.” 
When Bharata had heard Sumantra’s fitting words, he replied, “Have Guha 
come to see me at once.” Guha was delighted to receive permission, and 
surrounded by his kinsmen, he humbly approached Bharata and said: “This 
region is your pleasure garden. You caught us here quite unawares, but we 
all bid you a welcome stay among our tribe of fisherfolk. 

[16—17] “Here are roots and fruits offered by the Nisadas, and meat both 
fresh and dried and a great variety of forest fare. I hope that your army will 


spend the night here—we shall regale it with food. Then tomorrow, after we 
have honored you with all you could desire, you and your soldiers may go 
your way.” 


Sarga 79 

[1-5] When wise Bharata had been addressed in this way by Guha, the 
overlord of the Nisadas, he made this reasoned and purposeful reply: “Dear 
friend of my guru, you have, in fact, already fulfilled my greatest wish, in 
that you are willing all on your own to show hospitality to such an army as 
mine.” Having spoken these excellent words in this fashion, the mighty and 
majestic Bharata once more addressed Guha, the overlord of the Nisadas: 
“Which way should I take, Guha, to get to Bharadvaja’s ashram? This 
region is densely forested and the lowlands by the Ganges are hard to 
traverse.” Upon hearing these words of the wise prince, Guha, who ranged 
the dense forests, cupped his hands in reverence and replied: 

[6-10] “Alert and armed with bows, the fishermen will accompany you, 
and so will I, glorious prince. But I trust that you are not setting out with ill 
will toward tireless Rama. This huge army of yours somehow arouses my 
suspicions.” As Guha was addressing him in this manner, Bharata, who was 
as innocent as the clear, blue sky, replied in a gentle voice: “May the hour 
that brings such disaster never come! Please, you should harbor no 
suspicions about me. For Raghava is my eldest brother and like a father to 
me. For I am setting forth to bring back Kakutstha, who is living in the 
forest. Do not imagine otherwise, Guha. I am telling you the truth.” 

[11-15] His face beamed with joy when he heard what Bharata had said, 
and joyfully he replied to Bharata: “How blessed you are! I know of no one 
to equal you on the face of the earth. For although the kingship came to you 
effortlessly, you are prepared to give it up here and now. You are prepared 
to bring back Rama when he is in such a plight, and for this you shall win 
everlasting fame throughout the worlds.” And as Guha was conversing with 
Bharata in this fashion, the sun’s light began to fade, and night came on. 
Once their army was encamped and Guha had provided for them 
generously, majestic Bharata and Satrughna went to bed. 

[16-21] But grief brought on by his brooding about Rama troubled great 
Bharata, who did not deserve it, for he had always kept his eyes fixed on the 
way of righteousness. Raghava was consumed with a searing inner blaze 


like the fire hidden within a tree that a forest fire has scorched. From that 
fire of grief he broke out in sweat, and the sweat poured down his every 
limb, just as the Himalayas, warmed by the rays of the sun, pour down 
melted snow. Kaikeyi’s son was crushed under a great mountain of sorrow, 
with its deep gorge of brooding, its minerals of heaving sighs, thickets of 
desolation, numberless creatures of delirium, plants and rushes of misery, 
and peaks of grief, care, and woe. And so high-minded Bharata, wakeful 
and utterly distraught, came out with his people to meet with Guha, and 
again Guha comforted him about his elder brother. 


Sarga 80 

[1-5] Guha, the ranger of the deep forests, then began to tell the exalted 
Bharata of great Laksmana’s fidelity: “When virtuous Laksmana was 
keeping his vigil, mounting close guard over his brother, his splendid bow 
and arrows in his hands, I said to him: ‘Here, dear boy, is a comfortable bed 
made ready on your behalf. Please rest easy and lie down in comfort upon 
it, delight of the Raghavas. My people are all used to such hardships while 
you are used to comfort. Righteous prince, we will stay awake and stand 
guard over him. For there is no one on earth dearer to me than Rama. Do 
not be anxious. Would I speak a lie to your face? 

[6—10] “ ‘Whatever hope I may have in this world for great glory, for the 
full acquisition of righteousness or of simple wealth, I have by reason of his 
grace. And I for my part, bow in hand with all my own kinsmen, will 
protect my dear friend Rama as he lies asleep with Sita. I have wandered 
the forest all my life, and nothing happens here without my knowing of it. 
Moreover, we are prepared to withstand in battle even an army of four 
divisions.” When we had addressed him in this way, great Laksmana 
entreated us all, with righteousness alone in view: ‘How could I find sleep, 
or indeed any happiness in life, while Dasarathi is lying on the ground with 
sita? 

[11-16] “ ‘Just look at him, Guha, reposing with Sita on the grass, a man 
whom all the gods and asuras could not withstand in battle. This is the only 
one of DaSsaratha’s sons to resemble him in every trait; a son obtained by 
means of great austerities and all kinds of heavy labors. With him in 
banishment the king will not long remain alive. The earth will surely soon 
be widowed. The women must have cried out their last great cries and 


ceased in exhaustion. The din has surely ceased by now in the king’s palace. 
I have little hope that Kausalya, the king, or my mother will live out this 
night. Even if my mother should live through it to look after Satrughna, 
Kausalya is so sorrowful that she, who bore this one heroic son, will 
perish.’ 

[17-22] “ ‘And my father, who never got the wish that just eluded him, 
who never installed Rama in the kingship, will perish too. And when that 
moment comes, when Father passes away and they purify the lord of the 
earth with all the rites for the dead, they will have attained their object. 
Then they will stroll at their ease through my father’s capital, through its 
lovely squares and well-ordered thoroughfares; with its mansions and 
palaces, adorned with every precious object; with its teeming elephants, 
horses, chariots; sounding with the sound of musical instruments, stocked 
with every luxury, thronging with delighted and prosperous people, dotted 
with orchards and gardens, a place of crowded fairs and festivals. If only we 
might happily return when this period is over, to find him well and his 
promise fulfilled.’ 

[23-25] “So the night passed with the great prince standing there 
mourning in this fashion. Then, at daybreak, when the sun grew bright, the 
two of them matted their hair and went down to the bank of the Bhagitratht, 
where I had them comfortably ferried across. Their hair matted, dressed in 
garments of bark, carrying splendid arrows, bows, and swords, the two 
princes, slayers of their enemies and as powerful as bull elephants, glanced 
back often as they departed with Sita.” 


Sarga 81 

[1-5] As soon as he heard Guha’s painful words, Bharata was plunged into 
agonizing thought. That delicate young man, so courageous and handsome, 
with the shoulders of a lion, great arms, and large lotus-shaped eyes, 
recovered for a moment, but then in profound distress he suddenly 
collapsed, like an elephant pierced to the heart by goads. Seeing Bharata in 
this state, Satrughna came close to him, and as he clasped him in his 
embrace, he wept aloud, grief-stricken and nearly insensible. All of 
Bharata’s mothers flew to him then, women already haggard from fasting, 
desolate, and tortured by the calamity that had befallen their husband. 


[6-10] Weeping, they gathered around him where he lay fallen on the 
ground. But Kausalya was most distraught; she edged close to him and 
clasped him in her embrace. As a loving cow might nuzzle her calf, the 
poor woman nuzzled Bharata. Weeping and sick with grief, she asked: “My 
son, I trust that you have no illness that pains your body? For now the 
survival of this royal House depends on you. Just to see you, my son, gives 
me strength to live, with Rama and his brother gone. Now that King 
Dasaratha has departed, you are our sole protector. I trust that you have not 
heard any bad news, have you, about Laksmana or my son—the only son I 
have—who has gone to the forest with his wife?” 

[11-15] After a moment glorious Bharata revived, and, still weeping, he 
comforted Kausalya. Then he said to Guha: “Where did my brother, Sita, 
and Laksmana spend the night? What bed had they to sleep on, what did 
they eat? Please tell me, Guha.” Thus questioned, Guha, overlord of the 
Nisadas, told Bharata what sorts of refreshments he had provided for Rama, 
his dear and kindly guest: “I offered a variety of foods in great quantity for 
Rama’s meal, cooked food and fruits of various kinds. But the truly 
valorous Rama refused it all. He heeded the code of kshatriyas and would 
not accept it, saying: 

[16-18] “ ‘It is not for us to take, my friend. Ours is always to give,’ 
were the words with which great Rama entreated us, your majesty. So 
illustrious Raghava only drank water, which Laksmana brought for him, 
and both he and Sita then fasted. Laksmana had a little of the water that was 
left over, and all three, silently and intently, performed the evening sandhya 
rites. 

[19-23] “Afterward Saumitri himself fetched some straw and quickly 
made a pleasant pallet for Raghava. Then Rama lay down with Sita upon 
the pallet, and, after washing their feet, Laksmana withdrew. It was there, at 
the foot of the ingudi tree, upon that very grass that the two of them, Rama 
and Sita, slept that night. ***Laksmana, however, the slayer of enemies, 
strapped on palm-guards and finger guards, bound upon his back a pair of 
quivers filled with arrows, and, holding his great bow strung and ready, he 
stood nearby the whole night through. Then I too grasped my great bow and 
arrows, and with my unwearying kinsmen similarly armed, I came and took 
up my position by Laksmana, to stand guard over the man who is the equal 
of great Indra.” 


Sarga 82 

[1-6] After listening attentively to all of this, Bharata went with his 
counselors to the foot of the ingudi tree, and gazing at Rama’s bed he said 
to all his mothers: “Here is where the great man slept on the ground that 
night. Here are the imprints he made. Rama is a son of Dasaratha, that wise 
and illustrious king, and scion of an illustrious House. He should not have 
had to sleep on the bare earth. The tiger among men used to sleep on a pile 
of choice spreads overspread with furs. How could he sleep on the bare 
ground? Before, he always slept in the finest palaces, mansions, and 
summer houses with inlaid floors of gold and silver, amid a profusion of 
choice spreads, dazzling with bouquets of flowers, scented with sandalwood 
and aloe—rooms that looked like white clouds, echoing with the screeching 
of flocks of parrots. 

[7-11] “He would awaken to the sound of singing and musical 
instruments, the jingling of gorgeous ornaments, and the beating of splendid 
mrdanga drums. The panegyrists would come at their appointed hour, along 
with a crowd of bards and genealogists, to greet the slayer of his enemies 
with well-suited verses and songs of praise. No one in the world would ever 
have believed this; it does not seem at all real to me. My mind is in a whirl. 
I think I must be dreaming. Surely no divine power is mightier than fate, if 
Rama Dasarathi and his beautiful, beloved Sita, the daughter of the king of 
Videha, the daughter-in-law of DaSaratha, had to sleep on the ground. 

[12-17] “This is my brother’s bed; this is where he tossed and turned 
upon the hard surface, crushing all the straw with his limbs. I imagine Sita 
fell asleep on this bed that night wearing all her jewelry, for here and there 
you can see flakes of gold adhering. Clearly she must have caught her upper 
garment here that night, for silken threads can still be seen clinging. I think 
that sleeping beside her husband brings such pleasure that poor, faithful 
Maithili, delicate though she is, felt no pain. But though Raghava was born 
in a House of emperors, brings comfort to all the world, and is prized by all 
the world, still he gave up the highest prize, the kingship. Handsome, red- 
eyed, lotus-dark Raghava was destined for pleasure and deserves no pain. 
How could he sleep on the ground? 

[18-22] “Vaidehi truly has accomplished her highest goal in following 
her husband to the forest. But we, who are bereft of the great man, are all 
cast into uncertainty. The world has lost its helmsman, and how empty it 


seems to me, with Dasaratha gone to heaven and Rama withdrawn to the 
wilderness. And yet, no one even thinks to advance against our treasure- 
laden land, for the might of his arms protects it still, even though he is 
living in the forest. Though the guardposts on the ramparts of the capital 
stand empty, though the horses and elephants have grown unruly, the city 
gates stand wide open, and the army is demoralized; though the capital is 
unprotected, weakened, and vulnerable in its plight, our enemies dare not 
covet it, like food prepared with poison. 

[23—27] “From this day forward I too will sleep on straw spread upon the 
ground, subsisting only on fruits and roots, and wearing barkcloth garments 
and matted hair. On his behalf, I will live with pleasure in the forest for 
what time remains, taking his vow upon myself so that no falsehood will 
attach to him. As I live there on my brother’s behalf, Satrughna shall live 
with me, while my noble brother protects Ayodhya with Laksmana. And in 
Ayodhya the twice-born brahmans shall consecrate Kakutstha. If only the 
gods allow this wish of mine to come true! I will bow my head and beg 
Raghava’s grace myself in every possible way. But if he does not accede, 
then I will live with him as long as it takes. For if I remain in the forest, he 
will not be able to ignore me.” 


Sarga 83 

[1—5] It was in that very place, on the bank of the Ganges, that Bharata 
Raghava passed the night. He rose at daybreak and addressed Satrughna: 
“Arise, Satrughna, why do you lie asleep? Please fetch Guha at once, the 
overlord of the Nisadas. He will ferry the army across.” Exhorted in this 
fashion by his brother, Satrughna replied, “I am awake. I am not sleeping 
but only brooding, just like you, on my noble brother.” While the two lions 
among men were conversing in this fashion, Guha paid a timely visit to 
them. He cupped his hands in reverence and said to Bharata, “I trust that 
you spent a comfortable night on the riverbank, Kakutstha, and I trust that 
all is well with you and your army.” 

[6-10] Upon hearing Guha’s affectionate inquiry, Bharata, subordinating 
all other considerations to Rama, replied: “Yes, we passed the night 
comfortably, your majesty. You have shown us honor. Now let your 
fishermen ferry us across the Ganges in their many boats.” When Guha 
heard Bharata’s instructions, he hurried back to the settlement and 


addressed his kinsmen, calling out: “Arise, awake, my blessings on you 
ever. Haul down the boats, and let us ferry the army across.” As they were 
exhorted in this fashion, they arose in haste and, on instructions from their 
king, gathered five hundred boats from every direction. 

[11-16] Some of them were fine boats distinguished by svastikas and 
fitted out with large bells, lovely well-built sailboats that easily caught the 
wind. Guha brought up one such boat, distinguished by svastikas and 
covered with a white carpet, a beautiful boat that gave out sounds of festive 
music. Bharata boarded it with mighty Satrughna, Kausalya, Sumitra, and 
the other wives of the king. In advance of the women came the purohita and 
the brahman gurus, next the wives of the king, and then the wagons and 
supplies. As the men loaded equipment, set the camp ablaze, and began 
plunging into the ford, the noise rose up to the highest heaven. The 
sailboats, manned by the fishermen, flew swiftly along, transporting the 
people on board. 

[17—23] Some boats were laden with women, others with horses, while 
still others transported the carts and chariots and great treasure. On reaching 
the further bank, the fisherfolk helped the people disembark, and as they 
returned they sailed their boats in lovely formations. The caparisoned 
elephants were urged on by their drivers, and as they made the crossing they 
looked like flag-topped mountains. Only some of the people were able to 
board the boats; others crossed on rafts, in tubs or barrels, while still others 
had only their arms to use. Once it had been ferried across the Ganges by 
the fishermen, the auspicious, many-bannered host struck out at the hour of 
Mitra for the great forest at Prayaga. Thus did great Bharata allow his army 
to encamp at its pleasure and to rest, and then he set out in the company of 
his sacrificial priests to visit Bharadvaja, preeminent among seers. 


Sarga 84 
[1-5] When the bull among men spied the ashram of Bharadvaja from only 
a few miles away, he ordered his whole army to a halt and proceeded with 
only his counselors. Knowing the ways of righteousness as he did, he laid 
aside his weapons and equipment, and, dressed in a pair of linen garments, 
he proceeded on foot, with the purohita Vasistha ahead of him. Then, when 
he caught sight of Bharadvaja, Raghava had his counselors halt, and he 
advanced, following the purohita. The moment Bharadvaja saw Vasistha, 


the great ascetic sprang from his seat, calling out to his disciples, “The 
guest-offering!” Bharata then did obeisance to him. Since he had come in 
the company of Vasistha, the seer of great blazing energy knew him to be a 
son of Dasaratha. 

[6-9] The seer first gave the two of them the guest-offering and water to 
wash their feet and then some fruit. Wise in the ways of righteousness, he 
asked them in due order after the welfare of their House, of Ayodhya, their 
army, treasury, allies, and counselors. But knowing that Dasaratha had 
passed away, he did not mention the king. Vasistha and Bharata then asked 
him in turn after his health, his sacred fires, his trees, disciples, birds, and 
beasts. Bharadvaja assured them that all were well, but then, in his abiding 
affection for Raghava, the great ascetic addressed Bharata: 

[10-13] “What is your purpose in coming here when you should be 
ruling the kingdom? Explain this to me fully, for my mind is uneasy about 
it. The son whom Kausalya bore, a slayer of his enemies and the increaser 
of her delight, has been banished for a long time to the forest with his wife 
and brother. They say that his father, acting on the orders of a woman, 
ordered the illustrious prince with the words, ‘You are to become a forest 
hermit for fourteen years.’ I trust that you have no intention of harming this 
innocent man and his younger brother, thinking thereby to enjoy 
unchallenged kingship.” 

[14—18] When he was addressed in this way by Bharadvaja, and, his eyes 
flooded with tears, Bharata replied to him in a voice breaking with sorrow: 
“T am lost if even the blessed one thinks such a thing of me! Oh, do not 
suspect evil of me, do not rebuke me like this. I never wanted what my 
mother demanded on my behalf. It gives me no satisfaction, and I will never 
accede to her demand. Instead, I am on my way to beg forgiveness of the 
tiger among men, to do obeisance at his feet, and to bring him back to 
Ayodhya. That is the reason I have come—believe me, blessed one. Please 
show me your grace and tell me the present whereabouts of Rama, the lord 
of the earth.” 

[19-22] Bharadvaja then graciously replied to Bharata: “Such behavior 
toward your guru, such restraint and adherence to the ways of the virtuous, 
become you, tiger among men, as a son of the Raghava dynasty. I already 
knew what was in your heart and only questioned you to hear it openly 
confirmed and to see your fame magnified to the highest degree. Your 


brother is living on the great mountain Citraktta. Tomorrow you shall go to 
that place, but stay here tonight with your counselors. Grant me this desire, 
wise prince, for you are mindful of the desires and needs of others.” Prince 
Bharata, a man of noble vision, was overjoyed and replied, “So be it.” For 
he had made up his mind that he would indeed spend the night in that great 
ashram. 


Sarga 85 

[1-5] Once Bharata, son of Kaikeyi, had made up his mind to spend the 
night there, the sage offered him hospitality. Bharata replied to him: “But 
surely you have already done so. The water for washing our feet and the 
guest-offering are all the hospitality appropriate to the forest.” With a slight 
smile, Bharadvaja said to Bharata: “I know you are agreeable and would be 
satisfied with anything. But it is for your army that I wish to make 
provision. This would give me pleasure, and you yourself, bull among 
mortals, deserve no less. But for what reason did you leave your army so far 
away before coming here? Why did you not approach together with the 
army, bull among men?” 

[6-10] His hands cupped in reverence, Bharata replied to the ascetic: 
“Blessed one, I did not approach with my army for fear of the blessed one. 
Spirited horses, men, and huge rutting elephants follow in my train, blessed 
one, covering a vast expanse. I was afraid they would damage the land and 
water, the trees and leaf huts of the ashram, and therefore I came alone.” 
But when the great seer instructed him, “Please bring the army here,” 
Bharata accordingly had the army advance. Bharadvaja then entered the 
fire-sanctuary, sipped water, and wiped his mouth. He then invoked the 
divine craftsman Visvakarman in order to provide the hospitality. 

[11-15] “I invoke the divine craftsmen Visvakarman and Tvastr; for it is 
my intention to provide hospitality, and to this end let them make these 
arrangements for me: Let the rivers flowing eastward and flowing 
westward, on earth and in the sky, now come together from wherever they 
may be. Let some of them flow with maireya wine, and some with long- 
aged wine, others with cool water tasting like the juice of sugarcane. And I 
invoke the gandharvas of the gods, Visvavasu, Haha, Huhu, as well as the 
divine apsaras and the gandharva women wherever they may be—Ghrtact, 
Visvaci, Misrakesi, Alambusa. In addition, I invoke the beautiful women 


who wait on Sakra and those who wait on Brahma. All these do I invoke to 
come with Tumburu and with all their trappings. 

[16-18] “cccLet the heavenly forest of Kubera, god of wealth, come from 
the land of the Kurus, the forest whose foliage is raiment and jewelry, and 
which constantly bears fruit in the form of heavenly women. Let the blessed 
moon come and provide me with the most exquisite food, solid and soft, 
and things to suck and lick, in great variety and quantity; many-colored 
garlands too, dropping from the trees, wine and every other type of drink, 
and meats of different sorts.” 

[19-24] Thus did the sage speak in his deep concentration, incomparable 
power, and ascetic energy, his words accented in full accord with the rules 
of proper articulation. As he continued rapt in meditation, facing east, his 
hands cupped in reverence, one by one all those heavenly things began to 
appear. A soft breeze began to blow, with a faint touch of the spice hills of 
Malaya and Dardura, a most pleasant, comforting, and auspicious breeze 
that banished one’s sweat. Heavenly clouds rolled in, showering blossoms, 
and in every direction could be heard the beating of the drums of the gods. 
Gentle winds began to blow, troupes of apsarases danced, the gandharvas 
of the gods sang, and their lutes gave forth notes. The sound they sent up 
carried to heaven and over the earth to the ears of the people, a smooth and 
even sound with graceful rhythm. 

[25—29] The heavenly sound charmed the ears of the men, and when it 
faded away, Bharata’s army beheld the creations of Visvakarman. The 
ground had been leveled out all around to a distance of five leagues, and 
luxuriant lawns carpeted it, glistening like sapphire or cat’s-eye beryl. Bilva 
trees sprang up on it, as did kapittha, panasa, bijapiraka, Gmalaka, and 
mango trees, all adorned with fruit. From the land of the northern Kurus 
came the forest with its heavenly delights and a heavenly river with trees 
densely covering its banks. Splendid four-room houses suddenly appeared, 
stables for the horses and elephants, clusters of castles and mansions, and 
lovely archways. 

[30-35] There was a royal palace that looked like a silvery cloud. It had 
a grand archway and was beautified with white garlands and perfumed with 
heavenly fragrances. It was four-cornered and spacious, complete with 
couches, chairs, and carriages, provisioned with heavenly delights to suit 
every taste, with heavenly delicacies and garments. It was stocked with all 


manner of food, with utensils polished spotlessly, seats properly arranged 
for everyone, and a magnificent couch with a sumptuous spread. It was a 
majestic residence filled with treasures, and with the permission of the great 
seer, great-armed Bharata, son of Kaikeyi, entered it. Behind him followed 
all the counselors and the purohita, and they rejoiced to see the 
arrangements provided in the residence. There was a heavenly throne in it, a 
fan, and a parasol, and, with his ministers, Bharata approached as if the king 
were there. 

[36-40] He paid homage to the throne, prostrating himself before Rama, 
and taking up the yak-tail fly whisk, he sat down upon a minister’s seat. 
Then all the others sat down in due order, the counselors and the purohita, 
next the chief of the army, and finally the palace supervisor. At 
Bharadvaja’s command, rivers with rice pudding in place of mud instantly 
sprang up before Bharata. Along either bank of the rivers, lovely heavenly 
dwellings plastered with white clay were produced by the grace of that 
brahman. And at the very same instant there appeared twenty thousand 
women sent by Brahma, decked out with heavenly jewelry. 

[41-45] And then twenty thousand more women came, sent by Kubera, 
all adorned with coral, gold, gems, and pearls. And from the heavenly 
Nandana garden came a troupe of twenty thousand apsarases who could 
madden with passion any man they took in their arms. The kings of the 
gandharvas—Narada, Tumburu, Gopa, Parvata, Suryavarcasa—then began 
to sing in the presence of Bharata, while before him danced Alambusa, 
Misrakesi, Pundartka, and Vamana, at Bharadvaja’s command. All the 
garlands to be found among the gods and in the heavenly Caitraratha forest 
appeared there at Prayaga at Bharadvaja’s command. 

[46-50] Through the ascetic power of Bharadvaya, and the the bilva trees 
turned into drummers and asvattha trees became dancers, with vibhitaka 
trees beating the time. Sarala, tala, tilaka, and naktamdlaka trees massed 
together in delight, having become hunchbacks or dwarfs. Simsapd, 
amalaki, and jambu trees and all the vines of the woodlands assumed the 
form of women and took up their dwelling in Bharadvaja’s ashram. Then 
they all cried out: “Here is wine to drink for all who drink wine! Here is 
rice pudding for those who are hungry and succulent meat to eat, as much 
as you desire!” “Those women then massaged the men with oil and bathed 
them at the murmuring riverbanks, fifteen women for every single man. 


[51-55] The lovely, bright-eyed ladies approached and massaged the 
men, and, after drying them off, they gave each other things to drink. Even 
the draft animals of the great Iksvaku soldiers—the horses, elephants, 
donkeys, camels, and oxen, the sons of Surabhi—were fed with sugarcane 
and sweet barley by strong men who bade them eat. For no horseman paid 
attention to his horse, nor did an elephant driver his elephant; for the whole 
army was delirious with drink and pleasure. Their every desire gratified, 
anointed with red sandalwood paste, the soldiers shouted out from where 
they lay with the troupes of apsarases: “We will neither go back to 
Ayodhya nor on to the Dandakas! May Bharata fare well, and let Rama find 
happiness as well!” 

[56—60] Indeed that is what the foot soldiers shouted, as well as the 
cavalrymen and trainers of the elephants and horses; for after such a 
reception they recognized no master. By the thousands the men of Bharata’s 
retinue roared in delight and cried out, “This is heaven!” And no sooner 
would they finish some ambrosial treat than they would glance at the other 
heavenly foods and turn their thoughts once more to eating. The female 
servants and slave girls, the wives and women accompanying the army all 
found themselves dressed in fresh garments, and they too wanted for 
nothing. The elephants, donkeys, and camels, the cows and horses, and 
even the wild birds and beasts as well were well cared for, and no one had 
to provide for any of them. 

[61-65] There was not a man to be seen whose garments were not 
sparkling white, nor one who was hungry or dirty or whose hair was 
begrimed with dust. To their amazement the men beheld thousands of metal 
pots crowned with flowers and banners, filled to the brim with white rice, 
goat and boar meat, with mounds of choice condiments and fragrant, 
flavorful soups prepared from fruit stock. Along the edges of the forest 
were wells thick with rice pudding in place of mud; there were wish- 
fulfilling cows too, and trees dripping with honey. There were pools filled 
with maireya wine and ringed about with mounds of savory meats prepared 
in steaming cauldrons—venison, peacock, and chicken. 

[66-72] There were thousands of platters made of gold, and well-fired 
trays and jars and jugs filled with curds. There were ponds filled with 
buttermilk scented with fresh yellow kapittha fruit, filled with white curds 
or porridge, and there were mounds of sugar. At the bathing places on the 


river the men beheld ointments and fragrant powders and bathing requisites, 
all stored in containers. There were stacks of toothbrushes, white and 
bristled, white sandalwood ointment packed in vials, and sparkling clean 
mirrors. There were piles of clothing and pairs of shoes and sandals by the 
thousands. There were collyrium boxes, combs, and brushes; parasols, 
bows, and shining armor; couches and chairs. °*There were full streams for 
watering the donkeys, camels, elephants, and horses, and streams just right 
for bathing, with lovely landings, lotuses, and water lilies. 

[73-77] On every side the troops saw mounds of soft barley-grass the 
color of sapphire or cat’s-eye beryl for strewing before their animals. The 
men were lost in wonder at the sight of the marvelous hospitality—like 
something in a dream—that the great seer provided for Bharata. And while 
they were enjoying themselves like this in Bharadvaja’s lovely ashram, just 
like the gods in the Nandana garden, the night slipped away. Then the 
rivers, the gandharvas, and all the lovely women took their leave of 
Bharadvaja and returned just as they had come. But the men were still 
drunk and wild with liquor, still anointed with the heavenly unguents of 
aloe and sandalwood, and the heavenly garlands were still there, the various 
splendid garlands, though now in disarray and crushed by the men. 


Sarga 86 
[1-8] After passing the night with such hospitality shown to him, Bharata 
went with his escort and of his own accord approached Bharadvaja. 
Bharadvaja had just completed his agnihotra rites when he observed that 
Bharata, tiger among men, had come with his hands cupped in reverence. 
The seer addressed him: “I trust you spent a pleasant night here in our 
domain. Were your people content with the hospitality? Please tell me, 
blameless prince.” The supremely powerful seer then strode from his 
ashram, and Bharata, his hands cupped in reverence, prostrated himself and 
replied: “I, my ministers, and all my army, and even our draft animals have 
passed the night quite pleasantly, blessed holy one. You have gratified most 
amply our every desire. We have been well fed and well housed, and our 
fatigue and pain have been allayed. Indeed, all of us, the servants included, 
have passed the night most pleasantly. And although I must now bid you 
farewell, blessed one, foremost of seers, please turn a friendly eye upon me 
as I set out to find my brother. Please direct me to the ashram of my great 


and righteous brother. Tell me which road to take, righteous seer, and how 
far I must go.” 

[9-13] Questioned in this fashion, Bharadvaja, the great and mighty 
ascetic, answered Bharata, who was yearning for the sight of his brother: 
“Bharata, at a distance of two and a half leagues through the desolate forest 
stands Mount Citrakiita, a place of lovely caverns and woodlands. Along its 
northern flank runs the Mandakini River, thickly bordered with flowering 
trees and lovely flowering woodlands. “Their leaf hut must be standing 
between the river and Mount Citrakita, my son. I am certain the two of 
them are living there. Illustrious lord of the army, if you lead your army of 
elephants, horses, and chariots by way of the southern road, keeping toward 
the southwest, you will soon see Raghava.” 

[14-16] Now, when the wives of the king of kings heard that they were 
about to depart, they left their fine carriages—the fine carriages they always 
deserved—and crowded around the brahman Bharadvaja. Trembling, 
haggard, and desolate, Kausalya, along with Queen Sumitra, grasped the 
sage’s feet with her hands. Kaikeyi, her every desire now thwarted, an 
object of contempt to all the world, was overcome with shame as she too 
grasped his feet. 

[17-25] Reverently she circled the great and holy sage and with a 
desolate heart stood apart, not far from Bharata. Then Bharadvaja, a sage 
strict in his vows, made a request of Bharata: “I should like to make the 
acquaintance of your mothers individually, Raghava.” Having been 
addressed in this fashion by Bharadvaja, the righteous and eloquent Bharata 
cupped his hands in reverence and uttered these words: “This woman whom 
you see, holy one, who is like a goddess though desolate now and haggard 
with grief and fasting, is Kausalya, my father’s chief queen. It is she who 
bore Rama, the tiger among men who moves with the gait of a lion, just as 
Aditi bore Dhatr. The woman holding her by the left arm, with as wretched 
a look as a karnikara branch stripped of its blossoms in the heart of the 
forest, is the queen whose sons are the mighty and valorous princes, godlike 
Laksmana and Satrughna. And she on whose account the two tigers among 
men went away dead in life, on whose account King Dasaratha was bereft 
of his sons and so went to heaven—behold her, the power-hungry Kaikeyl1, 
an ignoble woman in a noblewoman’s guise, a vicious and malevolent 


person—my mother, and the one in whom I see this great calamity of mine 
to have its source.” 

[26-30] Having said this in a voice choked with tears and his eyes 
reddened, the tiger among men heaved sighs again and again like an angry 
snake. When Bharata had finished speaking, the great and wise seer 
Bharadvaja replied with words of great import: “Bharata, you must not 
impute any fault to Kaikeyt. The banishment of Rama will turn out to be a 
great blessing.” Bharata then did obeisance and received the sage’s 
benediction, and, after reverently circling and taking leave of him, he 
commanded the army, “Make ready!” The various groups of people then 
harnessed the many heavenly horse-drawn chariots with fittings of gold, 
and they boarded, eager to be off. 

[31-36] The elephant bulls and cows, girded with gold, their pennants 
flying, set forth with a rumble, like clouds at the end of summer. The 
various vehicles set forth, large ones and small ones and some of great 
value, while the foot soldiers marched forth on foot. Eager to see Rama, the 
women, with Kausalya at their head, set forth cheerfully in their splendid 
carriages. A handsome palanquin was standing ready, resplendent as the 
morning sun, and majestic Bharata got in and set forth with his escort. 
Teeming with elephants, horses, and chariots, the great army, like a massive 
lofty cloud, set forth, turning southward, traversing stretches of forest alive 
with birds and beasts. Its soldiers, elephants, and horses all excited, and 
terrifying the flocks of birds and beasts as it plunged into the great forest, 
the army of Bharata made a splendid sight. 


Sarga 87 

[1-5] As the great many-bannered army was making its way, the rutting 
bull elephants that lived in the forest were terrified and ran off with their 
herds. So, too, were the apes and droves of chitals and black antelopes that 
were everywhere to be seen in the stretches of the forest, on the mountains, 
and at the riverbanks. The righteous son of Dasaratha happily proceeded in 
the company of his great and clamorous army of four divisions. Great 
Bharata’s army, which resembled the ocean’s flood, covered the earth, just 
as the clouds in the rainy season cover the sky. For the earth was inundated 
with a flood of swift horses and elephants, and for a long time it 
disappeared altogether from sight. 


[6-10] Majestic Bharata had covered a great distance, and his mounts 
had grown weary when he addressed Vasistha, the best of counselors: “We 
have clearly come to the region of which Bharadvaja spoke. The scene that 
appears before us is just as I heard it described. Here are Mount Citraktita 
and the Mandakini River, and there, in the distance, the forest can be seen, 
blue-black as a storm cloud. Even now my elephants, mountainlike 
themselves, are trampling the lovely slopes of Mount Citrakttta. The trees 
upon the mountain slopes are shedding their blossoms, as blue-black water- 
laden clouds shed water when the heat of summer is over. 

[11-15] “Just look at the mountain, Satrughna. It is a place where 
kinnaras roam, and now the horses are swarming over it like dolphins 
through the ocean. Startled herds of deer are swiftly darting off—they look 
like banks of clouds in the sky shredded by the autumnal wind. The trees, 
with their cloud-dark branches and the fragrant flower-chaplets they wear 
upon their crowns, look like the men of the south. The forest had been still 
and dreadful in appearance, but now, with all these throngs of people, it 
seems like Ayodhya to me. The dust kicked up by hooves had hung, 
obscuring the sky, but a breeze has come and quickly dispelled it, as if to do 
me a kindness. 

[16-20] “And see, Satrughna, how the master charioteers drive the 
horse-drawn carriages and how they fly along so swiftly through the 
woodlands. And look now how those lovely peacocks are frightened and 
scurrying off to the mountain, the dwelling place of birds. This seems to me 
to be a perfectly charming spot, clearly a place where ascetics would live— 
it is like the very pathway to heaven. The many charming chitals with their 
mates in the forest appear as if they were speckled with blossoms. Come, let 
the soldiers set out and search the woodland, to see if those tigers among 
men, Rama and Laksmana, are anywhere to be found.” 

[21-27] Upon hearing Bharata’s order, warriors with weapons in hand 
entered the forest and soon caught sight of smoke. When they spied that 
column of smoke, they returned and reported it to Bharata, saying: “Where 
there is fire there must be men. Clearly the two Raghavas are somewhere 
nearby. Then again, those tigers among men, the two enemy-scorching 
princes, may not be here, but others clearly are, ascetics like Rama.” 
Hearing these just and reasonable words, Bharata, crusher of enemy armies, 
addressed all the soldiers: “Remain here, gentlemen, and be on the alert; let 


no one go on ahead. I myself shall go with Sumantra and our guru.” Thus 
ordered, they all stood around where they were, while Bharata directed his 
gaze toward the column of smoke. The army too, from where Bharata had 
made them halt, gazed at the smoke that rose before them and felt delight, 
thinking it would not be long before they rejoined their beloved Rama. 


Sarga 88 

[1-6] Now, during the long time that godlike Dasarathi had been living on 
the mountain, he had grown to love the mountains and the forest. Once, 
eager to please Vaidehi and beguile his own mind, he showed his wife 
around wonderful Citrakita, as Indra, smasher of citadels, might show his 
wife, Sact. He said to her: “Neither my expulsion from the kingdom, my 
dear, nor being apart from my loved ones pains my heart while I am 
viewing this lovely mountain. Just look at that mountain, my dear, home to 
flocks of many different birds, with its peaks—adorned with veins of 
minerals—trising almost to the sky. Some shine like silver, while others are 
as red as blood. Others still are tinted yellow, and some are as red as 
madder. Some sparkle like the finest gems while others gleam like topaz, 
crystal, or the blossoms of the ketaka tree. Yet others shine like stars or 
quicksilver. Adorned with minerals, all the regions of the lord of mountains 
are radiant. 

[7-12] “What a sight the mountain makes, swarming with birds and 
teeming with herds of deer as well as groups of leopards, hyenas, and apes, 
all of them tame. Trees in fruit and blossom, shady and enchanting, cover 
the mountain and heighten its majesty. There are mangoes, jambis, asanas, 
lodhras, priydlas, panasas, dhavas, ankolas, bhavya, tinisas, bilvas, 
tindukas, kasmaris, aristas, madhiikas, tilakas, badaris, Gmalakas, nipas, 
dhanvanas, and bijakas, as well as reeds and canes. See there, my dear, on 
the lovely hillsides are some spirited kinnaras, impassioned with desire and 
pairing off to make love. And look over there, where those swords and 
delicate garments are hanging from the branches: those are the enchanting 
pleasure-bowers of the vidyadhara women. 

[13—18] “What a sight the mountain makes with its waterfalls, one here, 
one there, and with its springs and running streams—tt is like an elephant 
streaming with ichor. The breeze out of the grottoes bears the fragrance of 
different flowers and approaches with such pleasing redolence—what man 


would it not gladden? If I might live here all the years to come with you, 
my flawless wife, and with Laksmana, I would never feel the searing pain 
of grief. For I delight in this lovely mountain, my beautiful wife, with its 
magnificent peaks where fruits and flowers are so abundant and many 
different birds come flocking. And my living in the forest has brought me a 
twofold reward: my father has discharged his debt to righteousness, and 
Bharata has been pleased as well. Vaidehi, I trust that you too take delight 
in being with me on Citrakiita, with so many different marvels before your 
eyes to experience, to contemplate and talk about? 

[19-21] “Living in the forest—as the royal seers of old, my ancestors, 
used to say—is the real nectar of immortality for kings and leads to their 
well-being after death. How beautiful the rocks of the mountain are, 
massive rocks, hundreds of them all around, so many and so colorful— 
blue-black, yellow, white, and pink. At night the plants growing on the 
lordly mountain look like tongues of fire, eater of oblations, blazing by the 
thousands in the beauty of their own luster. 

[22-27] “Some parts of the mountain, my lovely, look like dwelling 
places or gardens, while others are sheer rock. As if having split open the 
earth, Citrakiita stands forth. Its peak seems auspicious in every way. There 
you can see the sumptuous beds of lovers, spread with leaves of the kustha, 
pumnaga, tagara, and bhirja and interspersed with lotus petals. Their lotus 
garlands can be seen too, cast aside now by the lovers and crushed. And 
there, my beloved, look at all those different fruits. So rich in fruits, roots, 
and water is Mount Citrakita that it almost surpasses Vasvaukasara, Nalini, 
or the land of the northern Kurus. Passing this time with you, my beloved 
Sita, and with Laksmana will be a pleasure to me, and one that fosters the 
righteousness of my House, for I shall be keeping to the path of the virtuous 
with the utmost self-restraint.” 


Sarga 89 
[1-5] Then the lord of Kosala, making his way down the mountain, showed 
Maithill where the clear waters of the lovely Mandakini River ran. Lotus- 
eyed Rama said to the daughter of the king of Videha, his broad-hipped 
wife with a face as fair as the moon: “Just look at the lovely Mandakini 
River with its sparkling sandbanks, the hamsas and sdrasa cranes that make 
their home there, the flowers embellishing it, the fruiting and blossoming 


trees of every sort that grow thick upon its banks. Wherever one looks it 
shimmers like Nalini, the lake of Kubera, king of kings. Herds of animals 
have drunk here, and though the bathing places are turbid now, they are 
lovely still and give me much pleasure. 

[6-10] “Over there some seers wearing hides, matted hair, and upper 
garments of barkcloth are immersing themselves in the Mandakini River, 
my beloved, for it is the appointed hour. Those others are sages who take 
rigorous vows and worship the sun, my large-eyed wife, with their arms 
held high in self-mortification. As the wind buffets the treetops and they 
strew their leaves and flowers all about the river, the mountain seems 
almost to be dancing. And look at the Mandakini River there, where its 
water flows crystal clear, and there, where its sandy beaches stretch out, and 
over there, where perfected beings crowd about it. And just look at the 
flowers the wind has shaken off and massed into drifts, or those others 
bobbing in the middle of the water. 

[11-14] “Those sweet-voiced birds are rathdangas, my precious, the ones 
alighting on the drifts of flowers and uttering their pleasant cries. To set 
one’s eyes on Citrakita and the Mandakini, my lovely, is far better than 
living in the town—in your eyes too, I think. Come plunge with me into the 
river. Its waters, as always, are agitated only by perfected beings, men 
cleansed of all impurities and endowed with ascetic power, self-restraint, 
and tranquility. Plunge into the Mandakini, my lovely Sita, as if it were an 
old friend of yours, submerging the lotuses and water lilies. 

[15-19] “Always just think of the wild animals as the townsfolk, my 
beloved, the mountain as Ayodhya, and this river as the Sarayt. You both 
bring me such joy, both righteous Laksmana, who attends to my orders, and 
you, Vaidehi, who are so agreeable. Being here with you, bathing at the 
time of the three oblations, and eating sweet fruits and roots, I no longer 
yearn either for Ayodhya or the kingship. s7The man does not exist who 
would not find repose and happiness beholding this river, the herds of 
elephants that stir it up, the lions, monkeys, and elephants that come to 
drink its water, and the blossoming trees in full bloom that lend it such 
adornment.” So Rama, heir of the Raghu dynasty, spoke with his beloved 
about the river, fondly and at length, as he went strolling over lovely 
Citrakita, a very balm to the eye. 


Sarga 90 

[1-4] Now, as Rama was sitting there, he perceived the noise and the dust— 
they reached to heaven—of Bharata’s approaching army. The wild bull 
elephants, meanwhile, were frightened by the deafening noise, and in panic 
they and their herds ran, scattering in every direction. Raghava heard the 
noise made by the army and noticed all the elephants fleeing. And watching 
them run off, and listening to the din, Rama addressed Laksmana Saumitri, 
a man of blazing power: 

[S5—10] “Ho there, Laksmana! You worthy son of Sumitra, go and take a 
look. A tumultuous clamor has broken out, awesome and as deep as 
thunder. Perhaps a king or royal officer is moving through the forest 
hunting. Or it could be something else, perhaps an animal. Please find out, 
Saumitri, find out as quickly as you can exactly what this all might be.” 
Laksmana hurriedly climbed a flowering sala tree, and peering about in 
every direction, he cast his glance to the east. Craning his neck and peering 
out, he saw a vast army, a mass of chariots, horses, and elephants, and foot 
soldiers among them on the alert. He informed Rama about the army, 
teeming with horses and elephants and decked out with the battle standards 
on its chariots, and then he said this: “Put out the fire, brother, and let Sita 
get to a cave. String your bow and take up your arrows and armor!” 

[11-15] Rama, tiger among men, replied to Laksmana, “Very well, but 
you should consider first, Saumitri: Whose army do you think this might 
be?” But though he was addressed in this way by Rama, Laksmana replied 
to Rama as if he were a raging fire eager to consume the army. He said: 
“Clearly, now that Bharata, the son of Kaikeyi, has secured the consecration 
to the kingship he has been longing for, he is coming to kill the two of us! 
There, in fact, is the lofty, spreading, and majestic kovidara tree, his battle 
standard, coming into view, shining brilliantly atop his chariot. There are 
men mounted on speeding horses drawing close at will, and how excited 
those riders look mounted on their elephants. 

[16—20] “Let us take our bows and fall back to the mountain, my mighty 
brother, or make our stand right here, armed for battle with our weapons at 
the ready. If only the kovidara battle standard would come within our range 
in battle! If only I could catch sight of Bharata, the cause of the great 
calamity that has befallen you, Raghava, Sita, and me. Your enemy has 
arrived, mighty Raghava, he who brought about your expulsion from the 


ancient kingship. It is Bharata, and I will kill him. I see no wrong, Raghava, 
in slaying Bharata. No unrighteousness comes from ridding oneself of a 
man who was first to give offense. When he has been struck down, you 
shall rule the whole treasure-laden earth. If only that power-hungry woman 
Kaikeyi could see her son killed by me today in combat—like a tree felled 
by an elephant—and feel the anguish of bitter sorrow. 

[21-25] “But no, I will slay Kaikeyi too, and her supporters and 
kinsmen. Let the earth be cleansed today of this foul scum! Today, O giver 
of honor, I will cast out upon the enemy army my pent-up wrath and our 
dishonor, like fire, the eater of oblations, upon dry grass. This very day I 
will rend the enemies’ bodies with my sharp arrows, and spatter the 
woodlands of Citraktta with their blood. And when my arrows have rent 
the hearts of their elephants and horses, let wild beasts drag them off, and 
the men too, when I have cut them down. "I have always discharged my 
debt to my bow and arrows in great battles, and I have no doubt I shall 
again in destroying Bharata and all his army.” 


Sarga 91 

[1-5] In order to calm Laksmana Saumitri, who was so violently agitated 
and almost insensible with rage, Rama spoke these words: “What need is 
there of a bow or sword and shield when it is the great archer, wise Bharata 
himself, who is coming? This is an appropriate time for Bharata to wish to 
see us. He would not do us any harm, nor even contemplate it. When has 
Bharata ever opposed you, or made you any such threat that you should 
now have these suspicions of him? You must not speak disparagingly or 
abusively of Bharata. It is I who would be abused were any abuse directed 
against him. 

[6-9] “How, after all, could a son kill his father, whatever the extremity, 
or a brother his brother, Saumitri, his very own breath of life? If it is for the 
sake of the kingship that you are saying these things, I shall tell Bharata 
when I see him, ‘Hand over the kingship to him, to Laksmana.’ For were I 
plainly to tell him, Laksmana, ‘Offer him the kingship,’ Bharata’s only 
response would be, ‘Of course.’ ” So spoke his righteous brother, whose 
welfare was his one concern, and Laksmana seemed almost to shrink into 
himself for shame. 


[10-13] Raghava noticed Laksmana’s chagrin and once again addressed 
him: “I think the great-armed prince has come here only to visit us. Or 
perhaps he wants to take Vaidehi home. He may have had second thoughts 
about her staying in the forest, a woman used to every comfort. There you 
can see the team of splendid horses, my mighty brother, those 
thoroughbred, magnificent swift horses, in speed like the rushing wind. And 
there is Satrumjaya, our wise father’s aged and massive elephant, lumbering 
at the head of the army.” 

[14-17] Climbing down from the top of the sala tree, Laksmana, 
champion in battle, came and stood at Rama’s side, his hands cupped in 
reverence. Now, acting on Bharata’s order, “Let there be no disturbance,” 
the army had encamped all around the mountain. For a league and a half 
along the slope of the mountain the Iksvaku army encamped with its 
throngs of elephants, horses, and chariots. The army made a brilliant sight 
when Bharata had marshaled it there on Citraktita the day he came, 
shedding his pride and honoring the claims of righteousness, to conciliate 
the delight of the Raghus with all the diplomacy at his command. 


Sarga 92 

[1-5] After encamping his army, lordly Bharata, the best of men who walk 
the earth, set out walking to find Kakutstha, who was a guru to him. As 
soon as the army was duly encamped as he had instructed, Bharata 
addressed his brother Satrughna: “Dear boy, you must at once explore the 
whole extent of the forest, with parties of our men and these huntsmen to 
accompany you. For I shall find no peace until I see Rama, powerful 
Laksmana, and illustrious Vaidehi. No, I shall find no peace until I see the 
lovely moonlike face of my brother and his eyes like lotus petals. 

[6-10] “I shall find no peace until I bow my head to my brother’s feet, 
which bear all the signs of sovereignty. I shall find no peace until he 
assumes, as he deserves, his position in the kingship of our fathers and 
forefathers, with the consecration water moist upon his head. Illustrious 
Vaidehi, the daughter of Janaka, has fulfilled herself by following her 
husband, master of the ocean-girdled earth. How blessed is Citrakita, this 
mountain equal to Himalaya, king of mountains, where Rama is living like 
Kubera in the Nandana garden. This trackless forest, the haunt of wild 


beasts, has fulfilled itself as well, to have become the dwelling place of 
Rama, the best of all who bear arms.” 

[11-15] Having said this, mighty Bharata, bull among men, set out on 
foot into the great forest. The eloquent prince made his way through the 
thickets growing on the mountain slopes, their treetops all in blossom. 
Then, upon reaching the flowering sa/a tree atop Mount Citrakita, he spied 
the smoke, the towering banner of the fire burning in Rama’s ashram. 
Majestic Bharata and his kinsmen rejoiced to see it, and, thinking, “Rama 
must be here,” the prince felt as if at last he had reached the farther shore of 
an ocean. Perceiving Rama’s ashram and the holy men there on Mount 
Citrakita, great Bharata hurried off with Guha after again encamping his 
army. 


Sarga 93 

[1-5] Now, once the army was encamped, Bharata set out, longing to see 
his brother, pointing out the way for Satrughna. After having first instructed 
the seer Vasistha, “Please bring my mothers at once,” he himself hurried on 
ahead, in his deep love for his guru Rama. Sumantra likewise followed 
close behind Satrughna, for his burning desire to see Rama again was not 
less than Bharata’s. Majestic Bharata advanced and soon could see his 
brother’s thatched leaf hut situated within an ascetic’s retreat. In front of the 
lodge Bharata saw the split firelogs and the flowers that had been gathered. 

[6—12] And nearby in the forest he saw the dry dung of deer and buffalo 
heaped up in great mounds as fuel for use against the cold. As brilliant, 
great-armed Bharata proceeded, he excitedly said to Satrughna and the 
ministers all around him: “I think we must have reached the spot 
Bharadvaja spoke of. I believe that the Mandakini River cannot be far from 
here. This must be the trail, for above strips of bark have been fastened. 
Laksmana must have marked it for traveling at night. And that other one 
must be a path beaten on the mountain slope by the huge-tusked elephants 
charging and trumpeting at one another. Over there you can see the thick 
smoke from black-trailed fire; 1t is customary for ascetics to maintain a fire 
continuously in the forest. It is here that I shall experience the joy of seeing 
my noble brother Raghava, who is living like a great seer in order to honor 
his guru, his father.” 


[13-16] Bharata Raghava continued on and soon reached the place 
where Citraktita meets the Mandakini. He addressed the people with him: 
“The tiger among men must sit cross-legged on the ground rapt in the 
heroic posture—the lord of all the people in this unpeopled place. A curse 
on me that I was born and that I live! It is on my account that this calamity 
has befallen brilliant Raghava, the master of the world. He has had to 
renounce all pleasures and make his dwelling in the forest. And thus I am 
condemned by all the world. But now I will go and beg for forgiveness 
from Rama and Sita; I will throw myself down again and again at their 
feet.” 

[17-22] Even as the son of Dasaratha was lamenting in this fashion, he 
saw a large, enchanting, and holy leaf hut in the forest, densely thatched 
with sala, tala, and asvakarna leaves. It was a spacious hut with soft kusa 
grass spread about, like an altar at a sacred rite. Bows adorned it, gleaming 
like rainbows, heavy, sturdy, and backed with gold, of a sort that could rout 
any foe. Arrows flashing like sunbeams adorned it too, like the serpents 
adoming Bhogavati, awesome arrows packed in quivers, with heads 
blazing. A pair of swords in golden scabbards shed a luster over the hut, 
and two shields lent their adornment, brilliantly embossed with gold. 
Brilliant forearm-guards and finger guards studded with gold were hanging 
there too. It was a place as impregnable to enemy hosts as a lion’s cave is to 
deer. 

[23-27] ‘Bharata saw there a holy altar in Rama’s residence, broad and 
sloping to the northeast, with a blazing fire upon it. Glancing about for a 
moment, Bharata suddenly spied his guru Rama seated in the thatched 
cottage, wearing a crown of matted hair. He saw Rama seated there, dressed 
in a black antelope hide and barkcloth garment. He was the image of fire, 
the purifier, in every respect, with the shoulders of a lion, great arms, and 
lotus-petal eyes—the righteous master of all the ocean-girdled earth. As he 
sat together with Sita and Laksmana upon the ground strewn with darbha 
grass, he resembled the eternal Brahma. 

[28-32] When majestic Bharata saw him, both sorrow and confusion 
overwhelmed him at once, and righteous Bharata, the son of Kaikeyi, went 
running to him. The mere sight of Rama anguished him, and he lamented in 
a voice choked with tears. He could hardly endure it, and yet he steadied 
himself to say: “The man to whom his subjects in the assembly should 


rightly be paying homage, my elder brother, is sitting here receiving the 
homage of wild beasts. The man who in the past was accustomed to clothes 
worth many thousands, here he is, the great man, wearing deerskins in the 
performance of righteousness. How can Raghava bear this burden of matted 
hair, when he used to wear a chaplet of many-colored flowers of every 
kind? 

[33-37] “The man who should rightly be gaining abundant merit through 
sacrifices performed according to precept now seeks it by mortifying his 
body. It had always been precious sandalwood paste that coated my noble 
brother’s limbs. How is it possible they are now coated with dirt? It is my 
fault that this misery has befallen Rama, who had previously known 
nothing but happiness. A curse on my life, vile creature that I am, an object 
of scorn to all the world!” Lamenting thus in his desolation, his lotus face 
breaking out in sweat, Bharata collapsed weeping before he could reach 
Rama’s feet. Consumed with sorrow, the powerful prince Bharata 
exclaimed in desolation, “Elder brother!” but could say nothing further. 

[38-41] He glanced at glorious Rama, and with his voice choked with 
tears he cried out again, “Elder brother!” but was unable to utter anything 
more. Satrughna was weeping too, as he prostrated himself at Rama’s feet. 
And as Rama embraced the two of them, he shed tears as well. The two 
princes, Rama and Laksmana, then met with Sumantra and Guha there in 
the wilderness just as might the sun, maker of day, and the moon, maker of 
night, with the planets Venus and Jupiter in the sky. And even the 
inhabitants of the forest as they watched the princes, men like bull 
elephants, reunited there in the vast wilderness, lost all delight as well, and 
all burst into tears. 


Sarga 94 
[1-5] Rama drew Bharata to his breast, embraced him, and kissed him on 
the forehead. Then, taking Bharata on his lap, he questioned him closely: 
“What has become of your father, dear boy, that you have come to the 
wilderness? While he yet lives you should not be going off to the forest. It 
has been a long time, indeed, since I have seen you, Bharata, who have now 
come from so far into this wilderness. But why have you come to the forest, 
dear boy, looking so somber? I trust that King Dasaratha is in good health, 
still true to his given word, still performing rdjasitya and asvamedha 


sacrifices, and deciding points of law. And I trust, dear boy, that proper 
homage is still being paid to the wise and brilliant brahman, the preceptor 
of the Iksvakus, who is constant in righteousness. 

[6-10] “I trust, dear boy, that Kausalya is happy and also Sumitra, the 
mother of such good children. I trust too that noble Queen Kaikeyt is 
rejoicing as well. I trust that you still honor your purohita, a highborn man, 
learned and disciplined, who gives instruction ungrudgingly. I trust that you 
have appointed a man to tend your sacred fires who is sagacious and upright 
and knows the ritual precepts. And I trust that he always informs you in a 
timely fashion both before and after the oblations have been offered. I trust 
further that you continue to hold the preceptor Sudhanvan in esteem, dear 
brother. He is expert in the most formidable arrows and missiles, and a 
master of the science of statecraft. I trust too, dear brother, that you have 
made brave men your counselors, men you look upon as your very self— 
men who are learned, self-controlled, and highborn, and able to read a 
man’s thoughts in his face. 

[11-16] “For counsel is the basis of a king’s success, Raghava, so long 
as it is well kept by counselors and ministers skilled in the sdstras. I trust 
that you are not ruled by sleep, but are always awake early, while spending 
the late-night hours reflecting on what makes for prudent statecraft. I trust 
that you take counsel neither all by yourself nor with a multitude. And I 
trust that, once determined, your counsel does not fly about the kingdom. I 
trust that the enterprises you decide on involve little expense and bring 
great profit, and that you undertake them quickly, without procrastination. 
And I trust that other kings learn of your every venture only when it is fully 
accomplished, or nearly so, and never beforehand. I trust further, dear boy, 
that your counsels, dear brother, or your ministers’, even when not betrayed, 
cannot be discovered through reasoning or supposition. 

[17-21] “You prefer, I trust, a single wise man to a thousand fools. At 
times of political crisis a wise man can confer great benefits. A king may 
turn to thousands of fools, to tens of thousands, but they will not render him 
the least assistance. Yet even a single minister who is clever, brave, capable, 
and knowledgeable can secure great royal fortune for a king or his officer. I 
trust that you have appointed servants to the tasks appropriate to them, the 
foremost servants to the most important tasks, the middling to the middling 
ones, and the lowly to the low. I trust that you appoint your principal 


ministers to the principal tasks, men who hold hereditary positions, who are 
honest and have passed the test of loyalty. 

[22-27] “I trust that the people have no reason to despise you, as 
sacrificial priests despise an outcaste, or women a lover who takes them 
brutally. JiRemember, too, that a shrewd man with cunning schemes, a 
servant prone to corruption, or a man who is bold and hungry for power will 
slay you if you do not strike first. I further trust that you have appointed as 
your general a bold and brave man, one who is steady, sagacious, honest, 
highborn, loyal, and capable. And I trust that you show honor and esteem to 
your foremost soldiers, the courageous, powerful men who are skilled in 
battle and have already demonstrated their heroism. And I trust that you 
pay, when payment is due, the appropriate wages and rations to your army, 
and do not defer them. For if the time for their wages and rations is missed, 
servants grow angry with their masters and are easily corrupted—and this, 
as it is set down in the texts, can lead to very great misfortune. 

[28-33] “I trust that everyone has remained loyal to you, especially the 
men of good family, and that they would willingly give up their lives in 
your cause. I trust that you always choose a man of the provinces as your 
envoy, Bharata, a wise, diplomatic, perceptive, and discerning man who 
repeats exactly what he is told. And I trust that you have come to learn the 
minds of the eighteen chief officials in each foreign state, and the fifteen of 
your own, by means of undetectable spies, three for every official. I also 
trust, crusher of your foes, that you do not wrongly view as harmless any 
hostile men who, once deported, have made their way back. You do not, I 
trust, associate with brahmans who are materialists, dear brother. Their only 
skill is in bringing misfortune; they are fools who think themselves wise. 
Although preeminent texts on righteous conduct are ready to hand, those 
ignorant fellows derive their ideas from logic alone and so propound utter 
nonsense. 

[34—36] “I trust that you are keeping Ayodhya content and prosperous, 
dear brother, the city where from ancient times our heroic ancestors have 
lived. I trust that the city with its sturdy gates is still true to its name, 
Ayodhya, ‘Unassailable,’ and that it is still thronging with elephants, horses, 
and chariots, still crowded with nobles by the thousands—brahmans, 
kshatriyas, and vaisyas—every one of them remaining, as always, prompt in 
his own tasks, self-controlled, and energetic. And I trust that the city is still 


crowded with mansions of various construction and thronged with learned 
people. 

[37-45] “I trust that the countryside is still prospering, Raghava, and that 
life there continues to be comfortable, with shrines abounding by the 
hundreds, with sanctuaries, wells, and pools lending their adornment. I trust 
that the people are well settled, and the men and women happy; that fairs 
and festivals lend their adornment, and that the boundary lines are well 
spaced. I trust that the land is still rich in cattle and free from disasters, still 
nourished beyond the whim of the rain god, still lovely and safe from wild 
beasts. I trust that you cherish all men who make their living by farming 
and cattle raising; for a well-founded economy, dear brother, promotes the 
world’s happiness. I trust further that you support them with protective and 
defensive measures. A king must, in accordance with the ways of 
righteousness, guard all who live in his realm. I trust that you gladden your 
women and guard them well, but do not place too much trust in them. «I 
trust that you are protecting the elephant forests, and attending to the needs 
of the elephants. I trust you always arise early, prince, and display yourself 
in full array to the people on the thoroughfares. I trust too that all the forts 
are well stocked with money, grain, weapons, and water, with engines of 
war, and with craftsmen and archers. I trust that your revenues far exceed 
your expenditures, I hope, and your treasure never passes into unworthy 
hands, Raghava. 

[46-50] “I trust that your expenditures are assigned to the gods and 
ancestors, brahmans and guests, the soldiers and hosts of allies. I trust that 
no noble, honest man is ever charged with theft, without being first 
interrogated by men learned in the sdstras; and if innocent, is never 
imprisoned out of greed. And when a thief, either caught in the act or 
discovered with the stolen property, has been seized and interrogated, I 
hope he is never set free, bull among men, out of greed for money. And I 
trust that your wise ministers, Raghava, render judgment impartially when a 
rich man and a poor man are engaged in a suit. For the tears people shed 
when falsely accused come to slay the livestock and children of the king 
who rules for personal gain. 

[51-55] “I trust, moreover, that you make use of the three means, 
Raghava—affection, kind words, and gifts—in showing regard for children, 
the aged, and the foremost learned brahmans. I trust too that you pay 


homage to your gurus, to the aged, to ascetics, guests, and gods, to shrines 
and all accomplished brahmans. Then too, I trust that you never deny the 
claims of righteousness in the name of statecraft, or again, the claims of 
statecraft in the name of righteousness, or either of them—from lust for 
pleasure—in the name of personal desire. I also trust, foremost of 
champions, that you make due allocation of time to matters of 
righteousness, the state, and personal desire and that you are cognizant of 
the proper times for each, Bharata, and attend to them all. I trust that the 
brahmans who comprehend the meaning of all the sastras, and the people of 
the city and provinces too, wish you happiness, my wise brother. 

[56-59] “I trust that you avoid the fourteen errors of kings: atheism; 
falsehood; irascibility; inattention; procrastination; shunning the wise; 
indolence; sensual indulgence; solitary determination of political affairs; 
taking counsel with those ignorant of such affairs; failure to execute your 
decisions, to keep your counsel secret, or to employ auspicious rites; and 
indiscriminate courtesy. And finally, I trust that you never eat savory foods 
all by yourself, Raghava, and that you give aid to allies when they request 
it.” 

Sarga 95 

[1-7] When Bharata had listened to Rama’s words, he replied: “What good 
is it for me to know the right conduct of kings, when I am wholly lost to 
righteousness? There is an ancient practice of righteousness, bull among 
men, one established among us for all time. It is this: with the eldest brother 
living, your majesty, a younger may not become king. So you must come 
back with me, Raghava, to the prosperous city of Ayodhya, and have 
yourself consecrated for the good of our House. Some say a king is but a 
mortal; but I esteem him a god. His conduct in matters of righteousness and 
statecraft, 1t is rightly said, is beyond that of mere mortals. While I was still 
in the land of the Kekayas, my brother, and you had withdrawn to the 
wilderness, the king, a man esteemed by the good, a performer of sacrifices, 
went to heaven. So arise, tiger among men, make the funeral libation to 
Father. Satrughna here and I have already done so. For it is said, Raghava, 
that what a well-loved person gives to those in the world of the ancestors 
abides forever—and Father loved you so well.” 


[8—11] When he heard Bharata’s piteous words that told him of his 
father’s death—the dreadful words Bharata spoke, which struck him like a 
bolt of lightning—Rama Raghava, slayer of enemies, lost consciousness. 
Throwing out his arms he fell to the ground like a flowering tree in the 
forest cut down by an axe. Fallen upon the earth, Rama, the lord of the 
earth, resembled a bull elephant asleep, grown weary from striking a 
riverbank. His three brothers and Vaidehi wept as they sprinkled water upon 
him, the great bowman, utterly broken by grief. 

[12-17] Regaining consciousness, Kakutstha, with tears pouring from 
his eyes, began a long and mournful lament, crying: “What good was I, a 
wretched son, to my great father? He died of grief for me, and I could not 
even perform his final rites. Oh Bharata, my blameless brother, you have 
achieved your greatest goal, you and Satrughna, since you were able to 
honor the king with all the rites for the dead. Ayodhya is bereft of the lord 
of men; it no longer has its chief, no longer has direction. Even were my 
stay in the forest over, I could not bear to go back. When my stay in the 
forest is at an end, slayer of enemies, who will there be in Ayodhya ever 
again to give me guidance, now that Father has gone to the next world? In 
the past, when Father observed good conduct on my part, he would say such 
gratifying things to me, so pleasant to hear. From whom am I to hear them 
now?” 

[18—2178*-2179*—22] When he had finished speaking to Bharata, 
Raghava approached his wife, her face like the full moon, and, consumed 
with grief, he said to her: “Sita, your father-in-law is dead, and you, 
Laksmana, have lost your father. Bharata has brought the sorrowful news 
that the lord of the earth has gone to heaven.” ''As Kakutstha spoke, still 
more copious tears welled up in the eyes of the glorious young men. His 
three brothers did what they could to solace him, and they told him, “Let 
the funeral libation be offered to Father, the master of the world.” ™™™When 
Sita heard that her father-in-law, the king, had gone to heaven, tears so 
flooded her eyes that she no longer could see her husband. As the daughter 
of Janaka wept, Rama comforted her. Lost in sorrow, he then sorrowfully 
said to Laksmana: “Bring me a cake of ingudi meal and fetch an upper 
garment of barkcloth. I will go to make the funeral libation for our great 
father. Let Sita proceed in front, and you next, while I go at the rear, for 
such is the procession of mourning.” 


[23-28] Then their constant attendant, the celebrated Sumantra, a high- 
minded and gentle man, self-restrained, tranquil, and staunchly devoted to 
Rama, joined the princes in consoling Raghava. Supporting him, he helped 
him down to the auspicious Mandakini River. With difficulty the glorious 
princes made their way to the charming bathing place on the lovely 
Mandakini River, where the woodlands were always in flower, and the 
current ran swiftly. And upon reaching the bathing spot, auspicious and 
sparkling clear, they sprinkled water for the king, intoning, “So let this be 
for you.” The protector of the earth then held out a handful of water, and, 
facing to the south, the direction of Yama, he said, weeping, “O tiger among 
kings, may this pure water I now offer you remain with you in the world of 
the ancestors.” 

[29-33] Mighty Raghava then ascended from the bathing place on the 
Mandakini and in the company of his brothers made the offering of food to 
his father. Upon a spread of darbha grass Rama deposited the cake of 
ingudi meal mixed with fruit of the badari tree. And weeping in the anguish 
of his deep sorrow, he said, “Be pleased to partake of this, great king, such 
food as we ourselves now eat, for a man’s gods must feed on the same food 
as he.” The tiger among men ascended from the riverbank and, by the same 
way he had come, ascended the lovely slope of the mountain. And upon 
reaching the door of his leaf hut, the lord of the world clasped both Bharata 
and Laksmana in his arms. 

[34-38] All the brothers began to weep along with Vaidehi, and the 
mountain echoed with the sound, as of lions roaring. Bharata’s soldiers 
were alarmed when they heard the tumultuous sound. “Bharata must surely 
have met with Rama,” they said. “The loud sound must be their grieving 
over their dead father.” With one mind they all left their camps and raced 
off in the direction of the noise, following where it led them. Some went on 
horses or elephants, others—the more delicate ones—on ornate chariots, 
while the rest of the men went on foot. All the people rushed to the ashram, 
yearning to see Rama, for, though his absence had been brief, it had seemed 
so very long. 

[39-43] Yearning to see the reunion of the brothers, they hurried off on 
every sort of vehicle, in a flurry of hooves and wheels. Struck by the hooves 
and wheels of the many vehicles, the earth gave off a tumultuous sound, 
like the heavens when storm clouds gather. The sound frightened the bull 


elephants and the cows in their train, and they ran off to another part of the 
forest, perfuming the way with their scent. Boars, deer, lions, buffaloes, 
apes, monkeys, tigers, nilgai, and gayal were also terrified, as were the 
chitals, while the birds—cakravakas, natyihas, hamsas, karandavas, 
plavas, kokilas, and cock krauncas—fled to the horizons in a blind rush. 

[44-47] The sky appeared to be as covered with birds terrified by the 
sound as did the earth with men. Righteous Rama then caught sight of his 
tearful, sorrowing men, and like a father or a mother, he embraced them. 
The prince embraced some men, while others did obeisance to him; his 
presence restored to all of them, each according to his station, their one true 
kinsman or one true friend. "And as the great men wept, the sound of it 
made earth and heaven echo continually, through the mountain caves and all 
directions, with a clamor like the roll of mrdanga drums. 


Sarga 96 

[1-5] Placing the wives of Dasaratha before him, Vasistha set out for that 
spot, longing to see Rama. Proceeding slowly toward the Mandakini, the 
wives of the king soon spied the bathing place that Rama and Laksmana 
frequented. Kausalya’s throat was choked with tears, and her mouth went 
dry as she spoke in her desolation to Sumitra and the other wives of the 
king. She said: “This must be where they come to bathe—poor children. It 
has recently been disturbed by them, who are ever undisturbed in their 
actions. Once it was deserted, away here in the forest—but now they have 
been driven here from their own country! It must be from here, Sumitra, 
that your son Saumitri, constantly and without flagging, has to fetch water 
himself on my son’s behalf.” 

[6-12] Then the large-eyed woman spied there, on the ground, the cake 
of ingudi meal for their father set down upon some darbha grass, whose 
tips pointed toward the south. And when Queen Kausalya observed what 
had been deposited on the ground by Rama in anguish for his father, she 
said to all of DaSaratha’s women: “Look at this. It was offered by Raghava 
according to precept to his father, the great Raghava, the leader of the 
Iksvakus. But how unseemly a food I find it for the great and godlike king, 
who used to enjoy so many delicacies. He had the whole four-cornered 
earth for his enjoyment and was great Indra’s equal on earth. How is it 
possible that the lord of the earth must now eat a cake of ingudi meal? No 


greater sorrow than this has the world to show me, that Rama, once so 
wealthy, should now have only ingudi meal to offer his father. And now I 
have right before my very eyes the cake of ingudi meal Rama offered his 
father—how is it, then, that my heart does not burst for grief into a 
thousand pieces?” 

[13—16] As she was in such anguish, her co-wives tried to comfort her. 
They continued on, then, and soon caught sight of Rama in the ashram, 
resembling an immortal god fallen from heaven. And as his mothers gazed 
at Rama, who was now denied every luxury, they too were anguished and 
racked with grief and they broke out in shrill weeping. Rama, tiger among 
men, a man always true to his promise, then rose and clasped the lovely feet 
of all his mothers. And the large-eyed women brushed the dust from his 
back with their lovely hands, with their soft fingers and palms so pleasant to 
the touch. 

[17—23] Saumitri too was overcome with sorrow as he gazed at all his 
mothers. He did obeisance to them after Rama, slowly and clingingly. All of 
the women treated good Laksmana, a son born of DaSaratha, exactly as they 
treated Rama. Sita as well sorrowfully grasped the feet of her mothers-in- 
law and stood before them, her eyes brimming with tears. Just as a mother 
would embrace her own daughter, Kausalya embraced Sita as she stood 
anguished with sorrow, desolate and haggard from her stay in the forest. 
And she said to her: “How is it possible that the daughter of the king of 
Videha, the daughter-in-law of Dasaratha, the wife of Rama, should have to 
live a life of hardship in the desolate forest? Your face is like a lotus 
scorched by sun, like a withered lily, gold caked with dirt, or the moon 
obscured by clouds; and as I look at it, grief consumes me as fire consumes 
its fuel—a wild grief, here, in my heart, Vaidehi, kindled by this calamity.” 

[24-29] Even as his anguished mother was speaking in this fashion, 
Bharata’s elder brother made his way to Vasistha and clasped his feet. 
Raghava grasped the feet of the fiery and brilliant purohita just as Indra, 
overlord of the immortal gods, might grasp Brhaspati’s, and then, together, 
they took their seats. Last, righteous Bharata sat down near his elder 
brother, and with him sat the counselors, the leading men of the city, the 
soldiers, and the people most wise in the ways of righteousness. As mighty 
Bharata sat next to him and gazed at him who was still radiant with majesty 
despite his ascetic’s garb, he humbly cupped his hands in reverence, like 


great Indra before Prajapati, lord of creatures. And the nobles waited and 
with great curiosity wondered, “Just what will Bharata say to Raghava now, 
after bowing to him and showing him honor?” Surrounded by their friends 
the brothers sat—truthful Raghava, high-minded Laksmana, and righteous 
Bharata—like the three sacred fires at a sacrificial session surrounded by 
the ritual officiants. 


Sarga 97 

[1-7] Now, when Rama had first comforted his brother Bharata, who so 
cherished his guru, he and his brother Laksmana began to question him: “I 
should like to hear from your own lips what all this means, why you have 
come to this region in barkcloth, hides, and matted hair. For what reason did 
you leave the kingdom and enter this region wearing black hides and matted 
hair? Please, tell me everything.” Questioned in this fashion by great 
Kakutstha, the son of Kaikey1 cupped his hands in reverence once more, 
and holding them out firmly, he replied: “It was grave wrongdoing for our 
great-armed father to repudiate my noble brother. And grief for his son so 
tortured him that he went to heaven. Under the constraint of a woman—my 
mother, Kaikeyi—he committed this great evil, slayer of your foes, which 
robbed him of his glory. But my mother never achieved her goal, the 
kingship. And now she is a widow racked with grief, who must fall into the 
most abominable hell. 

[8—13] “Please show your grace to me, your slave. Have yourself 
consecrated, like Indra the munificent, into the kingship this very day. All 
these subjects and your widowed mothers have come themselves to you. 
Please, show them your grace. It is proper both by reason of the succession 
and by the virtue of you yourself, O giver of honor. So you must assume the 
kingship as is right, and grant your loved ones their desire. Let the earth be 
a widow no more, but once again complete, with you as her husband, just as 
the autumnal night is made complete by the bright, hare-marked moon. I 
and all the advisers here are begging you with heads bowed low. Tiger 
among men, please show your grace to me, your brother, your pupil, and 
your slave, and please do not transgress against this whole order of 
advisers, this ancient, hereditary, and venerable order.” 

[14-18] Having spoken in this fashion, Bharata, the great-armed son of 
Kaikeyi, tearfully pressed his head once more to Rama’s feet. And as his 


brother Bharata stood heaving sighs like an elephant in rut, Rama embraced 
him and replied: “You are highborn, valorous, and mighty, and keep your 
vows. How would it be possible for one such as you ever to do evil for the 
sake of kingship? I find not even the slightest fault with you, crusher of 
your foes. But then too, you ought not reproach your mother so childishly. 
O foremost of those who uphold righteousness, your mother commands as 
much reverence as our father, who was wise in the ways of righteousness 
and honored by all the world. 

[19-24] “Our father and mother, righteous people both, bade me, ‘You 
must go to the forest.” How should I have done otherwise, Raghava? It is 
now for you to assume the kingship in Ayodhya, which is honored by all the 
world. And I must live in the Dandaka forest, wearing clothes of barkcloth. 
Such was the apportionment the great king made in the presence of the 
people. Then, after having given his orders, the mighty DaSaratha went to 
heaven. The righteous king, the guru of the world, must be your guide. You 
must accept what Father bestowed, whatever your portion. And as for me, 
dear boy, I will accept the portion bestowed by our great father and 
withdraw for fourteen years to the Dandaka forest. This is what our great 
father—who was held in honor by all the men of the world, the peer of 
Indra, overlord of the wise gods—bade me do. It is this that I regard as my 
ultimate good, and not perpetual lordship over all the worlds.” 


Sarga 98 

[1-5] As the lions among men continued to grieve in the company of their 
hosts of friends, the night passed sorrowfully. And when night had 
brightened into dawn, Rama’s brothers performed the morning offering and 
prayers by the Mandakini in the company of their friends, and then returned 
to him. They sat together in silence, no one saying a word, until, from 
where he sat among their friends, Bharata addressed Rama: “My mother has 
been satisfied; the kingship has been bestowed on me. And I bestow it on 
you, and you alone. Enjoy unchallenged kingship. Like a dike washed away 
by a great flood when the rains come, the kingdom will face disintegration 
and you alone can prevent it. 

[6—12] “Just as a donkey cannot match the pace of a horse and common 
birds cannot match that of the great eagle Tarksya, so I lack power to match 
yours, lord of the earth. Life is ever easy when it is others who must depend 


on you, but how hard life is, Rama, when you must depend on others. It is 
like when a man plants a sapling and nurtures it until it becomes a great tree 
with spreading branches, impossible for a short man to climb. When the 
tree comes into flower but shows no fruit—the whole purpose for which it 
was grown—the man fails to take any pleasure in it. This is just a simile, 
my great-armed brother—and you will easily grasp its meaning—for your 
not ruling over us, a bull-like master over his servants. Let the guildsmen, O 
great king, and all the leading subjects behold you installed in the kingship, 
tamer of your foes, blazing like the sun. Let rutting elephants trumpet in 
your entourage, Kakutstha; let the women of the inner apartments rejoice 
with all their hearts.” 

[13—20] When the various groups of townsfolk heard Bharata’s speech as 
he was pleading with Rama, they thought, “He is right!” Accomplished 
Rama then gazed at glorious Bharata, who was lamenting in his sorrow, 
and, in full possession of himself, tried to comfort him with these words: 
“No one acts of his own free will; man is not independent. This way and 
that he is dragged along by fate. All accumulations end in loss, all 
elevations end in falls, all unions end in separation, and all life ends in 
death. Just as a ripe fruit need fear one thing—to fall—so every man that is 
born need fear but death. Just as a stout-pillared house decays and 
collapses, so men collapse, succumbing to old age and death. The passing 
days and nights quickly deplete the life of all living things in the world, just 
as the fierce-rayed sun dries up water in the summer. You should be 
grieving for yourself alone, not for anyone else. Your life is steadily 
dwindling, whether you stand still or move. 

[21-26] “Mrtyu, the god of death, walks with you; Mrtyu sits beside 
you. Travel as far away as you like, Mrtyu will return with you. Wrinkles 
beset the body, the hair turns white; a man decays with old age, and what 
can he do to escape it? People are glad when the sun rises, and glad when it 
sets; but they do not mark that their life is slipping away. All things that 
breathe are delighted to see the face of each new season come, though with 
the turning of the seasons their life breath is slipping away. Just as two 
pieces of wood might drift together in the open sea and, having met, drift 
apart after a few brief moments, so too do your wives and children, your 
relatives and riches meet with you and hasten away. To lose them is a 
certainty. 


[27-30] “No creature that draws breath in the world can escape this 
course of things. There is no cure to be found for it, grieve for the dead all 
you will. Like a man standing by the roadside and calling out to a passing 
caravan, ‘I too am coming, right behind you’—so did our ancestors take 
this sure road, our fathers and our forefathers. Why should you grieve when 
you cannot avoid it, when you are following that very road yourself? Since 
life trickles away like the waters of a stream, never to return, happiness 
should be one’s aim—and people have found happiness, or so it is recorded. 

[31-36] “By means of every holy rite, with fitting priestly stipends, our 
righteous father, the lord of the earth, cleansed away his sins and went to 
heaven. Our father conscientiously supported his dependents, protected his 
subjects, levied taxes in accordance with righteousness, and by virtue of 
these acts he has gone to the highest heaven. Having offered up the various 
sacrifices and enjoyed abundant pleasures, the lord of the earth attained a 
ripe old age and went to heaven. Our father abandoned a decrepit mortal 
body and found the heavenly treasure that awaits one in the Brahmaloka. 
This man no one should mourn, no one as wise as you, as learned and 
intelligent. The strong of heart will shun these different griefs, these words 
of lamentation, this weeping, and hold fast to wisdom in all circumstances. 

[37-40] “So compose yourself and do not grieve, most eloquent of men. 
Go back and take up your residence in the city, as Father of his own accord 
directed you to do. And the order this same man of holy deeds has given me 
I shall carry out, and exactly where our noble father directed. It would be 
wrong, tamer of your foes, for me to disregard his order. And you too must 
always honor it, for he was our kinsman, indeed, our father.” Such were 
R&ama’s most sensible words, and when he finished speaking, righteous 
Bharata made this righteous and wonderful reply: 

[41-45] “Where in such a world as this is your like to be found, tamer of 
your foes, a man whom sorrow does not pain, and joy does not delight? You 
are esteemed by the elders, you have questioned them about your doubts 
and gained these insights about the living and the dead, and how alike they 
are both in their existing and not existing. What is there that could distress 
you? Such a man does not despair when calamity befalls him. Your courage 
is like that of a deathless god; you are a great man true to your word. You 
are all-knowing and all-seeing and a man of wisdom, Raghava. In 


possession of such virtues and sage in matters of birth and death, you 
should not be affected by sorrow, however insufferable. 

[46-50] “While I was away, my mother, that wretched woman, did a 
terrible thing on my behalf, which I never sought. Please forgive me! I am 
bound by the bond of righteousness, and therefore, I do not execute my 
mother here and now through the harshest form of punishment, although 
that evil doer is deserving of punishment. For how could I, a son born of 
Dasaratha—that man of honorable family and honorable deeds—knowing 
the meaning of righteousness, do a deed so abominable, so unrighteous? I 
would not reproach our late father before the assembly; for he was a god to 
us, a performer of sacred rites, our guru, elder, king, and father. 
Nonetheless, my righteous brother, what man knowing the meaning of 
righteousness would do so sinful a deed, contrary to all that is right and 
good, just to please a woman? 

[51-55] “There is an ancient saying: ‘Creatures lose their wits when 
their end is near.’ In acting as he did, the king has illustrated this saying for 
all the world. Mindful of what is correct, you must redress the transgression 
Father committed out of anger, delusion, and recklessness. For the world 
considers a child to be truly a son only if he corrects his father’s 
transgressions; otherwise it is the other way around. Be such a child and do 
not endorse the evil deed Father did, censured by every man of wisdom in 
the world. You must save Kaikeyi, Father, and me, save your friends and 
our kinsmen, all the people of the city and provinces, this whole world. 

[56-60] “How incongruous they are, this wilderness and the kshatriya 
class, this matted hair and the government of men. You must not do so 
perverse a deed. Or, if it is your wish to follow the way of righteousness 
that demands physical exhaustion, then endure the exhaustion of 
righteously governing the four social classes. O you who understand 
righteousness, those who understand righteousness have proclaimed that the 
state of a householder is the foremost of the four stages of life. How can 
you renounce it? I am a mere child compared to you, both in learning and 
order of birth. How could I govern the earth when you are present? I am but 
a child, deficient in virtue, intelligence, and status. Without you I could not 
manage. 

[61-68] “Knower of righteousness, in keeping with your own proper 
duty, you must, together with your kinsmen, govern the kingdom of our 


fathers, this entire, sovereign, unchallenged kingdom. Let all the subjects in 
a body, and the sacrificial priests under Vasistha’s lead who are skilled in 
vedic mantras, consecrate you here and now to the accompaniment of the 
vedic mantras. Once we have consecrated you, you must return and protect 
Ayodhya, utterly triumphant over all peoples, just like Indra Vasava 
together with the Maruts. You must discharge the three debts: those owed to 
the seers, the ancestors, and the gods. And you must eradicate your 
enemies, fulfill your friends’ every desire, and give me proper guidance. 
Elder brother, this very day let your friends find delight in your 
consecration; this very day let your enemies take fright and flee in the ten 
directions. Bull among men, please free my mother and me from this 
infamy this very day and guard our revered father from sin. I implore you 
with my head bowed low. Take pity on me, on all your kinsmen, just as Siva 
Mahesvara takes pity on all creatures. However, if you only turn your back 
and go off into the forest, I will go with you as well.” 

[69-71] But even though Bharata wearied himself begging Rama’s grace 
with his head bowed low, the courageous lord of the earth was resolved not 
to return, but to hold firmly to his father’s word. Witnessing Raghava’s 
wonderful determination, the people, though sorrowful, experienced joy at 
the same time. They were sorrowful because he would not return to 
Ayodhya and yet they rejoiced to observe his firmness in adhering to his 
vow. The sacrificial priests, the merchants, and the commanders of the 
troops, and also his mothers, stunned though they were and choked with 
tears, commended Bharata for saying those words. Then, all together, they 
bowed low before Rama and began to implore him. 


Sarga 99 
[1-6] As Bharata was speaking in this fashion, Laksmana’s majestic eldest 
brother, the most honored among his kinsmen, replied to him once more: 
“How fitting are the words you have spoken, like a true son of Kaikeyi and 
Dasaratha, the best of kings. However, long ago, dear brother, when our 
father was about to marry your mother, he made a bride-price pledge to 
your grandfather—the ultimate price, the kingship. Later, during a battle 
between the gods and asuras, the lordly king of the land, pleased and 
delighted with your mother, granted her a boon. Your illustrious fair- 
complexioned mother then bound the best of men to his oath and demanded 


these two boons of him: the kingship for you, tiger among men, and my 
banishment. And under this constraint the king granted her the boon. 

[7-13] “And that is why, bull among men, Father constrained me to do 
this, to live in the forest for fourteen years, in accordance with the granting 
of his boon. And I for my part have come here, to the desolate forest, with 
Laksmana and Sita, and I will brook no opposition to my safeguarding 
Father’s truthfulness. In just the same way you must likewise ensure, by 
your immediate consecration, that the truth of the lord of kings, our father, 
be preserved. For my sake, Bharata, knower of righteousness, you must free 
the lordly king from his debt. You must save your father and give your 
mother cause to rejoice. For, dear boy, I have heard recited a verse sung 
long ago by illustrious Gaya when he was offering a sacrifice to his 
ancestors in the land of Gaya: ‘Because a son rescues (trdyate) his father 
from the hell named Put, he is called putra; or because he protects his 
ancestors. Thus, one should strive to have many virtuous and learned sons, 
for among such a host perhaps one might be found who will make the 
journey to Gaya.’ 

[14-19] “All the royal seers have concurred in this, delight of the king. 
Thus, lordly best of men, you must save our father from hell. Heroic 
Bharata, you must return to Ayodhya with Satrughna and all the twice-born 
men and win the loyalty of your subjects. As for me, I will enter the 
Dandaka forest without delay, your majesty, and only these two shall join 
me, Vaidehi and Laksmana. It is you, Bharata, who must become the king 
of men. As for me, I shall become sovereign king of the beasts of the wild. 
Go now in delight, to the best of cities, and in delight I too shall go off to 
the Dandakas. Let the royal parasol cast its cool shade over your head, 
blocking out the rays of the sun, maker of day. I shall have shade as well to 
retreat to for comfort, the deeper shade of these woodland trees. Quick- 
witted Satrughna will be your companion while trustworthy Saumitri will 
be my chief ally. Let all four of us, his principal sons, preserve the truth of 
the lord of men. Do not despair.” 


Sarga 100 
[1-6] Now, while he was consoling Bharata, an eminent brahman named 
Jabali addressed righteous Rama in words at variance with righteousness: 
“This is all very well, Raghava, but you really must not entertain such 


useless ideas like the commonest of men, and you a noble-minded man in 
distress. What man is truly kin to anyone, what profit has anyone in anyone 
else? Just as a person is born alone, so must he die. And so, Rama, the man 
who feels attachment, thinking, “This is my mother, this my father,’ should 
be regarded as a madman, for in truth no one belongs to anyone. A man 
traveling from village to village will spend the night somewhere and the 
next day leave the place where he stopped and continue on—in the same 
way, Kakutstha, his father and mother, his home and wealth are mere 
stopping places for a man. The wise feel no attachment to them. 

[7-11] “Best of men, you must not abdicate the kingship of your fathers 
and embark upon this terrible path, which is painful, rocky, and full of 
thorns. You should consecrate yourself in prosperous Ayodhya; the city is 
waiting for you, wearing the single braid of a waiting wife. You should 
indulge in priceless royal pleasures and enjoy yourself in Ayodhya, prince, 
like Sakra in his heaven Trivistapa. Dagaratha was nobody to you, and you 
were nobody to him. The king was one person, you another. So do as I am 
telling you. The king has gone where he had to go; such is the course all 
mortals follow. You are merely deluding yourself. 

[12-17] “The men I grieve for, and I grieve for no one else, are those 
who place ‘righteousness’ above what brings them profit. They find only 
sorrow in this world, and at death their lot is annihilation just the same. 
People here busy themselves because ‘It is the Eighth Day, the rite for the 
ancestors.’ But just look at the waste of food—what really is a dead man 
going to eat? And if something one person eats here could fill the belly of 
someone else, one could simply offer sraddha for a traveler, and he would 
need no provisions for the road. The texts that preach, ‘Sacrifice, give alms, 
sanctify yourself, practice asceticism, renounce,’ are all composed by clever 
men as lures to solicit donations for themselves. You must accept the idea 
once and for all, high-minded prince, that there exists no world to come. 
Address yourself to what can be perceived and turn your back on what 
cannot. You should give precedence to these ideas of the wise, with which 
the whole world concurs. Propitiated by Bharata, you must accept the 
kingship.” 


Sarga 101 


[1-6] Upon hearing Jabali’s words, Rama, foremost among the truthful, 
replied with sound logic, his own convictions quite unshaken. He said: 
“What you, sir, have said in the hopes of pleasing me is wrong with only a 
semblance of right; it is harm that simulates help. A person wins no esteem 
among the wise when his conduct belies his tenets, and he acts in evil ways, 
recognizing no bounds. It is conduct alone that proclaims whether a man is 
highborn or base, honest or dishonest, brave or merely a braggart. It would 
be ignobility with a semblance of nobility, dishonesty with an outward 
show of honesty, dishonor masquerading as honor, indecency disguised as 
decency, were I to reject the good and accept such unrighteousness. For it 
merely wears the cloak of righteousness. It would throw the world into 
confusion, and is utterly in conflict with both duty and precept. 

[7-11] “For what sensible man anywhere in the world, aware of what is 
right and wrong, would hold me in high esteem were I a man of evil acts, a 
corruptor of the people? To whose actions should I be conforming, and how 
then should I reach heaven, were I to adopt such a practice and break my 
promise? Moreover, all the people would follow suit in acting as they 
please, for subjects will behave just like their king. The actions of a king 
must always be truthful and benevolent. The kingdom will thereby be true, 
the world firmly established on truth. For it is truth and truth alone that both 
gods and seers hold in esteem, for the man who tells the truth in this world 
will attain the highest abode. 

[12—16] “People recoil from a man who speaks falsely, just as they do 
from a snake. Truth, it is said, is the ultimate form of righteousness in this 
world, and the very root of heaven. Truth is the lord of this world, the 
goddess of the lotus resides in truth, all things are rooted in truth, there is no 
higher goal than truth. The almsgiving, sacrifices, the offering of oblations, 
the practice of asceticism, and the vedas themselves are all based on truth, 
and so it is truth that must be one’s highest aim. One man protects the 
world, one protects his House, one is exalted in heaven, and one sinks down 
to hell. As for me, why should I not truthfully follow my father’s 
command? I have always been true to my word, and I have pledged upon 
my truth. 

[17-21] “Not out of greed or delusion or ignorance would I blindly 
breach the dam of truth. No, I will remain true to my promise to my guru. 
Neither the gods nor the ancestors, we have heard, accept offerings from a 


man whose covenant is false, nor from an inconstant and irresolute man. I 
know myself that this personal code of righteousness is the true one. Wise 
men have always borne the burden it imposes, and I gladly accept it. I reject 
the kshatriya’s code, where unrighteousness and righteousness go hand in 
hand, a code that only debased, vicious, covetous, and evil men observe. 
And sinful action is of three sorts: one can have evil thoughts, or do an evil 
deed, or tell a lie. 

[22—25] “Land, fame, glory, and wealth seek out the man who holds to 
truth and ever attend on him. °°One then should devote himself to truth 
alone. What you consider to be the best course is in fact ignoble; the 
statements you make urging me to ‘do what is good for me’ are mere 
sophistry. I have promised my guru to live in the forest. How then can I do 
as Bharata bids and defy the bidding of my guru? I made this promise in the 
presence of my guru, my father, and it brought delight to the heart of Queen 
Kaikeyi. That promise shall never be broken. 

[26-31] “I will therefore live a life of purity in the forest, restricting my 
food to holy things, roots, fruits, and flowers, and gratifying the gods and 
ancestors. My five senses will have contentment enough, and I shall be 
maintaining the world on its course. Moreover, I myself shall remain a 
sincere believer, fully aware of what is right and what is wrong. On entering 
this realm of action one must do good deeds. And such deeds have their 
rewards. Agni, god of fire, Vayu, god of wind, and the Soma, the moon 
god, have reaped them. After Indra brought a hundred rites to completion, 
he became the king of the gods in the highest heaven. After performing 
awesome feats of asceticism, the great seers too reached heaven. Wise men 
say that truthfulness, righteousness, and strenuous effort, compassion for 
creatures and kindly words, reverence for twice-born brahmans, gods, and 
guests is the path to the highest heaven. Those men who are earnest in 
righteousness and keep company with the wise, who are supremely 
generous, nonviolent, and free from taint, those supreme and mighty sages 
are the ones truly worthy of reverence in this world.” 


Sarga 102 
[1-5] Vasistha, perceiving that Rama was angry, addressed him: “Jabali 
likewise understands the true course of birth and death in this world. He 
only said these things in his desire to dissuade you. I want you now, master 


of the world, to learn from me the origin of this world. Everything was once 
just water, and within this water the earth was fashioned. The self-existent 
Brahma then came into existence with the gods. He then became a boar, 
raised up the treasure-laden earth, and created the whole moving world with 
the help of his accomplished sons. Brahma the everlasting, the eternal and 
imperishable, arose from the ether and from him Marici was born, and from 
Marici, a son, Kasyapa. Vivasvant, the sun, was born from Kasyapa. Manu 
is known as Vaivasvata, the son of Vivasvant—he was the first Prajapati, 
lord of creatures—and the son of Manu was Iksvaku. 

[6-10] “It was upon him that Manu originally bestowed this prosperous 
land, and thus you must know that Iksvaku was the first king of Ayodhya. 
The son of Iksvaku, so we have heard, was majestic Kuksi, and Kuksi was 
the father of the heroic Vikuksi. The son of Vikuksi was the mighty, 
powerful Bana, and Bana’s son was the great-armed, glorious Anaranya. 
When Anaranya, the best of men, was king, there was no drought, no 
famine, and not even a single thief in the land. Anaranya had a great-armed 
son, King Prthu. And Prthu was the father of the great king Trisanku, that 
heroic man who by virtue of his truthfulness went to heaven with his earthly 
body. 

[11—15] “Trisanku had a glorious son, Dhundhumara, and Dhundhumara 
begot the illustrious Yuvanasva. Yuvanasva was the father of majestic 
Mandhatr, and Mandhatr was the father of mighty Susandhi. Susandhi had 
two sons, Dhruvasandhi and Prasenajit. Dhruvasandhi had a son named 
Bharata, an illustrious crusher of his foes. To great-armed Bharata was born 
a son named Asita, against whom his neighboring kings, the Haihayas, the 
Talajaighas, the Stiras, and the Sasabindus, rose up in enmity. The king 
marshaled his troops in battle against them all, but still he was driven into 
exile and became a contented sage upon a lovely mountain. He had two 
wives, both of whom were pregnant, so we have heard. 

[16-20] “A man of the Bhargava lineage, Cyavana had retired to the 
Himalayas, and Kalindi once approached the seer and did respectfully greet 
him, for she was eager to obtain a boon for the birth of a son; and the sage 
respectfully greeted her in turn. The queen then went home and soon gave 
birth to a son. Her co-wife had given her poison in order to slay the unborn 
child, but he was born nonetheless along with that very poison, and so they 
called him Sagara, ‘With Poison.’ This was the King Sagara who, while 


performing a sacrifice, caused the excavation of the ocean, which even now 
frightens creatures when it swells under the full moon. Asamafya, or so we 
have heard, was the son of Sagara, but in the very prime of life he was 
expelled by his father for the evil deeds he had done. 

[21—25] “Heroic Amsumant was the son of Asamafiya, Dilipa was the 
son of Amsumant, and Bhagiratha of Dilipa. Bhagiratha was the father of 
Kakutstha, from whom you have come to be known as the Kakutsthas. 
Kakutstha’s son was Raghu, whence you are called the Raghavas. Raghu’s 
mighty son was the immensely powerful man-eater known throughout the 
world as Kalmasapada Saudasa. The son of Kalmasapada was called 
Safikhana, and whoever came up against his might perished utterly along 
with his army. The son of Safkhana was heroic and majestic Sudargana, 
Sudarsana’s son was Agnivarna, and Agnivarna’s son was Sighraga. 

[26-31] “Sighraga’s son was Maru, Maru’s son was Prasusruka, 
Prasusruka’s son was the splendid Ambarisa. Ambarisa’s son was the 
valorous Nahusa and Nahusa’s son was the supremely righteous Nabhaga. 
Aja and Suvrata were the two sons of Nabhaga, and Aja’s son was righteous 
King Dasaratha. And you, known far and wide as Rama, are his eldest son 
and heir. Assume, then, the kingship that is your own and show regard for 
the world, your majesty. For among all the Iksvakus the firstborn has 
always become the king. When the firstborn is living, it is not a younger 
son but only the eldest who is consecrated for kingship. This is the 
immemorial custom of your own House, the House of Raghava, and you 
must not abandon it now. You must govern the earth with its abundant 
treasures and abundant vassal kingdoms, and, like your father, win great 
fame.” 


Sarga 103 
[1-5] When Vasistha, the purohita of the king, had finished this speech, he 
once more addressed Rama in words harmonious with righteousness: 
“Raghava Kakutstha, a man born into this world has three gurus: his 
teacher, his father, and his mother. The father begets the man, bull among 
men, but the teacher imparts wisdom to him, and for this reason he is called 
guru. | was your father’s teacher, and I am yours as well, slayer of your 
foes. In heeding my words, you will not stray from the path of the virtuous. 
Here are the men of your assembly and the guildsmen gathered together; in 


practicing righteousness on their behalf, my son, you will not stray from the 
path of the virtuous. 

[6-11] “Your mother is aged and righteous, and you must not disobey 
her; in doing as she bids, you will not stray from the path of the virtuous. If 
you heed the words Bharata uttered when supplicating you, Raghava, you 
will not go astray in your pursuit of truth and righteousness.” Addressed in 
this gentle fashion by his guru, Raghava, bull among men, for his part 
replied to Vasistha, who sat beside him, saying this: “The constant benefits 
parents confer upon their child are not easily repaid—all that a mother and 
father do, giving him things to the limit of their resources, bathing and 
clothing him, always speaking kindly to him and nurturing him as well. 
King Dasaratha was my father, he begot me, and the promise I made to him 
must not be rendered false.” 

[12-15] Addressed in this fashion by Rama, noble Bharata, in great 
distress, addressed the charioteer who was waiting in attendance and said: 
“Charioteer, spread out some Ausa grass on the ground for me at once; I will 
fast against my brother, until he shows me his grace. Eating nothing, seeing 
nothing, like a penniless twice-born brahman, | will lie before his hut until 
he consents to return.” He then watched in distress as Sumantra remained 
with his eyes fixed on Rama, and then he procured a layer of kusa grass 
himself and spread it on the earth. 

[16-21] Mighty Rama, the best of royal seers, then said to him: “What 
have I done, dear Bharata, that you should fast against me? A brahman may 
have the right to coerce men by lying on his side, but there is no precept 
permitting those whose heads are anointed to fast against anyone. So stand 
up, Raghava, tiger among men, and abandon this heartless vow. You must 
leave at once for Ayodhya, the foremost of cities.” But Bharata still 
remained seated and, gazing all around at the people of the city and 
provinces, he cried, “Why do you not remonstrate with my brother?” But 
the people of the city and provinces then said to the great prince: “We 
recognize that what Raghava is telling Kakutstha is right. And moreover, 
this illustrious man is holding firm to what his father bade him do. That is 
why we are truly incapable of dissuading him.” 

[22-26] Upon hearing their words, Rama said: “Listen to the words of 
our friends, who see with the eye of righteousness. You have heard from 
both sides now. Consider it properly, Raghava. Stand up, my great-armed 


brother, touch me and sip water.” Bharata then rose, took a sip of water, and 
said: “Hear me, men of the assembly, you counselors and guildsmen as 
well. I did not ask my father for the kingship; I gave my mother no 
instructions. But I do recognize that my noble brother Raghava is 
supremely wise in the ways of righteousness. Thus, if someone must live 
here, if Father’s bidding must be done, I myself will live out the fourteen 
years in the forest.” 

[27-32] Righteous Rama marveled at his brother’s forthright declaration, 
and, glancing at the people of the city and provinces, he said: “What my 
father in his lifetime bought or sold or pledged neither Bharata nor I can in 
any way annul. I cannot permit a surrogate to live in the forest, for that 
would be repugnant to me. What Kaikeyi asked for was proper, and what 
my father did was rightly done. I know that Bharata is forbearing and shows 
his gurus honor. All will be perfectly safe in his care, for he is a great prince 
and true to his word. When I return from the forest, I shall rejoin my 
righteous brother and then become supreme lord of the earth. Kaikey1 made 
her demand of the king, and I have done her bidding and have thus saved 
my father, the lord of the earth, from falsehood.” 


Sarga 104 

[1-4] The great seers who had assembled to watch the thrilling meeting of 
the two brothers of incomparable blazing energy were amazed. The hosts of 
seers, perfected beings, and supreme seers, remaining invisible, sang the 
praises of the two brothers, the great Kakutsthas, crying: “How fortunate 
the man who has such sons as these, sons who know and follow the way of 
righteousness. How envious we are after hearing their conversation.” Then 
all at once the hosts of seers, eager for the destruction of ten-necked 
Ravana, spoke to Bharata, tiger among kings, saying: 

[S—7] “O wise and highborn prince, a man of great virtue and glory. If 
you have any regard for your father, you must agree to what Rama says. It 
is our wish that Rama forever keep his father free from debt. It is indeed 
because Dasaratha was free from his debt to Kaikeyi that he has gone to 
heaven.” Saying no more, the gandharvas, great seers, and royal seers all 
departed, each to his own abode. 

[8—13] Splendid Rama was gladdened by these splendid words, and his 
face beamed with delight as he paid homage to the seers. But Bharata went 


limp in every limb. He cupped his hands in reverence and, in a breaking 
voice, once more addressed Raghava: “Please, show regard for the code of 
kings and the traditional code of our House, Kakutstha. Please grant what 
your mother and I beg of you. I cannot, on my own, protect this vast 
kingdom. Nor can I win the loyalty of the people of the city and provinces, 
for it has already been devoted to you. It is for you alone that our kinsmen 
and soldiers, our allies and friends are longing, as farmers long for rain. You 
must, wise brother, accept the kingship and restore its stability. For you, 
Kakutstha, are the only one who commands the power to govern the 
world.” 

[14-19] Having spoken in this fashion, Bharata then threw himself at 
Rama’s feet, and he continued to beseech his brother with earnest 
expressions of love. Rama gathered his dark and lotus-eyed brother Bharata 
into his embrace, and in a voice like the call of an impassioned hamsa he 
said: “You already possess the knowledge of proper governance, dear boy, 
so you too are perfectly capable of protecting the land. Take counsel with 
your ministers, your friends, and wise counselors, and you shall see all 
matters accomplished, however great they may be. The moon’s splendor 
might forsake it, Himalaya might lose its snow, the ocean might overstep its 
shore, but I will never forsake my promise to our father. Whether it was 
love or greed that made your mother act as she did on your behalf, dear boy, 
should be none of your concern. You must still treat her as your mother.” 

[20-25] As Kausalya’s son was speaking in this fashion, his brilliance 
like the sun’s, his face like the waxing moon, Bharata replied to him: 
“Please place these slippers, adorned with gold, upon your feet, my brother. 
They will serve to guarantee the security of all the world.” The mighty tiger 
among men put on the slippers. Then, removing them, he presented them to 
great Bharata. The mighty Bharata, who understood righteousness, accepted 
the beautifully ornamented slippers, and, after reverently circling Raghava, 
he placed them on the head of a splendid elephant. Rama then paid homage 
to his people in due order: to his gurus and counselors, to the subjects, and 
to both of his younger brothers. Then the heir of the Raghava dynasty 
dismissed them, unshakable as the Himalayas in his own code of 
righteousness. In their sorrow, his mothers could not bid him farewell, their 
throats were so choked with tears, but Rama did obeisance to them all and 
then entered his hut, weeping. 


Sarga 105 

[1-5] Bharata then took those slippers and placed them on his head. Then, 
in delight, he boarded the chariot with Satrughna. All the counselors 
revered for their counsel—Vasistha, Vamadeva, and Jabali, firm in his 
vows, went before them. They passed the lovely Mandakini River, heading 
east and keeping great Mount Citraktta on their right. In the company of his 
army, Bharata made his way along the mountainside, observing the 
thousands of lovely different minerals it held. Not far from Citraktta, 
Bharata caught sight of the ashram where the sage Bharadvaja made his 
residence. 

[6-10] Wise Bharata, the delight of his House, approached the ashram of 
Bharadvaja, and alighting from the chariot, he prostrated himself at his feet. 
In delight Bharadvaja spoke these words to Bharata: “Have you done what 
had to be done, my son? Have you met with Rama?” Addressed in this 
manner by the wise Bharadvaja, Bharata, who cherished the ways of 
righteousness, replied: “Entreated by both his guru and me, Raghava, so 
firm in his vows, was deeply displeased and said this to Vasistha: ‘I will 
scrupulously keep my promise to my father, the promise of the fourteen 
years I made to my father.’ 

[11-14] “Addressed in this fashion, Raghava eloquently spoke, and the 
wise Vasistha replied to him with equal eloquence, uttering these weighty 
words: ‘Be pleased, wise prince, to give us these gold ornamented slippers. 
In your stead they will ensure the welfare and security of Ayodhya.’ When 
he was addressed in this manner by Vasistha, Raghava stood facing 
eastward and bestowed on me these gold-worked slippers, in order to rule 
the kingdom. Great Rama then gave me leave, and now I am returning. I am 
going back to Ayodhya, taking the splendid slippers with me.” 

[15—19] When he had heard those wonderful words of great Bharata, the 
sage Bharadvaja responded with words more wonderful still: “It is not 
surprising, tiger among men, foremost of those possessed of good character, 
that nobility should come to dwell in you, like rainwater in the lowlands. 
Your great-armed father, DaSaratha, is not dead, not when he has such a son 
as you, a righteous son who cherishes the ways of righteousness.” When the 
great seer finished speaking these words, Bharata cupped his hands in 
reverence, and in preparation for taking his leave, he clasped his feet. Again 


and again majestic Bharata reverently circled Bharadvaja, and then, 
together with his counselors, he set out for Ayodhya. 

[20-24] Spread far and wide with all its carriages, wagons, horses, and 
elephants, the army made its way back in Bharata’s train. They all crossed 
the heavenly, wave-wreathed Yamuna River and saw once again the 
gracious waters of the Ganges. After crossing the river brimming with 
lovely water, he, his kinsmen, and his army entered lovely Srigaverapura. 
Beyond Sriigaverapura, Bharata once more beheld Ayodhya, and he was 
consumed with sorrow as he said to his charioteer: “Look, charioteer, 
Ayodhya is darkened and in ruins. Its beauty is gone, its bliss is gone, it is 
desolate and silent.” 


Sarga 106 

[1-5] The chariot gave out a smooth deep sound as the glorious and lordly 
Bharata approached and quickly entered Ayodhya. There were cats roaming 
everywhere, and owls circling; the people and elephants were in hiding, and 
the city lay shrouded in gloom. It lay dark as night itself with no light at all. 
It resembled Rohini, the beloved wife of Rahu’s enemy, Candra, the moon 
god—blazing with light through her splendor—when she is left alone and 
obscured by an eclipse. It looked like a mountain river, its water scant, hot, 
and turbid, its sky-going birds dazed by summer’s heat, its fish, large and 
small, and crocodiles lying hidden deep below. It was like a flame that has 
leapt from the sacrificial fire, smokeless and golden, first sprinkled with the 
oblation and then extinguished. 

[6—10] It was like an army routed in a great battle, its armors in ruins, its 
horses and elephants slaughtered, its chariots and battle standards shattered, 
and its heroes slain. It was like a great wave raised foaming and roaring on 
the open sea and then, when the wind dies down, subsiding into silence. It 
resembled a vedic altar abandoned by the learned sacrificers and bare of all 
its sacrificial implements, when the hour of the soma pressing has come and 
gone, and the chanting has ceased. PPrPIt resembled a herd of cows in a cattle 
pen when their bull has left them, and they no longer graze the new grass 
but are anguished and filled with longing. It looked like a new pearl 
necklace when its precious gems have come unstrung, the most perfect, 
smooth, radiant, glistening gems. 


[11-18] It resembled a star suddenly slipping from its place when its 
merit 1s exhausted, and falling from heaven down to earth, its expansive 
luster dimmed. It was like a woodland vine at the end of spring, decked 
with flowers and swarming with drunken bees, then scorched by a racing 
forest fire and withered. All the merchants were in a daze, the bazaars and 
shops closed up tight, and the city looked like the night sky covered with 
clouds, its hare-marked moon and constellations obscured. It looked like a 
rowdy drinking hall littered with smashed goblets, the costly drinks drained, 
and the patrons lying in the open, dead drunk. It was like a ruined well, 
sunken and broken, its water used up, its pavement cracked, its buckets 
cracked and scattered all around. It seemed like a bowstring, once long and 
taut and fitted out with loops, but now fallen from the bow to the ground 
when cut by a champion’s arrows. Like a filly, it seemed stripped of all her 
trappings and wildly whipped on by a battle-drunk rider, a weak filly, one 
that should still be running free. And it was like the radiance of the sun, 
bringer of light, gone behind a bank of clouds when the driving rains come, 
and the blue-black clouds obscure it. 

[19-24] Mounted in the chariot, Bharata, Dasaratha’s majestic son, then 
spoke these words to his charioteer, who was driving the excellent chariot 
onward: “Why is it that the deep, pervasive sounds of singing and musical 
instruments are not coming from Ayodhya now, as they always used to? The 
heady fragrance of wine, the pervading fragrance of garlands, and the 
fragrance of aloewood incense are no longer carried on the breeze. And the 
rumble of fine carriages, the rich sound of horses, the trumpeting of rutting 
elephants, and the deafening sound of chariots are no longer to be heard in 
the city, now that Rama is in exile. No people are to be seen thronging 
together on Ayodhya’s thoroughfares, neither the youngsters in their finery 
nor the adults with their stately step.” Saying many such things, he entered 
his father’s residence which, now bereft of the lord of men, resembled a 
cave abandoned by its lion. 


Sarga 107 
[1-3] Then, after settling his mothers in Ayodhya, the grief-stricken 
Bharata, firm in his vows, addressed his gurus: “I have come to ask leave of 
you all for I am going to Nandigrama. There I shall endure all this sorrow 
of being without Raghava. With the king gone to heaven and my guru 


Rama in the forest, I shall wait until he assumes the kingship, for he is our 
illustrious king.” 

[4-10] When they heard great Bharata’s splendid words, Vasistha the 
purohita and all the counselors replied: “These are seemly and praiseworthy 
words you have spoken out of love for your brother, Bharata, and they befit 
you. Keeping to the noble way, always zealous on your kinsmen’s behalf, 
and steadfast in your brotherly love—whose approval could you fail to 
win?” On hearing the kind words of the counselors, all that he could hope 
for, he said to the charioteer, “Harness my chariot.” The face of the majestic 
prince beamed with delight as he did obeisance to all his mothers and 
boarded the chariot with Satrughna. Once Bharata and Satrughna had 
boarded the chariot, they sped off in great joy, together with their 
counselors and the purohita. Before them went all their gurus, the twice- 
born brahmans led by Vasistha, heading east toward Nandigrama. 

[11-15] And altogether unbidden, the army, with its crush of elephants, 
horses, and chariots, also set off as Bharata left, as did all the inhabitants of 
the city. Righteous Bharata, who cherished his brother, sped in his chariot 
toward Nandigrama, still bearing the slippers upon his head. Soon Bharata 
entered Nandigrama, and, hurriedly alighting from the chariot, he addressed 
his gurus: “My brother himself gave me the kingship as a trust—it 1s these 
gold-adorned slippers that will guarantee its welfare and security—and I 
shall guard this trust until Raghava’s return. Oh that I might soon see the 
feet of Rama Raghava placed within these slippers as I tie them on once 
again with my own hands. 

[16-22] “Once I am reunited with Raghava, I shall lay my burden down, 
making over the kingship to my guru and resuming toward him the conduct 
due a guru. Only when I have restored this trust to Raghava, these splendid 
slippers, this kingship, and Ayodhya, will I be cleansed of sin. Once 
Kakutstha is consecrated and the people are excited and happy once again, 
the joy and glory I shall gain will be worth four times the kingship.” 
Lamenting in this fashion, the desolate Bharata commenced his rule in 
Nandigrama in sorrow together with his counselors. Wearing barkcloth and 
matted hair, the garb of a sage, Lord Bharata dwelt in Nandigrama with his 
army, longing for Rama’s return, cherishing his brother, doing his brother’s 
bidding, and intent on carrying out the promise. Having consecrated the 


slippers, Bharata then remained in Nandigrama, informing those slippers of 
his every command. 


Sarga 108 

[1-7] Some time after Bharata’s departure, as Rama lived on in the grove of 
asceticism, he began to observe with a growing dismay an anxiety among 
the ascetics. It was those ascetics who had earlier taken refuge with Rama 
and were pleased with the ashram there on Citraktita, whom he now 
observed to be so anxious. They turned their gaze toward Rama 
suspiciously, their brows knit in a frown, and they whispered softly to one 
another and held conversation among themselves. Noticing their 
uneasiness, Rama began to suspect that he himself might be at fault. 
Cupping his hands in reverence, he addressed the seer who was chief of 
their community, saying: “Blessed one, I trust you have not found my 
conduct changed from before? Is that why this change has come over the 
ascetics? Have the seers found my younger brother Laksmana doing 
something unbefitting him, out of negligence? And I trust that Sita has not 
failed to maintain properly the conduct becoming a woman, neglecting, in 
overscrupulous obedience to me, her obedience to you?” 

[8—10] The seer, a man advanced both in years and in asceticism, was 
trembling slightly as he replied to Rama, who was so compassionate to all 
creatures, asking: “How could Vaidehi ever err, my son, especially against 
ascetics, when she is so good-natured and always earnest for what is good? 
It is in fact on your account that the ascetics are in this state—because of 
the raksasas. That is why they are disquieted and hold conversation among 
themselves. 

[11-15] “Not far off lives one of Ravana’s younger brothers—Khara is 
his name. He is the one who uprooted all the ascetics dwelling in 
Janasthana. He is a man-eater, audacious and impudent, vicious, haughty, 
and evil, and he cannot abide you, my son. From the moment you came to 
live in this ashram, my son, the rdksasas have been molesting the ascetics. 
They manifest themselves in every kind of deformation, loathsome, savage, 
and terrifying forms, a horror to behold. Enemies of all that is noble, they 
defile some ascetics with unspeakable impurities and strike terror into 
others by suddenly appearing before them. 


[16-22] “Stealthily these ignorant creatures prowl the ashram sites, one 
after another, and take a mad delight in harassing the ascetics. They scatter 
the ladles and the other sacrificial implements, douse the fires with water, 
and break the vessels when the oblations are being performed. Since these 
wicked creatures have infested the ashrams, the seers are eager to abandon 
them and have been urging me to go to some other region. So before these 
foul creatures unleash physical violence on the ascetics, we must leave this 
ashram, Rama. Not far from here there is a wonderful forest with many 
roots and fruits. It was our old ashram, and I will return there with my host. 
And you too, my son, should come away from here with us, if you are of a 
mind to do so, before Khara does some harm to you as well. For you to 
remain here with your wife is perilous, Raghava, ever alert and powerful 
though you may be. It will soon bring you sorrow.” 

[23—26] Since the ascetic had spoken in this fashion, his uneasiness was 
such that nothing Prince Rama offered in reply could hold him back. The 
chief of the community blessed Raghava, comforted him, and asked his 
leave, and then, abandoning the ashram with his community, he departed. 
as4R ama escorted the host of seers, following them out to some distance, and 
did obeisance to the seer, their chief. They were well pleased, and, as they 
gave him leave, they repeated their advice. Then he returned to his own 
holy abode to take up his residence. Lordly Raghava did not leave the 
ashram even for an instant now that the seers had quit it, since those very 
ascetics, whose virtues had been acquired from their conduct as seers, had 
always attended upon Raghava. 


Sarga 109 

[1-5] After the ascetics had departed, Raghava fell to thinking, and he 
found that, for many reasons, their dwelling place no longer pleased him, 
reflecting: “It was here that I met Bharata, my mothers, and the townsfolk, 
and my memory lingers on them still in their constant grief. Then, too, the 
camps great Bharata pitched and the dung of his elephants and horses have 
left things in a terrible state. We shall therefore go somewhere else.” And so 
Raghava set forth with Vaideht and Laksmana. Making his way to the 
ashram of Atri, glorious Rama prostrated himself before the holy seer, and 
Atri received him like a son. 


[6—-9ab] He personally provided Rama with hospitality, lavish and 
honorable, and he cheered Saumitri and illustrious Sita. His aged and 
honored wife arrived, and the seer, wise in the ways of righteousness and 
earnest for the welfare of all creatures, invited her and cheered her too. She 
was Anasuya, an illustrious ascetic who followed the way of righteousness, 
and that foremost of seers said to her, “Please receive Vaidehi.” And he told 
Rama about his ascetic wife, who followed the way of righteousness: 

[9cd—16] “Once, when the world was utterly ravaged by drought for ten 
years, it was Anasiiya who created roots and fruits and caused the Jahnavi 
to flow, for the ascetic power she has acquired is awesome, and her ascetic 
vows adorn her. She has practiced intense asceticism for ten thousand years, 
my son, and by her vows all obstacles have been removed. It was she who, 
to advance the cause of the gods, straightaway reduced ten nights to one. 
Here she is, blameless prince. She is as your mother. Let Vaidehi approach 
her; she is an illustrious woman worthy of every creature’s adoration, an 
aged and ever amiable woman.” When the seer had finished speaking in this 
fashion, Raghava replied, “So be it.” He then addressed Sita, who was wise 
in the ways of righteousness: “Princess, you have heard what the sage has 
said. Please approach the ascetic woman at once, for your own good. Her 
name is Anastiya, and her deeds have won her renown throughout the 
world. Approach the ascetic at once—she is most approachable.” 

[17-20] Upon hearing Raghava’s words, Sita, princess of Mithila, who 
always had his welfare at heart, then approached Atri’s wife, a woman wise 
in the ways of righteousness. Anasitiya was very old, her skin was wrinkled 
and loose, her hair white with age, and her body trembled constantly, like a 
plantain tree in the wind. Sita carefully did obeisance to the illustrious and 
faithful woman and announced her name to her. After doing obeisance to 
the faultless ascetic, Vaidehi cupped her hands in reverence and delightedly 
asked after her health. 

[21-24] She too felt delight when she saw how illustrious Sita was 
following the way of righteousness, and she cheered her, exclaiming: “How 
fortunate you have such high regard for righteousness! How fortunate that 
you should abandon your kinfolk, your pride and wealth, proud Sita, to 
follow Rama when he was banished to the forest. ""A woman who holds her 
husband dear—whether he is in the city or the forest, whether he is good or 
evil—gains worlds that bring great blessings. To a woman of noble nature 


her husband is the supreme deity, however bad his character, however 
licentious or indigent he might be. 

[25-28] “I can see no kinsman to surpass him, Vaidehi, far as I might 
look. Like ascetic power, which once acquired is never lost, a husband is 
ready and able, come what may. But wicked women have no such 
understanding of virtue and vice. Their hearts are the slaves of desire, and 
they lord it over their husbands. Indeed, Maithilt, women like that, who 
give in to the lure of what they should not do, are held up to infamy and fall 
away from righteousness. But virtuous women like you, who can tell good 
from bad in this world, come to reside in heaven just the same as men who 
have gained great merit.” 


Sarga 110 

[1-5] Addressed in this fashion by Anasiya, Vaidehi ungrudgingly paid her 
homage and softly replied: “The instruction the noble lady has given me 
comes as no surprise. I myself am well aware that a husband is a woman’s 
guru. Even if my husband were utterly lacking in good behavior, my noble 
lady, still I would always obey him wholeheartedly. How much more 
readily would I obey a man praised for his virtues, a compassionate, self- 
disciplined, and righteous man, who is constant in his love, who defers to 
his mother and holds his father dear? Great Rama behaves toward all the 
women of the king exactly as he does toward Kausalya. 

[6-9] “And any woman the king glanced at even once mighty Rama 
would treat just like a mother, without the least resentment. For he 
cherished the king and he knows the meaning of righteousness. The 
instructions my mother-in-law imparted to me as I was coming to this 
desolate and frightening forest have remained firmly implanted in my heart. 
And I have retained as well the lessons my own mother taught me long ago, 
when I gave my hand before the marriage fire. But your words, follower of 
righteousness, have reminded me afresh of all this. Truly, no other ascetic 
act 1s required of a woman than obedience to her husband. 

[10—15] “sssSavitri 1s exalted in heaven because she showed obedience to 
her husband. Arundhati too went up to the heavens by virtue of her 
obedience to her husband. And Rohini, the very best of women and a 
goddess up in the heavens, is never seen even for an instant separated from 
the moon, her husband. Outstanding women such as these, firm in their 


vows to their husbands, are exalted in the world of the gods by reason of 
their meritorious deeds.” Anasiiya was delighted at hearing Sita’s words. 
She kissed her on the forehead, and to Sita’s delight she said: “I possess 
great ascetic power, acquired through various austerities. I will now make 
use of it for your enjoyment, Sita of pure vows. Your words are fitting and 
proper, Maithill, and they have pleased me. What is the most suitable thing 
I might do for you? Only tell me.” “You have already done it,” Sita replied 
to the woman of ascetic power. 

[16—20] These words pleased the righteous woman all the more, and she 
responded: “Come now, Sita, I wish to repay the delight you have given me. 
Here are a choice heavenly garland, raiment, jewelry, and a balm, Vaidehi, a 
precious unguent. This that I give you, Sita, will beautify your body, it will 
suit you perfectly, never spoil, and be yours forever. With this heavenly 
balm applied to your body, daughter of Janaka, you will adorn your 
husband to the same degree that Sti adorns the eternal Visnu.” Maithili then 
accepted the raiment, balm, jewelry, and garlands, a gift of love without 
compare. 

[21-25] And after accepting the gifts, illustrious Sita cupped her hands 
in reverence and waited in steadfast attendance upon the ascetic woman. 
Now, as Sita was waiting upon her, the pious Anasitya put a question to her 
about a certain tale she was fond of. She said: “It was at a ceremony of 
choosing a husband, they say, that glorious Raghava won you, Sita. Such, at 
least, is the tale that has reached my ears. I should like to hear that tale in 
full, Maithill, exactly as it happened, in its entirety. Will you please tell it to 
me?” Addressed in this fashion, Sita replied to that righteous woman: 
“Please listen,” and told her this tale: 

[26-30] “There is a righteous and mighty king of Mithila named Janaka. 
He honors the code of the kshatriyas and rules his land judiciously. Once 
when, plough in hand, he was tilling the circle of fields, I arose, breaking 
through the earth—so the story goes—and became the daughter of the king. 
King Janaka was busy sowing grain by the fistful when he caught sight of 
me, my body all caked with dirt, and he was amazed. He was childless then, 
and with his own two hands he took me affectionately on his lap, saying, 
‘She shall be my daughter,’ and showering me with affection. From out of 
the sky, so they say, there came a voice—a human voice but unlike any ever 
heard before: ‘It is so, lord of men. By rights she is your daughter.’ 


[31-35] “My father, the righteous lord of Mithila, was delighted. For in 
obtaining me the lord of men felt that he had obtained vast wealth. The 
virtuous king then entrusted me to the care of his favorite queen, the eldest, 
and she raised me affectionately, with a mother’s love. Now, when my 
father observed that I had reached the proper age for marriage, he began to 
worry, and he grew desolate, like a man impoverished by the loss of his 
wealth. For the father of an unmarried girl, though he be the equal of Indra 
on earth, finds himself humiliated by people, by his equals, and even by his 
inferiors. When the king perceived how close he was coming to being 
humiliated, he was launched upon a sea of worry, and like a man without a 
raft he could not make the shore. 

[36-39] “Seeing I was not born of a woman’s womb, the protector of the 
land for all his thinking about it could not discover a fit and proper husband 
for me. But after giving it much thought, he had an idea. The wise king 
decided, ‘I will hold the ceremony of choosing a husband for my daughter.’ 
At that time he had a superb bow and pair of quivers with inexhaustible 
arrows. Great Varuna had graciously bestowed them on him at a great 
sacrifice. Because of its weight, humans could not budge the bow, no matter 
how hard they tried. Even lords of men were unable to bend it even in their 
dreams. 

[40-45] “So after he had extended invitations to the kings and put the 
bow on display, my truthful father made this declaration before the 
convocation of the lords of men, announcing: ‘The man who can raise this 
bow and string it shall have my daughter for his wife. Let no one doubt it!’ 
The kings looked at the stupendous bow, like a mountain in weight, and 
then unable even to lift it, they said farewell and departed. A long time 
passed until one day this splendid Raghava arrived with Visvamitra to 
observe a sacrifice. My father paid special homage to valiant Rama and his 
brother Laksmana, and to righteous Visvamitra, saying, ‘Here are two 
Raghavas,’ the sage told my father: ‘Rama and Laksmana, sons of 
Dasaratha. They are eager to see the bow.’ Upon hearing this, my father had 
the bow brought out. 

[46-52] “In the twinkling of an eye mighty Rama bent it, and all at once 
the mighty prince strung and drew it. And so impetuously did he draw the 
bow that it broke in two right in the middle, and the sound it made as it fell 
was dreadful, like a thunderclap. Thereupon my father, true to his 


agreement, raised up a splendid water vessel, ready to bestow me on Rama. 
But prepared though my father was to bestow me, Raghava would not 
accept me right away, for he did not yet know the will of his father, the 
lordly king of Ayodhya. So my father invited my father-in-law, aged King 
Dasaratha, and afterward bestowed me on the celebrated Rama. And my 
father, of his own accord, bestowed my younger sister, the lovely and 
virtuous Urmila, as wife on Laksmana. And that is how I was bestowed on 
Rama, there at the ceremony of choosing a husband, and, in keeping with 
righteousness, I love my husband, the mightiest of men.” 


Sarga 111 

[1-5] When that knower of righteousness, Anasiiya, had heard this 
extraordinary tale, she embraced Maithilt with both arms and kissed her on 
the forehead with the words: “How wonderfully and sweetly you spoke, so 
that each word, each syllable was clear. And now I have heard the whole 
story of how your ceremony of choosing a husband took place. I am truly 
charmed by your tale, my sweet-voiced child. But now the majestic sun is 
setting, bringing on the gracious night. You can hear the twitter of the birds 
that by day range far and wide in search of food. Now at twilight they are 
going to their roosts to sleep. “And here, carrying their water pots, are the 
sages returning in a group, wet from their ablutions, their barkcloth 
garments soaked with water. 

[6-11] “The seers have performed their agnihotra rites according to 
precept—do you see the smoke, pearly as a dove’s neck, carried by the 
wind? Though their leaves are really sparse, the trees all about, even in the 
distance, seem to have grown dense; the horizons are all lost to view. The 
creatures that wander by night are now beginning to move, and the deer of 
the ascetics’ grove are settling down on the paths that lead to the altars. 
Adorned with stars, night is coming on, Sita. You can see the moon in his 
mantle of light rising in the sky. You may go now and attend on Rama, I 
give you leave. Your sweet storytelling has brought me deep contentment. 
But first, would you please adorn yourself, Maithill, in my presence? Allow 
me to have the pleasure of seeing you, my child, beautified by these 
heavenly ornaments.” 

[12-15] Sita then adorned herself, and looking like the daughter of the 
gods, she bowed her head to her and went off to Rama. The eloquent 


Raghava took great delight in seeing Sita adorned with the ascetic’s gift of 
love. And Sita, princess of Mithila, explained everything to Rama, how the 
ascetic had given her raiment, jewelry, and garlands as a gift of love. Rama 
was delighted, and so was the great chariot-warrior Laksmana, to see the 
honor conferred on Maithili, an honor such as few mortals ever receive. 

[16-20] And so, with the warm reception accorded him by the 
accomplished ascetics, the moon-faced delight of the Raghus happily 
passed the holy night. And when night was over and the forest ascetics had 
bathed and made their fire-offerings, the tigers among men asked leave of 
them. The forest ascetics, who followed the way of righteousness, informed 
them that travel through the forest was impeded by rdaksasas, telling Rama: 
“But there is one path through the forest which the great seers use when 
they go to gather fruit. By this path, Raghava, one can pass safely through 
the otherwise impassable forest.” Then the twice-born brahman ascetics 
cupped their hands in reverence and blessed the journey of the slayer of his 
foes. And then, together with his wife and Laksmana, Raghava plunged into 
the forest, like the plunging sun into a bank of storm clouds. 

The end of the Avodhyakanda. 


a Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 
b Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 
c Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 
d Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 
e Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 
f Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 
g Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 
h Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 
i Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 
j Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 
k Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 
| Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 
m Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 
n Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 
o Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 
p Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 
q Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 
r Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 
s Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 
t Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 
u Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 


v Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 
w Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 
x Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 

y Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 

z Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 
aa Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 
bb Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 
cc Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 
dd Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 
ee Emendation: see PVR 2: 533; 816* added. 
ff Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 
gg Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 
hh Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 
ii Emendation: see PVR 2: 533. 
jj Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 
kk Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 
ll Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 
mm Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 
nn Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 
oo Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 
pp Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 
qq Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 
rr Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 
ss Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 
tt Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 
uu Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 
vv Emendation: See PVR 2: 534. 
ww Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 
xx Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 
yy Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 
zz Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 
aaa Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 
bbb Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 
ccc Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 
ddd Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 
eee Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 
fff Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 
gge Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 
hhh Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 
ili Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 
jjj Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 
kkk Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 
lll Emendation: see PVR 2: 500. 
mmm Emendation: see PVR 2: 500. 
nnn Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 
ooo Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 
ppp Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 
qqq Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 


rrr Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 
sss Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 
ttt Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 
uuu Emendation: see PVR 2: 534. 


Chapter 3 
The Aranyakanda 


Sarga 1 

[1-5] Soon after entering the vast Dandaka forest, Rama, self-disciplined 
and unassailable, spied a circle of ashrams where ascetics dwelt. Kusa grass 
and barkcloth garments were strewn about it, and, flooded with brahmanical 
splendor, it was as luminous and blinding to the eye as the orb of the sun in 
the sky. It was a place of refuge for all creatures; its grounds were always 
kept immaculate, and troupes of apsarases ever paid homage there and 
danced. It was beautified by its spacious fire-sanctuaries, its sacrificial 
implements—the ladles and all—its hide garments and kusa grass, its 
bundles of kindling, pitchers of water, and roots and fruits. Tall forest trees 
encircled it, holy trees that bore sweet fruits. It was a place of worship, of 
offerings and oblations, a holy place echoing with the recitation of the 
vedas. 

[6-8] Wildflowers carpeted it, and there was a lotus pond filled with 
lotuses. Ancient sages were present there, temperate men who ate only roots 
and fruits, wore barkcloth garments and black hides, and shone like fire or 
the sun. Supreme seers, holy men given to rigorous fasting, enhanced its 
beauty. It resembled the abode of Brahma as the recitation of the vedas 
echoed through it, while illustrious brahmans who understood brahman 
enhanced its beauty still further. 

[9-15] Upon seeing the circle of ashrams, powerful, majestic Raghava 
unstrung his great bow and approached. And when the great seers, who 
were endowed with divine knowledge, saw Rama, they joyfully approached 
him and illustrious Vaideht. They were men strict in their vows who 
followed the ways of righteousness; and when they saw him, appearing like 
the rising moon, they received him with benedictions. With astonished 
expressions the forest dwellers beheld Rama’s handsome physique, his 
lovely attire, youthfulness, and splendor. And all the forest dwellers gazed 
at Vaidehi, Laksmana, and Rama with unblinking eyes as if at some 


marvelous creatures. Then the illustrious sages, dedicated to the welfare of 
all creatures, ushered Raghava into their leaf huts as their guest. And those 
illustrious sages, who were like fire, the purifier, and who followed the 
ways of righteousness, honored Rama according to ritual precept and 
fetched him water. 

[16-22] Knowing what was right, they offered the man roots, flowers, 
fruits of the forest, and their own ashram as well. And then, with their hands 
cupped in reverence, they said: “As the guardian of righteousness and the 
glorious refuge of his people, a king is worthy of reverence and esteem. He 
is a guru who wields the rod of punishment. A king is a fourth part of Indra 
himself and the protector of his subjects, Raghava. Therefore, he enjoys the 
choicest luxuries and is honored by the world. We are residents of your 
realm and deserve your protection. Whether in the city or the forest, you are 
our king and the lord of the people. We have renounced violence, your 
majesty, and have conquered our senses and anger. So you must always 
protect us ascetics, for we are as your children.” When they had spoken in 
this fashion, they honored Raghava and Laksmana with fruits, roots, 
wildflowers, and other kinds of food. And still other firelike ascetics, 
perfected beings whose conduct accorded with custom, gratified Lord Rama 
according to custom. 


Sarga 2 

[1-4] Having accepted such hospitality, Rama took leave of all the sages 
around sunrise and then plunged back into the forest. With Laksmana 
following behind, Rama soon beheld the heart of the forest, the haunt of 
wolves and tigers, crowded with herds of various other animals; a tangle of 
trees, vines, and shrubs, with murky pools; the different sorts of birds fallen 
silent, and swarms of crickets chirping. And there, in the heart of the forest 
that teemed with ferocious animals, Kakutstha beheld, towering before him 
like a mountain peak, a roaring, man-eating monster. 

[S—9ab] Sunken-eyed, huge-mouthed, his belly deformed, he was 
massive, loathsome, deformed, gigantic, monstrous, a terror to behold; clad 
in a tiger skin dripping with grease and spattered with blood, as terrifying to 
all creatures as Yama, the ender of all things, with jaws agape. On an iron 
lance he held impaled three lions, four tigers, two wolves, ten chitals, and 
the massive head of an elephant, complete with tusks and smeared with 


gore. And he was roaring deafeningly. The moment he saw Rama, 
Laksmana, and Sita, princess of Mithila, he attacked them in a rage, like 
Yama, the ender of all things, attacking people at their fated hour. 

[9cd—13] He let out a blood-chilling roar that seemed to shake the very 
earth. Then, seizing Vaidehi in his embrace, he strode off, crying: “You 
there, short-lived creatures who wear matted hair and barkcloth garments 
yet share a wife between you, who have entered the Dandaka forest bearing 
bows and arrows and swords! How is it two ascetics are living with a young 
woman? You are evil men impersonating sages and following the path of 
unrighteousness. Who are you two? I am the raksasa Viradha. Armed with 
weapons, I constantly roam this impassable forest, feeding on the flesh of 
seers. This shapely woman shall be my wife. And as for you evil men, I will 
drink your blood on the field of battle.” 

[14-19] Upon hearing wicked Viradha’s insolent and arrogant words, 
Janaka’s daughter Sita was stricken with terror and began to tremble 
violently, like a plantain tree in a high wind. When Raghava saw the 
beautiful Sita locked in Viradha’s embrace, his mouth went dry, and he said 
to Laksmana: “Just see, gentle brother! King Janaka’s daughter, an 
illustrious princess raised in perfect comfort and my virtuous wife, is caught 
in Viraddha’s embrace. Laksmana, everything Kaikeyi planned for us, chose 
with her boon, and desired in her heart, has come true all at once. She, my 
middle mother, not content with the kingship and farsighted on her son’s 
behalf, drove me—who wish all creatures well—into the forest. She should 
now at last be pleased. That someone else should touch Vaidehi pains me as 
nothing ever has, not the theft of my kingdom, Saumitri, nor even Father’s 
death.” 

[20-24] But even as Kakutstha, overwhelmed with tears and grief, was 
speaking in this fashion, Laksmana, enraged and hissing like a cornered 
snake, said: “You are the equal of Indra Vasava and the defender of all 
creatures, Kakutstha! And yet you stand there as if defenseless while I am 
here ready to serve you. What good is this complaining? In my rage I will 
kill the rdksasa Viradha this instant with a single arrow, and when the 
breath of life has left him, the earth shall drink in his blood. The rage I felt 
toward Bharata in his lust for kingship I shall vent against Viradha, just like 
Indra, wielder of the vajra, unleashing his bolt upon a mountain. Set in 
motion by the forceful movement of my arm, my great arrow shall crash 


down upon his great chest, ripping the life from his body, and he will go 
crashing down sprawled upon the earth.” 


Sarga 3 

[1-7] Now, once again Viradha spoke, making the forest resound: “Identify 
yourselves to me, as I demanded! Who are you two, and where are you 
going?” When the raksasa, his face ablaze, was questioning him, mighty 
Rama told him of his family, the Iksvakus: “Know that we are two virtuous 
kshatriyas residing in the forest. But we want to know about you. Who are 
you who roam the Dandakas?” Viradha then replied to the truly valorous 
Rama: “Very well, I shall tell you, your majesty. Now learn about me, 
Raghava. I am, they say, the son of Jaya, and my mother is Satahrada. All 
the rdksasas on earth call me Viradha. Through ascetic practices I won the 
favor of Brahma, who granted that no weapon of this world could ever kill 
me, nor even cut or pierce me. Abandon this woman and, without so much 
as a backward glance, hurry and begone the way you came. Then I shall not 
take your life.” 

[8—12] His eyes red with rage, Rama replied to Viradha, the hideous, 
evil-minded raksasa: “Curse you, vile and wretched creature. You are 
surely courting death—and death you shall find now in battle. Do not move. 
You cannot escape me alive.” Rama then strung his bow, quickly affixed 
one well-honed arrow after another, and shot them at the rdksasa. He fired 
seven arrows from his taut-strung bow, swift, gold-feathered arrows that 
flew like Suparna or the wind. Trimmed with peacock feathers, the arrows, 
which were like fire, the purifier, tore through Viradha’s body and fell to the 
ground dripping with blood. 

[13-15] Seizing a lance like Indra’s flagstaff, he let out a tremendous 
roar, looking for all the world like Yama, the ender of all things, with jaws 
agape. The lance resembled a thunderbolt or some blazing object in the sky, 
but with two arrows Rama, foremost of warriors, smashed it to pieces. 
Then, all at once, Saumitri broke the left arm of the terrible rdksasa while 
Rama broke the right one. 

[16—2lab] His arms broken, the raksasa Viradha, massive as a storm 
cloud, fell headlong in agony to the ground, like a mountain shattered by a 
thunderbolt. Then he said to Kakutstha, bull among men: “*Now I realize, 
dear boy, that you must be Rama, the worthy son of Kausalya, and that this 


is illustrious Vaidehi, and this, the illustrious Laksmana. I was cursed to 
take on this monstrous raksasa body. I am really the gandharva Tumbutru, 
and it was Vaisravana who cursed me. But I begged his forgiveness, and the 
glorious god said to me: ‘When Rama, the son of Dasaratha, slays you in 
battle, then you shall recover your true form and go to heaven.’ Such were 
King Vaisravana’s words. Because of my passion for the apsaras Rambha, I 
had grown careless in my attendance on the king, so he grew angry and 
cursed me. 

[21cd—24] “By your grace, I have been freed from this dreadful curse 
and may now return to my true abode. I wish you well, slayer of your foes. 
A league and a half from here, my son, lives righteous Sarabhaiiga, a great 
and powerful seer, radiant as the sun. You should visit him at once; he will 
see to your welfare. But first please consign me to a grave, Rama, then go 
your way in safety. Such is the immemorial custom with respect to dead 
raksasas. Those that are buried in a grave gain worlds that are eternal.” 

[25-27] Having spoken in this fashion to Kakutstha, the mighty Viradha, 
tormented by the arrows, left his body, about to enter heaven. As he was 
cast into a pit, the pointed-eared Viradha let out a monstrous, deafening 
roar, howling at the top of his voice. Once they had killed the raksasa and 
recovered Maithili, the two brothers, bearing their gold-worked bows, 
relaxed at their ease in the great forest like the moon and the sun, maker of 
day, in the heavens. 


Sarga 4 

[1-6] After mighty Rama had killed the awesomely powerful raksasa 
Viradha, he embraced Sita and comforted her. Then, turning to his splendid 
brother Laksmana, he said: “This trackless forest is a dreadful place, and we 
are not forest dwellers. Let us go at once to visit the ascetic Sarabhafiga.” 
And so Raghava set out for Sarabhafiga’s ashram. Nearing the abode of the 
godlike Sarabhafiga, a sage purified by asceticism, Rama beheld a great 
marvel. He beheld Indra himself, lord of the wise gods. His body was as 
luminous as fire or the sun; he stood without touching the ground. His 
jewelry was sparkling bright, no speck of dust sullied the garment he wore, 
and many great beings resembling the god himself were worshiping him. 

[7-15] And near the god he saw a chariot hovering in midair, looking 
like the morning sun, with bay steeds harnessed to it. There was an 


immaculate parasol, like a bank of silvery clouds or the disk of the moon, 
adorned with many-colored garlands; and a pair of splendid, priceless yak- 
tail fly whisks with golden handles held by two fair women who waved 
them over the god’s head. Gandharvas, immortal gods, perfected beings, 
and many supreme seers sang glorious hymns in praise of him as he 
hovered in midair. At the sight of Indra of the hundred sacrifices, Rama said 
to Laksmana: “Once, long ago, we heard that Sakra, the god invoked far 
and wide, possesses horses, divine horses that hover in midair. These are 
surely those very bay steeds. And the hundreds upon hundreds of young 
men who stand sword in hand around his chariot, wearing earrings and 
necklaces that flash like fire upon their chests—all of them, Saumitri, tiger 
among men, would appear to be twenty-five years old. And that, they say, is 
invariably the age of gods, the very age, it would seem, of these handsome 
tigers among men. Stay here a moment with Vaidehi, Laksmana, while I 
find out for certain who this splendid being beside the chariot might be.” 

[16-19] And having instructed Saumitri in this way with the words, 
“Stay here,” Kakutstha set out for Sarabhafiga’s ashram. Seeing Rama 
approaching, Indra, the lord of Saci, took leave of Sarabhajiga, then turned 
to the wise gods and said: “That man approaching is Rama. Before he can 
address me, conduct me to my residence; hereafter he may see me. Once he 
has accomplished his task and gained victory, I will see him without delay. 
For he has a great deed to do, one impossible for anyone else to 
accomplish.” 

[20-23] Having said this, Indra, wielder of the vajra, took his leave of 
the ascetic. After showing him high honor, the tamer of his foes went to 
heaven on his chariot harnessed with bay steeds. When thousand-eyed Indra 
had departed, Raghava proceeded with his companions and came upon 
Sarabhajiga as he was performing the agnihotra rites. Rama clasped his 
feet, and Sita and Laksmana did the same. The sage invited them in and 
procured them seats, and with his permission they sat down. Raghava then 
asked about Sakra’s visit, and Sarabhafiga explained everything to him: 

[24-28] “Brahma, the granter of boons, wishes to conduct me to the 
Brahmaloka. By severe ascetic practices have I won it, Rama, a place 
impossible for impure men to reach. But I knew you were living nearby, 
tiger among men, and I would not go to the Brahmaloka without first 
having seen you here as my honored guest. Now that we have met, I will go 


to the highest heaven, where the gods reside. Blessed and imperishable are 
the worlds I have won, the worlds of Brahma and of heaven’s vault. Tiger 
among men, please accept the worlds that are now mine.” So the seer 
Sarabhajiga spoke, and Raghava, tiger among men and master of all sdstras, 
made this reply: “I hope to win all these worlds for myself, great sage. 
What I need now, however, is for you to advise me of some place to dwell 
in these woods.” 

[29-31] Addressed in this fashion by Raghava, Sakra’s equal in power, 
wise Sarabhaiiga addressed him once more: “Make your way to the sacred 
region where the ascetic Sutiksna lives. He will arrange a dwelling place for 
you in a lovely part of the forest. Tiger among men, the path is there. But 
stay one moment, my son, and watch as I abandon my body, as a snake 
abandons its worn-out skin.” 

[32-36] Then, having stoked the fire and made the oblation of clarified 
butter, mighty Sarabhaiiga, expert in vedic mantras, entered the fire, eater 
of oblations. The fire consumed the hair on the great sage’s body, the hair 
on his head, his worn-out skin, his bones, and whatever flesh and blood 
remained to him. And Sarabhaiiga became a youth once more, brilliant as 
fire, the purifier, and he arose radiant from the altar of fire. Passing beyond 
the worlds of those who maintain the sacred fires, beyond those of the great 
seers and of the gods, he ascended to the Brahmaloka. *The bull among the 
twice-born, a man of holy deeds, beheld Grandfather Brahma with his 
retinue in his abode, and when the Grandfather saw the twice-born brahman 
he rejoiced and said, “I bid you welcome.” 


Sarga 5 
[1-5] When Sarabhajiga had gone to heaven, hosts of sages assembled and 
approached Rama Kakutstha of immense blazing energy. There were 
vaikhanasas and vdalakhilyas, sampraksdlas and maricipas. There were 
many ascetics of the sort that pound their food with stones or subsist on 
leaves. Some were sages who use their teeth as mortars, or keep themselves 
submerged; who subsist on water, or eat nothing but air. There were those 
who make their abode in the open, who always sleep upon the ground, or 
dwell only in the heights. There were self-mastering men who clothe 
themselves in wet garments or ceaselessly intone their prayers; who are 
ever engaged in ascetic practices or subject themselves to the five ascetic 


fires. All of them were possessed of brahmanical majesty and intently 
concentrated in yoga, all the ascetics who came to see Rama in the ashram 
of Sarabhaiiga. 

[6-10] When the host of righteous seers had come before him, they 
spoke earnestly to Rama, champion of righteousness and one most wise in 
the ways of righteousness. They said: “*You are lord and master of the 
House of the Iksvakus and of this earth, great chariot-warrior, like Indra the 
munificent among the gods. You are famed throughout the three worlds for 
your greatness and valor. Your filial devotion is profound, no less your 
truthfulness and righteousness. We have come before you, great prince, who 
know and cherish the ways of righteousness, and we must speak out 
because we are in need. Please forgive us for this, lord. It would be an act of 
great unrighteousness, dear Rama, for a lord of the earth to take a sixth part 
in taxes without providing protection as though to his sons. 

[11-14] “But he who strives constantly and energetically to protect all 
who live in his realm as though they were his very own life, or sons even 
dearer to him than life, secures long-lasting fame, Rama, for many years to 
come. He reaches the abode of Brahma and is exalted even there. A king 
who protects his subjects as he rightly should acquires a fourth part of the 
supreme righteousness amassed by a sage who lives on nothing but roots 
and fruits. Here a great throng of forest hermits has gathered, brahmans 
most of them. They are being horribly slaughtered by raksasas, undefended, 
Rama, though you are present to defend them. 

[15—18] “Come and see the corpses of the many purified sages slain in 
every imaginable way by dreaded rdksasas in the forest. The sages who 
dwell by the Pampa River and along the Mandakini and those living on 
Mount Citrakiita are being butchered. We can tolerate no longer these 
terrible outrages that ferocious rdksasas are committing against ascetics in 
the forest. So we have taken refuge with you, our one sure place of refuge. 
Please save us, Rama, lest we be slaughtered by the night-roaming 
raksasas.” 

[19-21] After hearing out the distraught ascetics, the righteous prince 
Kakutstha said to them all: “You have no need to plead with me; I stand at 
the bidding of all those in distress. It must have been to accomplish your 
purpose that chance has brought me here. My sojourn in the forest shall 
bear great fruit. I am ready to slay in battle the raksasas, the enemies of 


ascetics.” When the mighty and noble prince, firmly keeping to the ways of 
righteousness, had bestowed this boon upon the ascetics, he set out with 
them and Laksmana to visit Sutiksna. 


Sarga 6 

[1-5] Then Rama, scorcher of his enemies, set out for Sutiksna’s ashram 
with his brother, Sita, and those twice-born men. He traveled a long way, 
crossing deep rivers, until he saw a huge mountain towering before him like 
a thundercloud. The two Raghavas, foremost of the Iksvakus, then made 
their way with Sita into a grove densely wooded with different kinds of 
trees. And on his way he spied, deep in the gloomy forest with its many 
fruit-bearing and flowering trees, an ashram garlanded with barkcloth 
garments. There sat the ascetic Sutiksna, a man grown old in asceticism, his 
hair matted with dirt and mud. Rama addressed him according to precept: 

[6-11] “Blessed one, I am Rama, and I have come to see you. Will you 
address me, great seer, you who are wise in the ways of righteousness and 
strive for truth?” The sage then turned his gaze upon heroic Rama, foremost 
of those who uphold righteousness, and drawing him into his arms he said: 
“You are most welcome here, heroic Rama, foremost of those who uphold 
righteousness. With your arrival this ashram seems to have found its 
rightful protector at last. I have been waiting for you, mighty and glorious 
prince, and that is why I have not yet ascended hence to the world of the 
gods, leaving my body behind on the earth. I heard, when you reached 
Citrakita, that you had been deposed from the kingship. The king of gods, 
Indra of the hundred sacrifices, has come here, Kakutstha, and he told me 
that I have won all worlds by my holy deeds. Come then, with your wife 
and Laksmana, and by my grace enjoy yourself in the worlds won by my 
asceticism, worlds where gods and seers reside.” 

[12—14] Then, like Indra Vasava addressing Brahma, the self-controlled 
Rama replied to Sutiksna, a great and brilliant seer awesome in asceticism 
and truthful in speech, with these words: “I hope to win those worlds for 
myself, great sage. What I need now, however, is for you to advise me of 
some place to dwell in these woods. For you are knowledgeable in all 
matters and dedicated to the welfare of all creatures—that is what the great 
Sarabhajiga Gautama said of you.” 


[15—20] Addressed in this fashion by Rama, the great and world- 
renowned seer, filled with deep joy, made this gentle reply: “This very 
ashram, Rama, has every possible virtue; you may pass your time here 
pleasantly. Seers in great numbers frequent the place, and roots and fruits 
are always plentiful. Herds of animals come and go at this ashram, glorious 
prince; how charming they are wandering about without the least fear.” 
When he had heard the great seer’s words, Laksmana’s eldest brother drew 
forth his bow and arrow and firmly replied: “Most illustrious sage, I might 
chance to slay the herds of animals congregating here with one of my sharp- 
edged arrows that flash like lightning bolts. You would then be implicated 
in it, and what worse misfortune could there be than that? No, I do not think 
it would be good for me to stay for very long in this ashram.” 

[21—22] When Rama had spoken in this fashion to the granter of boons, 
he went to perform the sandhya rites. After the evening sandhya rites were 
over, he arranged to spend the night there. When twilight was past and he 
saw night coming on, the great Sutiksna himself prepared pure food, such 
as 1s proper fare for ascetics, and offered it to the two bulls among men. 


Sarga 7 

[1-4] Honored by Sutiksna, Rama, together with Saumitri, spent the night 
there, waking at dawn. Arising at the proper time, Raghava bathed with Sita 
in ice-cold water fragrant with the scent of lotuses. Next, at the appropriate 
moment and according to precept, Vaidehi, Rama, and Laksmana worshiped 
the fire and the gods in the forest, the refuge of ascetics. Thus purified and 
seeing that the sun, maker of day, was rising, they approached Sutiksna and 
gently said to him: 

[S—9] “We have passed the night comfortably, holy one, and you have 
shown us honor, honorable sage. We now beg leave of you. We wish to set 
forth, as the sages are urging us to make haste. We are hastening to visit all 
the ashrams belonging to the holy seers who live in the Dandaka forest. 
Before the sun shines too brightly, becoming too hot to endure—like a 
lowborn man, who has acquired wealth unrighteously—we wish to take our 
leave of you. We do so together with these great sages, who are constant in 
righteousness, tempered by asceticism, and like smoldering, purifying 
fires.” Then, having said, “We wish to go,” Raghava, together with Saumitri 
and Sita, paid homage to the sage, touching his feet. 


[10-16] As the two men touched his feet, the great sage raised them up, 
warmly embraced them, and said to them with affection: “May you and 
Saumitri go your way in safety, Rama, along with Sita here, who follows 
you like a shadow. Hero, you must see the lovely ashrams of these sages 
living in the Dandaka forest, men purified by their ascetic practices. You 
will see forests all in blossom, abounding in fruits and roots, with herds of 
tame animals and flocks of tame birds; ponds and lakes with clumps of 
blooming lotuses and sparkling clear water, teeming with waterfowl; 
mountain cascades that delight the eye; and delightful stretches of 
wilderness echoing with the cries of peacocks. Go then, my child, and you 
too, Saumitri, and may you return once more to my ashram after your visit.” 

[17-19] Addressed in this fashion, Rama replied with the words, “So be 
it,” and, after reverently circling the sage, he and Saumitri prepared to set 
forth. Large-eyed Sita then handed the brothers their splendid pairs of 
quivers, their bows, and gleaming swords. Strapping on the splendid 
quivers and taking up their loud-twanging bows, Rama and Laksmana left 
the ashram to begin their journey. 


Sarga 8 

[1-5] As her husband, the delight of the Raghus, was setting forth with 
Sutiksna’s leave, Vaidehi addressed him in an affectionate tone of voice: 
“Acquiring great righteousness requires the greatest care, and only he who 
avoids deliberate misdeeds can gain it in this world. And as for deliberate 
misdeeds, there are just three. Telling lies is very bad, but the other two, 
sexual intercourse with another man’s wife and unprovoked violence, are 
even worse. You have never been, nor will you ever be, guilty of telling 
lies, Raghava. And how could you possibly lust after the wife of another 
man, an act that destroys righteousness? Both of these misdeeds can be 
avoided by those who have mastered their senses, and I know you control 
your senses, my handsome husband. 

[6-10] “But the third one, violence—the taking of life recklessly and 
without provocation—to this you may be prone. For you have promised to 
slay the rdksasas in combat, my heroic husband, in order to protect the 
seers who live in the Dandaka forest. And to this end you have set forth to 
the forest known as Dandaka, in company with your brother, bearing bows 
and arrows. As I watch you setting out, my mind grows filled with anxiety, 


though thinking about your deeds usually brings me the greatest happiness. 
For I disapprove, my heroic husband, of our going to the Dandakas. I shall 
explain the reason why; so please listen to what I have to say. 

[11—15] “You and your brother are going to the forest, bow and arrow in 
hand, and I fear that when you see any of the forest dwellers, you might 
loose your arrows. For in this world a bow to a kshatriya is like kindling to 
a fire: if it comes too close, his blazing energy flares up wildly. Once upon a 
time, my great-armed husband, there was a truthful and pure ascetic who 
lived far off in a holy forest where animals and birds delighted to come. In 
order to obstruct his ascetic practices Indra, the lord of Sact, came to his 
ashram in the guise of a soldier, sword in hand. And there in that ascetic’s 
ashram he deposited the splendid sword, given by way of a pledge to him 
who practiced holy asceticism. 

[16-21] “But after receiving the weapon, the sage grew obsessed with 
keeping that pledge, and even wandered in the forest guarding the trust that 
had been committed to him. Thus, even when he went out to gather fruits 
and roots, he would not go without the sword, so obsessed was he with 
keeping that pledge. And from his constantly bearing the weapon, the 
ascetic’s heart by degrees turned violent, and he forgot his ascetic vows. 
The sage then took delight in wanton violence, became reckless, and was 
drawn over to unrighteousness. And so, simply because he lived with the 
weapon, he went to hell. It is only out of love and respect that I am 
reminding—not instructing—you that on no account should you take up 
your bow and, unprovoked, turn your thoughts to killing the raksasas of the 
Dandakas. My mighty husband, I disapprove of your killing creatures that 
have done you no wrong. 

[22—25] “Mighty kshatriyas, finding themselves in the forests inhabited 
by men who practice self-restraint, need bows only for protecting those in 
distress. How incongruous they are, weapons and the forest, the kshatriya 
class and the practice of asceticism—tt is all so at odds. We must respect 
the customs of the place. Wicked thoughts, my noble husband, arise from 
handling weapons. Once you are back in Ayodhya, you may follow the 
kshatriya code. But my joy would be complete, like that of my mother-in- 
law and father-in-law, if you would renounce the kingship altogether and 
become a contented sage. 


[26—29] “From righteousness comes material wealth, from righteousness 
comes happiness. Through righteousness one gains everything. The very 
essence of this world is righteousness. But righteousness belongs only to 
the vigilant, those who relentlessly control themselves by various acts of 
self-restraint. True happiness is not difficult to obtain. Remaining ever pure 
of heart, gentle husband, you must follow the ways of righteousness 
appropriate to an ascetics’ grove. But then, you already know all this just as 
it is, and all that pertains to it throughout the three worlds. It is only a 
woman’s impertinence that has made me speak this way, for who would 
presume to tell you what righteousness is? But still, please give it careful 
thought, together with your younger brother, and do without delay whatever 
you think best.” 


Sarga 9 

[1-5] After Rama had listened to the words that Vaidehi, princess of 
Mithila, had spoken in her devotion to her husband, he then replied with 
firm adherence to righteousness: “This is sound advice, my lady. What you 
have said in your affection is worthy of you and testifies to your high birth, 
righteous daughter of Janaka. And yet, I may repeat the words you yourself 
uttered, my lady: ‘Kshatriyas only bear bows so that no voice may be raised 
in distress.” And the sages who are undertaking strict vows in the Dandaka 
forest are indeed distressed, Sita. Although they are themselves the refuge 
of others, they have taken refuge with me. Engaged in the practice of 
righteousness, they have been dwelling in the forest, living on fruits and 
roots, but now they are terrified of the savage rdksasas and can find no 
peace. 

[6-9] “Time and again, while they are engaged in various penances in 
the forest, the ferocious, man-eating rdksasas come and devour them. So 
many were being devoured that the best of twice-born sages living in the 
Dandaka forest came to me and said, ‘Please save us!’ And when I heard 
those words that fell from their lips, I did obeisance at their feet and said 
this: ‘Please forgive me, sirs! How boundless is my shame that when I 
should be seeking out seers like you, you have had instead to seek me out.’ 
And in the presence of those twice-born men I spoke up and said, ‘What is 
it I must do?’ 


[10-15] “All the assembled host then spoke these words in a single 
voice: ‘There are many rdksasas in the Dandaka forest, who can take on 
any form at will. They are brutally oppressing us, Rama, and you must save 
us. When the time for the oblation has come, faultless prince, and at the 
times for the lunar rites, raksasas who feed on raw flesh, and are all but 
immune from attack themselves, attack us. Assaulted by the raksasas, the 
ascetics in their distress have sought some refuge, and you, sir, are our one 
sure refuge. Granted, we could kill the night-roaming rdaksasas through our 
ascetic powers, but we are reluctant to squander what took so long to amass. 
Ascetic practice is ever beset by obstacles, Raghava, and is so difficult to 
perform. That is why, although we are being devoured by rdksasas, we do 
not unleash our curse. You and your brother, therefore, must protect us from 
oppression by the raksasas who live in the Dandaka forest, for you are our 
sole defender in the forest.’ 

[16—21] “And when I heard their words, daughter of Janaka, I promised 
to do my utmost to safeguard the seers of the Dandaka forest. And having 
once promised them something, I could never, so long as I live, violate my 
pledge to the sages. For truthfulness has always been the one thing I 
cherish. Indeed, I would sooner give up my life, Sita, or even you and 
Laksmana, than break a promise I have made, especially to brahmans. 
Therefore, I am bound to safeguard the seers. I would do this even unasked, 
Vaidehi; how much more so now that I have given my word? Still, I am 
deeply gratified by what you have said, Sita, in your affection for me and 
your goodness of heart. No woman offers guidance to a man she does not 
love. It was worthy of you, my lovely wife, and becoming to one of your 
House.” So the great Rama spoke to his beloved Sita, daughter of the king 
of Mithila. Then, armed with his bow and in the company of Laksmana, he 
traveled on to the lovely forests of austerities. 


Sarga 10 
[1-6] Rama went in front, fair-waisted Sita in the middle, and behind 
followed Laksmana, bow in hand. As they traveled on with Sita, they saw 
varied mountain landscapes, forests, lovely rivers with sarasa cranes and 
cakravakas upon the sandbanks, ponds covered with lotuses and thronged 
with waterbirds, chitals massed in herds, rutting horned buffaloes and boars, 
and elephants butting at trees. They had traveled a long distance and the sun 


was hanging low when all at once they spied a lovely pond one league 
across. It was blanketed with white and blue lotuses, adorned with herds of 
elephants, and filled with waterfowl, sdrasa cranes, hamsas, and kadambas. 

[7-10] From within the lovely clear pool could be heard the sound of 
singing and musical instruments, but there was no one to be seen. Their 
curiosity aroused, Rama and the great chariot-warrior Laksmana proceeded 
to question a sage named Dharmabhrt: “We are all filled with curiosity, 
great sage, upon hearing this wonderful sound. What can it be? Please tell 
us.” ‘Addressed by Raghava in this fashion, the righteous sage proceeded to 
recount in full the story of the lake. 

[11-15] “Rama, this pond, filled with water in every season, is called 
Paficapsaras, ‘Pond of the Five Apsarases.’ The sage Mandakarni fashioned 
it by means of his ascetic power. Now, the great sage Mandakarni practiced 
intense asceticism for tens of thousands of years, subsisting on air and ever 
immersed in the water. Because of this, all the gods grew anxious, and, led 
by Agni, god of fire, they all assembled and said, ‘This sage is seeking to 
displace one of us.’ Then all the gods directed the five chief apsarases, 
heavenly women dazzling as lightning, to disrupt his ascetic practices. 
Then, in order to accomplish the purpose of the gods, these apsarases 
brought the sage under the spell of the god of love in spite of his knowing 
right from wrong. 

[16—20] “Those five apsarases became the sage’s wives, and so he built 
a house for them hidden within this pond. And the five apsarases have 
lived there happily ever since, making love to the sage, who regained his 
youth by means of his ascetic power. As they play together one can hear, as 
now, the notes of musical instruments mingling with the tinkle of jewelry 
and the enchanting sound of singing.” “Wonderful!” said glorious Raghava 
and his brother when they heard the account given by the purified sage. 
While the sage was telling his tale, Rama spied a circle of ashrams, with 
kusa grass and barkcloth garments strewn about, and surrounded by various 
trees. 

[21—27] With Vaidehi and Laksmana, Raghava Kakutstha then entered 
the majestic circle of ashrams, where he stayed for a while most 
comfortably, honored by the great seers. ‘And then that expert in great 
weapons visited by turns the ashrams of the ascetics with whom he had 
previously been staying. In one place Raghava lived comfortably for some 


ten months, in others a year, or four months, five, six, or more; here an extra 
month, there a month and a half, three months, or eight. And while he was 
living this agreeable life and enjoying himself in the ashrams of the 
ascetics, ten years went by. After he had circulated in this way, majestic 
Raghava, a knower of righteousness, returned with Sita to the ashram of 
Sutiksna. The sages honored Rama on his return to the ashram, and there, 
too, the tamer of his foes lived for some time. 

[28-35] Now, on one occasion, while Kakutstha was staying in the 
ashram and waiting in attendance on the great sage Sutiksna, he politely 
addressed him with these words: “Holy one, I have often heard, in the tales 
of storytellers, that Agastya, the best of sages, lives in this wilderness. But I 
do not know the place because this forest is so vast. Where is the holy 
ashram of the great and wise seer? By your grace, sir, I should like to pay a 
visit there with my younger brother and Sita to do obeisance to the sage 
Agastya. For it is a wish most fondly cherished in my heart that I might 
personally serve that foremost of sages.” When the sage Sutiksna had heard 
the words of righteous Rama, son of DaSsaratha, he joyfully replied: “I 
myself, Raghava, was planning to suggest the very same thing. You should 
take Laksmana and Sita and go to pay a visit to Agastya. How fortunate that 
you should bring this up with me yourself. Now I shall tell you, my child, 
where the great sage Agastya lives. 

[36-41] “You need to go four leagues south of this ashram, my son, and 
there you will come upon the great, majestic ashram of Agastya’s brother. It 
is in a level forest clearing, adorned by a grove of pepper plants; a lovely 
place with many flowers and fruits, resounding with the cries of different 
birds. There are all kinds of pleasant lotus ponds there, brimming with clear 
water, abounding in hamsas and kdrandavas, and adorned with cakravakas. 
You should spend one night there, Rama, and early the next morning you 
must travel southward, skirting the dense forest. There, after traveling one 
league more, you will come upon Agastya’s ashram in a delightful forest 
clearing surrounded by many trees. Vaidehi will enjoy herself there, and so 
will you and Laksmana. For it is a lovely forest clearing encircled by many 
trees. If you are of a mind to see the great sage Agastya, why not set your 
mind on going this very day, illustrious prince?” 

[42-45] After listening to the sage, Rama and his brother did obeisance 
to him and set forth with Sita to meet Agastya, seeing on their way forests 


of brilliant color, cloudlike mountains, lakes, and rivers as the road 
presented them to view. As he was proceeding at his ease along the way by 
which Sutiksna had directed him, he spoke these words to Laksmana in 
deep delight: “That is surely the ashram of the brother of the great and holy 
sage Agastya that I see. 

[46-50] “For here along the way one can make out the trees of the grove, 
thousands of them bending under the weight of their fruits and flowers. And 
from the grove, carried on the breeze, comes the smell of ripe peppers with 
its sudden rush of pungency. Here and there you can see piles of logs 
heaped up and, along the way, the sheaves of darbha grass the color of 
cat’s-eye beryl. And there in the heart of the forest—like a mountain peak 
shrouded in black cloud—looms the column of smoke from the purifying 
fires in the ashram. And at the secluded bathing places on the river there are 
twice-born men; they have completed their ritual baths and are making 
flower offerings with blossoms gathered by their own hands. 

[51-55] “Such was Sutitksna’s description, dear brother, exactly as I 
heard him give it. This must surely be the ashram of Agastya’s brother. It 
was his virtuous brother, with the good of all at heart, who stamped out the 
threat of death and made this region a sure place of refuge. Once upon a 
time two brothers lived together here, the cruel Vatapi and Ilvala, great 
asuras and brahman-killers. The pitiless Ilvala, disguised as a brahman and 
speaking chaste Sanskrit, would invite sages to srdddha feasts. His brother 
would then take on the form of a ram, and Ilvala would ritually prepare him 
and feed him to the twice-born men, in accordance with the rite prescribed 
for the sraddha. 

[56-60] “Then, once the sages had eaten, Ilvala would exclaim in a loud 
voice, ‘Vatapi, come forth!’ And, upon hearing his brother’s summons, 
Vatapi, bleating like a ram, would burst forth, splitting open the body of 
every single brahman present. In this way the eaters of raw flesh, who could 
take on any form at will, in league with each other killed thousands of 
brahmans time and again. The gods then sought the aid of the great seer 
Agastya, and he presented himself at the sraddha feast, they say, and ate the 
great asura. Thereupon Ilvala, proclaiming the feast at an end and offering 
the sprinkling of the hands, called to his brother, ‘Come forth!’ 

[61-65] “But as he was calling his brahman-killing brother, the wise 
Agastya, best of sages, smiling, said to him: ‘Whence can a rdksasa whom I 


have digested possibly come forth? This brother of yours, who had taken 
the form of a ram, has gone to the abode of Yama.’ Now, when he heard 
those words that told him his brother was dead, the night-roaming raksasa 
flew into a rage and began to assault the sage. He rushed upon the lord of 
the twice-born brahmans, but the sage, possessed of brilliant, blazing 
energy, incinerated him with his fiery eye, so that he died. The ashram here, 
adored with ponds and forests, must belong to the brother of that sage, 
who in compassion for brahmans did a deed no one else could do.” 

[66-70] While Rama was conversing in this fashion with Saumitri, the 
sun set and the moment of twilight arrived. After performing the evening 
sandhya rituals with his brother according to precept, he entered the ashram 
and did obeisance to the seer. Raghava, suitably received by the sage, spent 
that one night there, making a meal of roots and fruits. When night had 
passed and the sun’s immaculate disk appeared, Raghava asked leave of 
Agastya’s brother: “Blessed one, I bid you farewell. I have passed the night 
comfortably, and I now ask leave of you, for I am going to see your guru, 
your elder brother.” 

[71-75] “You may go,” he replied, and the delight of the Raghus set out 
on the road as directed, all the while observing the forest. Soon Rama came 
to a place where he saw woodland trees by the hundreds: nivaras, panasas, 
talas, timisas, vanjulas, dhavas, ciribilvas, madhikas, bilvas, and tindukas. 
They were all in flower and twined about by flower-topped vines; their bark 
was rubbed raw by elephants’ trunks; they were crowded with monkeys and 
resounded with flocks of wild birds by the hundreds. As mighty Laksmana, 
bringer of glory, followed close behind, lotus-eyed Rama said to him: 

[76-80] “Seeing that the leaves on these trees are so glossy and the birds 
and beasts so gentle, the ashram of the great, purified seer must not be far 
away. He who is known throughout the world as Agastya, ‘Stopper of the 
Mountain,’ by reason of his own deed—that must be his ashram we see, 
garlanded with barkcloth garments, where the forest is wrapped in thick 
smoke and the cries of various birds are echoing; a place where wild beasts 
grow tame and the weary traveler finds rest. It was this virtuous man, with 
the good of all at heart, who stamped out the threat of death and made the 
southern region a sure place of refuge. This must be the ashram of that seer 
whose power made the raksasas look on this southern region with terror 
and give up their hold on it. 


[81-85] “From the moment the virtuous sage set foot in this region, the 
night-roaming rdaksasas ceased hostilities and were pacified. And so this 
southern region, now safe from attack by savage creatures, is known by the 
name of that holy man throughout the three worlds. The greatest of 
mountains, Mount Vindhya, heeds his command and no longer grows, as it 
once did, to obstruct the course of the sun, bringer of light. Yes, this must be 
the ashram of long-lived Agastya, whose deeds are renowned throughout 
the world, a majestic ashram where the beasts that inhabit it are tame. This 
goodly man, revered by the world and always eager that the good should 
prosper, will ensure our welfare now that we have sought him out. 

[86-92] “Here, my dear and lordly brother, I will propitiate the great 
sage Agastya and live out what time remains of my sojourn in the forest. 
Here gods and gandharvas, perfected beings and supreme seers constantly 
attend upon Agastya, a seer given to rigorous fasting. Here no untruthful 
man may live, no one cruel or guileful, malevolent or licentious; that is the 
sort of sage he is. Here dwell gods and yaksas, great serpents and birds, 
they too given to rigorous fasting and eager to uphold the ways of 
righteousness. Here great perfected beings cast off their bodies and in new 
bodies ascend to heaven as supreme seers, in flying palaces gleaming like 
the sun. Here gods will make one a yaksa or offer immortality or various 
kingly offices to good creatures who propitiate them. We have come to his 
ashram. Enter first, Saumitri, and inform the seer that Sita and I have 
arrived.” 


Sarga I] 

[1-4] Upon entering the ashram, Raghava’s younger brother Laksmana 
came upon a disciple of Agastya’s and addressed him with these words: 
“The powerful Rama, eldest son of King DaSaratha, has come with his wife, 
Sita, to see the sage. I am Laksmana, his younger brother, and his faithful 
and devoted helper. You may perhaps have heard of me. By order of our 
father, we have entered the fearsome forest. We all wish to see the holy one. 
Please inform him.” 

[S—8] Upon hearing Laksmana’s words, the ascetic replied with a word 
of assent and entered the fire-sanctuary to inform the sage. Entering, he 
cupped his hands in reverence and promptly told the greatest of sages, 
unassailable in his ascetic power, about the arrival of Rama: “Two sons of 


Dasaratha are here, Rama and Laksmana. They have entered the ashram 
along with Rama’s wife, Sita. The tamers of their foes have come to see 
you, sir, in order to offer obedient service. Please direct me as to what I 
should do next.” 

[9-11] When he learned from his disciple that Rama, Laksmana, and 
illustrious Vaidehi had come, he spoke these words: “How fortunate that 
now at long last Rama has come to see me. I myself had been hoping with 
all my heart that he might come. You must go and welcome Rama, his wife, 
and Laksmana and show them into my presence. Why has he not been 
shown in yet?” 

[12—15] Thus addressed by the great sage, a knower of righteousness, his 
disciple did obeisance to him and, his hands still cupped in reverence, 
replied with the words, “So be it.” Then, in a flurry of agitation, the disciple 
hurried out and said to Laksmana, “Where is Rama? He himself may enter 
and go to see the sage.” Laksmana then went to the ashram along with the 
disciple and directed him to Kakutstha and Sita, the daughter of Janaka. 
‘The disciple, speaking deferentially in consequence of Agastya’s words, 
showed him in as custom demanded and with the cordial welcome he 
deserved. 

[16-20] Entering with Sita and Laksmana, Rama cast his gaze around 
the ashram, at the tame deer that wandered about, at the shrines of Brahma, 
Agni, Visnu, great Indra, Vivasvant, Soma, Bhaga, Kubera, Dhatr and 
Vidhatr, and Vayu. Then the sage sprang up from where he sat encircled by 
his students, and Rama watched him advancing at the head of the sages, 
ablaze with power. The mighty prince then turned to Laksmana, bringer of 
glory, and said: “Here, he is coming out, Laksmana, the holy seer Agastya. I 
can tell by his noble bearing that he must be that treasure-store of 
asceticism.” 

[21-25] Having spoken in this way about Agastya, who was as radiant as 
the sun, the great-armed prince and scorcher of his foes, in deep joy, clasped 
the feet of the sage. Then, after doing obeisance to him, righteous Rama 
stood with his hands cupped in reverence, and with him stood Laksmana 
and Sita Vaidehi. Once the sage had received Kakutstha and honored him 
with a place to sit and water for his feet, he asked after his health and bade 
him be seated. He poured an oblation into the fire, presented the guest- 
offering, and paid homage to his guest; then he gave them food in 


accordance with the ways of forest hermits. When the bull among sages, 
wise in the ways of righteousness, finally seated himself, he addressed 
righteous Rama, who sat with his hands cupped in reverence, and said: 
[26-29] “To be sure, Kakutstha, an ascetic who mistreats a guest is 
destined to feed on his own flesh in the other world like a man who bears 
false witness. And you who are now my dear guest are king of all the world, 
a great chariot-warrior, a man held in reverence and esteem, who keeps to 
the ways of righteousness.” And when he had spoken in this fashion, he 
paid reverence to Raghava with fruits and roots, flowers and other such 
things, to his heart’s content, and then addressed him further with these 
words: “Here is a great and heavenly bow, tiger among men, inlaid with 
gold and diamonds. It was fashioned by Visvakarman and belongs to Visnu. 
[30-34] “And this supreme arrow that gleams like the sun and never 
misses its mark was given by Brahma to great Indra, who gave it to me 
along with this pair of quivers that never run out of arrows. They are filled 
with razor-sharp arrows glowing like purifying fires. And here is a sword 
inlaid with gold, with a scabbard of pure gold. It was with this bow, Rama, 
that long ago Visnu slew the great asuras in battle and recovered the radiant 
royal splendor of the gods, the denizens of heaven. Bestower of honor, for 
the sake of victory please accept this bow, this pair of quivers, this arrow, 
and this sword, just as Indra, wielder of the vajra, once received that vajra.” 
Then, after having spoken in this fashion, the mighty and blessed Agastya 
presented all of that splendid weaponry to Rama. Then he spoke once more. 


Sarga 12 

[1-5] “My blessings upon on you, Rama and Laksmana. I am pleased and 
gratified that you have come with Sita to do obeisance to me. You must be 
fatigued by your wearying journey, terribly wearied. It is evident that 
Maithill, daughter of Janaka, is most disconsolate. For she is very delicate, 
and never before has sorrow heaped its scorn upon her. But driven by 
affection for her husband, she has come to the forest, where difficulties 
abound. You must do all you can to ensure Sita’s comfort here, Rama, since 
in following you into the forest she has done a most difficult thing. For 
from the hour of their creation, delight of the Raghus, such has been the 
nature of women: to love their man when things go smoothly, and when 
things get hard, to leave him. 


[6-11] “Indeed, women are as unpredictable as lightning, as sharp as 
swords, and as quick to fly away as Garuda or the wind. But this wife of 
yours is free from all these faults. She is as worthy of praise and esteem as 
is the lady Arundhati. You will be an ornament to this region, Rama, tamer 
of your foes, should you make your dwelling here with Saumitri and Sita.” 
Addressed in this way by the sage, Raghava, his hands cupped in reverence, 
replied deferentially to the seer, who blazed with the brilliance of fire: 
“How fortunate I am, how favored, that I, my brother, and my wife have 
virtues enough to please the great sage and granter of boons. But can you 
please direct me to some well-watered and abundantly forested region 
where I can establish my own ashram and live in comfort and happiness?” 

[12—15] Then, having listened to what Rama had said and reflecting a 
moment, the righteous and wise Agastya, foremost of sages, spoke these 
exceedingly wise words: “Two leagues from here, my son, is a majestic 
region known as Paficavati, abounding in roots and fruits, water and 
animals. You should go and establish your ashram there with Saumitri; you 
can enjoy yourself even as you are adhering strictly to your father’s order. 
For I have come to know all that has befallen you, faultless prince, by 
means of my ascetic powers and in consequence of my affection for 
Dasaratha. 

[16—22] “And by these very same powers I have also discovered your 
heart’s true desire despite your having promised to live with me here in this 
forest of austerities. And that is why I am telling you to go to Paficavatt. It 
is a lovely forested region, and Maithill will be comfortable there. The 
region has everything to recommend it, Raghava; it is not too far from here, 
and the Godavari River is close by as well. Maithilt will be comfortable 
there. It is a secluded, holy, and lovely place, great-armed prince, rich in 
fruits and roots, and all different kinds of birds come flocking there. 
Although accompanied by a wife, sir, you are capable of protecting her. 
Then, too, Rama, while living there you can safeguard the ascetics. Yonder, 
mighty prince, one can just make out a large grove of madhika trees. You 
must head north of it, toward the banyan. There, upon a rise of ground not 
far from a mountain range, is the region known as Pajficavati, where the 
woodlands are always in flower.” 

[23-25] After Agastya had spoken to him in this way, Rama together 
with Saumitri honored the truthful seer and begged leave of him. And when 


the two of them had been given leave and had fallen at his feet and done 
obeisance, they and Sita left his ashram for Paficavati. Taking up their bows 
and strapping on their quivers, the princes, fearless in battle, resolutely 
proceeded to Paficavatt along the path by which the great seer had directed 
them. 


Sarga 13 

[1-4] As the delight of the Raghus was traveling to Paficavatt, he 
encountered on the way a huge vulture of awesome valor. Seeing that bird 
in the forest, the illustrious Rama and Laksmana took him for a rdksasa and 
demanded, “Who are you, sir?” Then, in a sweet and kindly voice that 
immediately won them over, he replied, “My child, you must know that I 
was your father’s friend.” On learning of his acquaintance with his father, 
Raghava paid him homage and then intently inquired of his name and 
lineage. 

[5S—9] When he heard Rama’s words, the bird proceeded to tell of himself 
and his lineage, starting with the origin of all creatures, saying: “Hear me, 
great-armed Raghava, as I name from the very beginning all the Prajapatis, 
lords of creatures, who lived in ancient times. The first of them was 
Kardama, after whom came Vikrta, then Sesa, Saméraya, and mighty 
Bahuputra. Then came Sthanu and Marici, Atri and powerful Kratu, 
Pulastya, Angiras, Pracetas, and Pulaha. Then there was Daksa and after 
him Vivasvant, then Aristanemi and mighty Kasyapa, who was the last of 
them, Raghava. 

[10-18] “Now, the Prajapati named Daksa, so we have heard, glorious 
Rama, had sixty daughters, all endowed with glory. From their number 
Kasyapa married eight of the loveliest: Aditi and Diti, Dani and Kalaka, 
Tamra and Krodhavasa, Manu and Anala. And joyfully Kasyapa then 
addressed the maidens, ‘Bear sons who are my equal, to be masters of the 
three worlds.’ Aditi was willing, great-armed Rama, and so were Diti, 
Dani, and Kalaka, but the others were not. Of Aditi were born the thirty- 
three gods, tamers of their foes: the Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, and Aévins, 
slayers of their enemies. Diti bore glorious sons called the Daityas, my son. 
Long ago this treasure-laden earth and all the seas and forests belonged to 
them. Dani bore a son named Asvagriva, O tamer of your foes, while 
Kalaka bore Naraka and Kalaka. Kraufici, Bhasi, Syent, Dhrtarastri, and 


Suki were the five daughters Tamra bore, all of them famed throughout the 
world. Kraufict gave birth to the owls, and Bhasi to the kites. 

[19-25] “Syeni gave birth to the falcons and mighty vultures, Dhrtarastri 
bore all the hamsas and the kalahamsas. And, bless you, that lovely woman 
bore the cakravakas, whereas Suki bore Nata, whose daughter was Vinata. 
Then too, Rama, Krodhavasa bore ten children, Mrgi, Mrgamanda, Hart, 
Bhadramada, Matang’1, Sarduli, Sveta, Surabhi, Surasd, who was endowed 
with all auspicious marks, and Kadruka. The offspring of Mrgi were all the 
deer, Rama, foremost of kings; while those of Mrgamanda were the apes, 
gaur, and yaks. Next, Bhadramada bore a child named Iravati, whose son 
was the great world guardian, the elephant Airavata. :The offspring of Hari 
were the tawny monkeys, the swift forest monkeys and langurs, whereas the 
sons Sarduli bore were the tigers. 

[26-30] “Bull among men, the offspring of Matangt were the elephants, 
and the son Sveta bore was named Svetaksa, one of the guardian elephants 
of the directions. Then, bless you, Rama, the goddess Surabhi bore two 
daughters, one named Rohini, the other, illustrious Gandharvi. The children 
Rohini bore were the cows, and Gandharvi’s were the horses. And, Rama, 
Surasa bore the great serpents and Kadri the snakes. To the great Kasyapa, 
Manu bore men, bull among men, the brahmans, kshatriyas, vaisyas, and 
sudras. From her mouth were born the brahmans, from her breast the 
kshatriyas; from her thighs were born the vaisyas and from her feet the 
sudras, according to the holy vedas. 

[31-34] “And Anala brought forth all the holy fruit trees. Now, Vinata 
was the granddaughter of Suki, and Kadri was Surasa’s sister. Kadri bore 
the thousand great serpents that hold up the earth, while Vinata had two 
sons, Garuda and Aruna. By this Aruna was I begotten, tamer of your foes, 
as was my elder brother Sampati. Know me to be Jatayus, whose mother 
was Syent. I will live with you, if you wish, and keep watch over Sita 
whenever you and Laksmana are away.” 

[35-36] "Raghava once more paid homage to Jatayus, embraced him 
warmly, and bowed before him. For he had heard about Jatayus’s friendship 
with his father, who had often spoken of it. And so, committing Sita, 
princess of Mithila, to the care of the immensely powerful bird, he went 
with him and Laksmana to Paficavatit, ready to consume his enemies as a 
flame consumes moths. 


Sarga 14 

[1-5] Upon reaching Paficavati, a place teeming with all kinds of wild 
animals, Rama addressed his mighty brother Laksmana: “We have come to 
the place to which the great seer directed us. This must be Paficavati, dear 
brother, the place where the woodlands are in flower. You must survey the 
woodlands all around. You are clever at such things. Which place would 
you recommend for our ashram? Look for a place with a source of water 
nearby, the sort of spot where Vaidehi, you, and I may be comfortable, 
Laksmana: one where there are forests and water to delight us, where fuel 
and flowers, Ausa grass and fresh water are near at hand.” 

[6-8] Thus instructed by Rama, Laksmana cupped his hands in 
reverence and as Sita looked on, he made this reply to Kakutstha: “I shall 
always be subject to your will, Kakutstha, should you live a hundred years. 
You need only tell me to build in the place you choose yourself.” The 
splendid prince was well pleased with Laksmana’s words, and after some 
reflection, he chose a spot endowed with all the qualities he sought. 

[9-15] Coming to the place he had chosen, Rama took Saumitri’s hand 
in his and spoke to him as follows about building the ashram: “This is a 
splendid spot, level and lined with flowering trees. Here, dear brother, is 
where you should build us a proper ashram. Nearby I can see a lovely lotus 
pond adorned with lotuses radiant as the sun and charged with a fragrant 
scent. Over there is the lovely Godavari River lined with flowering trees, 
just as the purified Agastya had described it. It is neither too far nor too 
near, and it teems with hamsas, karandavas, and lovely cakravakas, and is 
thronged with herds of animals. One can see the grand, majestic mountains 
with many caves, thick with blooming trees, and echoing with the cries of 
peacocks. With veins of gold, silver, and copper threaded here and there, the 
mountains resemble elephants painted with a latticework of brilliant stripes. 

[16-19] “And there are lovely trees on the mountains, sdlas, tdlas, 
tamalas, kharjuras, panasas, amrakas, nivaras, timisas, and pumndgas, as 
well as thick groves of various other trees—mangoes, asokas, tilakas, 
campakas, and ketakas, and flowers, vines, and shrubs; sandalwood trees 
too, and syandanas, nipas, panasas, lakucas, dhavas, asvakarnas, khadiras, 
samis, kimsukas, and pdatalas. It is a pure and holy spot teeming with birds 
and beasts, and here is where we will live, Saumitri, in the company of this 
bird.” 


[20-23] And so, addressed in this fashion by Rama, mighty Laksmana, 
the slayer of enemy heroes, soon built an ashram for his brother. He built a 
leaf hut there, spacious and very lovely, with walls of clay and crossbeams 
fashioned of long bamboo, making it very sturdy. Majestic Laksmana then 
went down to the Godavari River and, after bathing, returned bearing 
lotuses and fruits. After making an offering of flowers and, in accordance 
with precept, performing the rite to appease the spirits, he showed Rama the 
ashram he had built. Raghava together with Sita inspected the pleasant 
ashram he had built and was greatly delighted by the leaf hut. 

[24—29] Then, in deep delight, he drew Laksmana into his arms, and 
embracing him tightly and affectionately, he said: “I am pleased with you, 
my lordly brother, this is a great work you have accomplished. But this 
embrace I now give you is all the compensation I can offer for it. You have 
shown yourself to be wise in thought, deed, and righteousness, Laksmana. 
With such a son as you my righteous father has not truly passed away.” 
Then, after Raghava had spoken to Laksmana in this way, the bringer of 
glory with full self-possession dwelt happily in that place so abundant with 
fruit. Constantly attended by Laksmana and Sita, the righteous prince lived 
there for some time, like one of the immortal gods in heaven. 


Sarga 15 

[1-5] While the great Raghava was living a happy life there, autumn passed 
and winter, his favorite season, arrived. Once, when night was brightening 
into dawn and the delight of the Raghus went down to the lovely Godavari 
River to bathe, his mighty brother Saumitri, humbly bearing the water pot 
and following behind with Sita, addressed him with these words: “The 
season you love has come, beloved brother, the most beautiful ornament of 
the year. The world crackles with frost and the earth is bedecked with a 
garland of crops; water is uninviting, and instead fire, the bearer of 
oblations, is what appeals most. 

[6-10] “Now is the time for pious men to worship the ancestral spirits 
and gods with offerings of first fruits, whereupon they are freed from sin. 
The countryfolk have all they desire; their cows give milk more richly than 
ever. And kings march forth on expeditions with hopes of conquest. The 
sun keeps steadfastly to the south, the region where Yama, the ender of all 
things, holds sway, and so the north has lost its ruddy glow, like a woman 


without her auspicious forehead mark. The Himalayas, by nature a treasure- 
store of snow, now with the sun so far away are even deeper in snow and all 
the more deserve their name. One’s skin is pleasantly warmed at noon, now 
the most pleasant time to stroll. Sunshine appeals on days like this, and 
shade and water lose their appeal. 

[11-15] “Mornings are frosty now, powdered with snow, bitterly cold 
and windy; the sun is weak, and the wilderness seems empty. No longer can 
one sleep outdoors. Led by the Pusya star, the nights pass cold and gray 
with snow and last far longer than their three watches. As for the moon, all 
its appeal has passed to the sun. Its disk is misty gray and its glow has 
vanished, like that of a mirror clouded over by breath. Mist has sullied the 
moonlight, and even when the moon is full, it does not shine so brightly. 
You mark it, but miss its beauty, as with Sita when she is tanned by the sun. 
The west wind’s touch is cold by nature, but doubly so now when it blows 
at dawn, shot through with snow. 

[16—20] “Mist covers the fields with their stands of wheat and barley. 
How beautiful they look at sunrise, when the sdrasa cranes and kraujica 
birds are calling there. How beautiful the golden rice plants look. Their 
heads, the color of kharjura blossoms, are so heavy with grain that the 
stalks are gently bowed. With its rays drawing near in a cloak of snow and 
frost, the sun, even at its zenith, looks more like the moon. The morning 
sunshine is too weak even to be felt, but it grows pleasantly warm to the 
skin by noon. How beautifully it glows, a faint pale red upon the earth. How 
beautiful the floor of the forest appears, with the early morning sunlight 
playing upon it and the meadows slightly dampened by a fall of hoarfrost. 

[21-25] “The forest tracts seem fast asleep, wrapped up in the darkness 
of hoarfrost, blanketed by the darkness of snow, with not a blossom open. 
And the sand on the riverbanks is wet with snow, the water thickly covered 
with mist, and only their cry reveals the presence of sarasa cranes. Because 
of the falling sleet, the faintness of the sun, bringer of light, and the cold, 
the water even on the mountaintops has the bitter taste of poison. The lotus 
ponds have lost their beauty. Their lotuses are ravaged by frost, their leaves 
aged and withered, their filaments and cups shriveled, their stalks all that 
remain. Tiger among men, at this time back in the city, righteous Bharata, 
lost in sorrow, must be practicing austerities in devotion to you. 


[26-33] “He has given up the pride and pomp of kingship, its many and 
various luxuries, to be an ascetic who rigorously fasts and sleeps on the 
cold ground. And at this moment, he too is probably getting ready to bathe, 
going down to the Sarayi with his subjects, who constantly attend on him. 
But he is a delicate youth, who was raised in perfect comfort. How can he 
endure the cold, plunging into the Saray in the last watch of the night? He 
is lotus eyed, swarthy, regal, slim, and tall, wise in the ways of 
righteousness, truthful in speech, controlled by shame, and self-restrained. 
He is kind spoken and gentle, long armed, a tamer of his foes; he has given 
up every comfort, devoting himself heart and soul to his noble brother. 
Great Bharata, your brother, shall win a place in heaven by emulating your 
every act of asceticism in the forest. Bharata disproves the popular saying, 
‘Men take after their mothers and not their fathers.” How could our mother 
Kaikeyi, with a husband like Dasaratha and a son like virtuous Bharata, 
have ever turned out to be so cruelly intentioned?” 

[34-36] But as righteous Laksmana was speaking like this in his 
affection, Raghava could not bear to hear such criticism of his mother, and 
he said: “You must never criticize our middle mother, dear brother. 
Continue instead to speak as you were of Bharata, the leader of the Iksvaku 
dynasty. But no, do not: for determined though I am to keep my vow and 
live in the forest, you would pain my heart, in my love for Bharata, and 
make me waver again like a child.” 

[37-39] Lamenting in this fashion, he reached the Godavari River, where 
he bathed with his younger brother and Sita. They then satisfied the 
ancestral spirits and deities with water-offerings, and afterward, in deep 
concentration, they intoned the hymn to the rising sun and the gods. After 
bathing, as Rama stood in the company of Laksmana and Sita, he resembled 
the blessed lord Rudra after his bath, attended by Nandi and the daughter of 
the king of the mountains. 


Sarga 16 
[1-5] After their bath, Rama, Sita, and Laksmana left the bank of the 
Godavari for their ashram. Returning to the ashram, Raghava and 
Laksmana performed the morning rites, and then they returned to the leaf 
hut. Great-armed Rama, resembling the moon beside the sparkling star 
Citra, then sat with Sita before the leaf hut and began to converse with his 


brother Laksmana about various matters. And while Rama was sitting there 
engrossed in conversation, a certain rdksasa woman chanced to come that 
way. Her name was Sirpanakha and she was the sister of the ten-necked 
raksasa, Ravana. Coming upon Rama, she stared at him who resembled one 
of the thirty gods. 

[6-11] Rama had long arms, the chest of a lion, eyes like lotus petals. 
Though delicate, he was very strong and bore all the signs of royalty. He 
was as dark as the blue lotus, as radiant as Kandarpa, the god of love, and 
the very image of Indra. When the raksasa woman saw him, she became 
infatuated with desire. Rama was handsome, the rdksasa woman was 
hideous, he was shapely and slim of waist, she misshapen and potbellied; 
his eyes were large, hers were beady, his hair was jet black, and hers the 
color of copper; he always said just the right thing and in a sweet voice, her 
words were sinister and her voice struck terror; he was young, attractive, 
and well mannered, she was ill mannered, repellent, an old hag. And yet, 
the god of love, who comes alive in our bodies, had taken possession of her, 
and so she said to Rama: “Your hair is matted in the manner of ascetics, yet 
you have a wife with you and bear a bow and arrows. How is it you have 
come into this region, frequented by raksasas?” 

[12-16] Questioned in this fashion by the raksasa woman Sirpanakha, 
the slayer of enemies in his open manner proceeded to tell her everything: 
“There was a king named DasSaratha, as courageous as one of the thirty 
gods. I am his eldest son, named Rama, known to people far and wide. This 
is Laksmana, my devoted younger brother, and this my wife, the princess of 
Videha, known as Sita. I was compelled to come to live in the forest by the 
command of my mother and my father, the lord of men, and I wanted to do 
what is right, for doing right has always been my chief concern. But I 
should like to know about you. Tell me, who are you? To whom do you 
belong? For what purpose have you come here? Tell me truthfully.” 

[17-20] Hearing his words and consumed with passion, the raksasa 
woman replied: “Listen, then, Rama, I shall tell you, and my words will be 
truthful. My name is Sirpanakha. I am a raksasa woman, who can take on 
any form at will, and I roam this wilderness all alone, striking terror into 
every living thing. The rdksasa named Ravana, the lord of all raksasas, is 
my brother; so too is the immensely powerful Kumbhakarna, who lies ever 
fast asleep. So is Vibhisana, but he is righteous and does not behave like a 


raksasa. My other brothers are Khara and Diisana, famed for their might in 
battle. 

[21-25] “But I am prepared to defy them all, Rama, for I have never 
seen anyone like you. I approach you as I would a husband, with true love, 
best of men. Be my husband forevermore; what do you want with Sita? She 
is ugly and misshapen and unworthy of you. I alone am suited to you. Look 
upon me as your wife. I will devour this misshapen slut, this hideous human 
female with her pinched waist, along with this brother of yours. And then, 
my beloved, you shall roam the Dandakas with me, viewing all the different 
mountain peaks and forests.” Thus addressed by the wild-eyed creature, 
Kakutstha burst out laughing but then went on to reply with his customary 
eloquence. 


Sarga 17 

[1-5] As Siirpanakha stood there bound tight in the snare of desire, Rama 
smiled and, humoring her, replied in jest: “But I am already married, my 
lady, and I love my wife. And for women such as you, to have a rival wife 
is a source of bitter sorrow. But my younger brother here is of good 
character, handsome, powerful, majestic, and still unmarried. His name is 
Laksmana. He has never had a woman before and is in need of a wife. He is 
young and handsome and will make a good husband, one suited to such 
beauty as yours. So you should accept my brother as your husband, large- 
eyed, shapely lady. With no rival wife, the two of you will be as inseparable 
as sunlight and Mount Meru.” 

[6-12] When the raksasa woman, wild with desire, was addressed in this 
way by Rama, she promptly turned away from him and said to Laksmana: 
“T shall make you a lovely wife, one befitting your beauty. And together we 
shall roam so pleasantly all through the Dandakas.” ‘Addressed in such a 
fashion by the raksasa woman Sirpanakha, Laksmana, with his customary 
eloquence, made this fitting reply: “Why would you want to be my wife, 
lotuslike beauty? I am completely subject to the will of my noble brother; I 
am a Slave, and she who is my wife must be a slave as well. Become instead 
the junior wife of my noble brother, large-eyed lady of unblemished beauty. 
He is prosperous, and with him your fortunes too will prosper and you will 
be happy. Soon enough he will turn away from this misshapen slut, this 
hideous old wife with her pinched waist, and give his love to you alone. For 


what man with any sense would reject this singular beauty of yours, my fair 
and shapely lady, and bestow his affections on a mere human female?” 

[13-20] ‘When Laksmana had spoken to her in this fashion, the 
potbellied, hideous creature, unused to teasing, thought he was in earnest. 
Then as Rama, the invincible slayer of his enemies, sat with Sita before the 
leaf hut, the rdksasa woman addressed him once more, infatuated with 
desire: “It is on account of this misshapen slut, this hideous old wife with 
her pinched waist, that you care so little for me. So I am going to devour 
this human female at once, before your very eyes; then, free of any rival, I 
shall live happily with you.” And so saying, she flew into a rage, and with 
eyes flashing like firebrands she rushed toward the fawn-eyed princess, like 
a huge comet hurtling toward the star Rohini. But as she was rushing 
toward Sita, like the very noose of Mrtyu, Death, mighty Rama angrily 
restrained her and said to Laksmana: “One should never tease these savage, 
ignoble creatures, Saumitri. Just look at Vaideht, dear brother; she is 
frightened half to death. Now, tiger among men, you must mutilate this 
misshapen slut, this potbellied, lustful raksasa woman.” 

[21—26] Addressed by Rama in this fashion, powerful Laksmana, in full 
view of his brother, drew his sword and in a rage cut off the creature’s ears 
and nose as Rama looked on. The terrifying Sirpanakha, her ears and nose 
hacked off, gave out an earsplitting roar as she fled back into the forest the 
way she had come. Mutilated, spattered with blood, and now even more 
terrifying, the radksasa woman roared incessantly, like a storm cloud when 
the rains come. Gushing blood copiously, a terror to behold, she 
disappeared into the deep forest, howling, her arms outstretched. Then she 
made her way to her brother Khara, of fearsome blazing energy, who was in 
Janasthana surrounded by a host of rdksasas. Mutilated, she fell to the 
ground before him, like a bolt of lightning from the sky. And then, spattered 
with blood and wild with fear and confusion, Khara’s sister told him the 
whole story—how Rama had come into the forest with his wife and 
Laksmana, and how she herself had come to be mutilated. 


Sarga 18 
[1-5] At the sight of his sister fallen before him, mutilated and spattered 
with blood, the raksasa Khara was consumed with rage and began to 
question her: “You possess great power and daring, you go your own way 


like Yama, the ender of all things, himself, going where you please and 
taking on any form you please. Who has brought you to this state? Which 
one of the gods, gandharvas, spirits, or great seers could it have been? Who 
was the mighty creature that mutilated you? For I know of no one in the 
world who would dare offend me, unless it be the thousand-eyed god, great 
Indra, the chastiser of Paka. Today I will take that person’s life with my 
deadly arrows, like the sdrasa crane that drinks the milk and yet leaves the 
water mixed with it. 

[6-9] “Who must I kill in combat, ripping into his vitals with my 
arrows? Whose bright-red foaming blood shall the earth drink? From whose 
corpse shall the swarming carrion birds tear the flesh—gorging on it in 
delight—once I have slain him in battle? Not even the gods, gandharvas, 
the pisdcas and raksasas will be able to save that wretch once he is drawn 
into deadly battle with me. When you have gradually come to your senses, 
you must tell me the name of that savage creature who attacked and 
overwhelmed you in the forest.” 

[10-16] When she heard what her brother had said in his rage, 
Sirpanakha tearfully replied: “Two handsome young men have arrived, 
delicate yet powerful; their eyes are as large as lotus petals, and they are 
wearing barkcloth and black antelope hides. They are the image of the king 
of the gandharvas and bear all the signs of royalty. Whether they be gods or 
men I cannot tell for certain. And with them I saw a young woman, 
beautiful and fair waisted, and all adorned with jewelry. It was those two 
together, all on account of that woman, who brought me to this state like 
some defenseless slut. And now, dear brother, grant me this, my fondest 
wish: that I shall drink her blood and theirs after the battle.” 

[17-21] When she finished speaking, Khara, in a rage, gave these orders 
to fourteen powerful rdksasas, the likes of Yama, the ender of all things, 
himself: “Two men bearing arms, wearing barkcloth and black antelope 
hides, have entered the fearsome Dandaka forest in the company of a 
woman. You are to kill the two of them and that slut, and then return. My 
sister here shall drink their blood. This is my sister’s most deeply cherished 
wish. You must go at once, raksasas, and fulfill it, crushing the two of them 
with your own blazing energy.” Thus commanded, the fourteen raksasas set 
forth with her, like clouds driven before the wind. 


Sarga 19 

[1-5] Then, when the terrifying Stirpanakha reached Raghava’s ashram, she 
pointed out the two brothers and Sita to the raksasas. They saw powerful 
Rama seated before the leaf hut with Laksmana and Sita, princess of 
Videha. Spotting them and the raksasa woman who had returned, majestic 
Rama Raghava said to his splendid brother Laksmana of blazing energy: 
“Stand next to Sita for a moment, Saumitri, while I slay these creatures here 
that have followed in the train of this raksasa woman.” Then, having heard 
those words of the celebrated Rama, Laksmana acknowledged them with 
the words, “So be it.” 

[6-10] Righteous Raghava then strung his great bow inlaid with gold 
and addressed the rdksasas: “We are two sons of Dasaratha, the brothers 
Rama and Laksmana. Together with Sita we have entered the trackless 
Dandaka forest. We are self-controlled ascetics who subsist on fruits and 
roots and follow the ways of righteousness as we live in the Dandaka forest. 
Why do you threaten us with violence? You are the evil creatures that have 
wrought havoc in the great forest. And now, at the injunction of the seers, I 
have come, bow in hand, to kill you. ‘So be pleased to stay right where you 
are, wicked creatures, come no closer. And if you value your lives at all 
withdraw completely, night-roaming rdksasas.” 

[11-15] The fourteen raksasas, brahman-killers all, lances in hand, were 
enraged when they heard his words. With eyes blazing bright red with rage, 
the dreaded creatures made a harsh reply to Rama, the soft-spoken prince, 
the corners of whose eyes were red as well, and, unacquainted as they were 
with his prowess, they were delighted. They replied: “It is you who, having 
provoked the anger of our master, the great Khara, will lose your life today, 
slain by us in battle. For what power have you, alone, to even stand before 
us—who are many—in the forefront of battle, much less fight in combat? 
These iron clubs, lances, and spears wielded by our arms shall rob you of 
the bow clutched in your hand and rob you of strength and life.” 

[16-20] Then, when they heard this, the fourteen raksasas, brandishing 
their swords and weapons, furiously attacked the invincible Rama Raghava, 
hurling their lances at him. But Kakutstha splintered all these fourteen 
lances at once with as many arrows adorned with gold. Then, in a towering 
rage, the mighty prince grasped fourteen iron arrows sharpened on a 
whetstone and brilliant as sunlight. Holding them in his grasp, Raghava 


drew his bow, and, making the rdksasas his targets, he loosed those arrows 
just as Indra of the hundred sacrifices does his vajras. They were gold 
feathered and razor sharp, adorned with gleaming gold, and they shed light 
like huge comets as they flew through the sky. 

[21—25] The arrows forcefully pierced the chests of the raksasas, then 
emerged dripping with blood and sank into the ground with the crash of 
thunderbolts. Pierced to the heart, their bodies mutilated and drenched with 
blood, the raksasas fell to the ground like uprooted trees, and the breath of 
life left them. Seeing them fall to the ground, the raksasa woman, terrified, 
beside herself with rage, again let out a ghastly shriek. Howling shrilly, 
Sirpanakha sped off and again made her way to Khara. With the blood 
scarcely dry on her she fell before him in agony, as a broken vine might fall, 
its sap oozing out. Having seen the raksasas felled in battle, Khara’s sister 
Sirpanakha ran off and told him all that had happened, how the raksasas 
had been slain, every last one. 


Sarga 20 

[1-5] Thus, to Khara’s ill fortune, Sirpanakha returned, and at the sight of 
her collapsed before him in a rage, he addressed her in a clear and steady 
voice: “Why are you still weeping when just now I issued orders on your 
behalf to the heroic, blood-drinking rdksasas? They are loyal and devoted 
to me and have always served my interests. They kill but cannot themselves 
be killed, nor would they ever fail to do my bidding. What is this, then? I 
want to know why you are still wailing ‘Oh my protector!’ and writhing 
like a snake upon the ground. Why are you lamenting like someone without 
a protector when I am standing here as your protector? Get up, get up, do 
not be afraid. Here now, you must abandon this faintheartedness.” 

[6-10] Addressed in this soothing manner by Khara, the unassailable 
raksasa woman wiped her tearful eyes and answered her brother: “All of 
the fourteen heroic and dreaded raksasas you sent on my behalf to kill 
Raghava and Laksmana—merciless though they were, and armed with 
lances and spears—have been killed in battle by Rama with arrows that 
pierced them to the quick. When I saw that great deed of Rama’s, how those 
powerful raksasas dropped instantly to the ground, I was seized with great 
terror. In fear, alarm, and desperation, I have again taken refuge with you, 
night-roaming rdksasa. For I see danger everywhere I look. 


[11-14] “I am drowning in a vast ocean of grief with despair for its sea 
monsters and terror for its garland of waves. Can you not save me? All 
those rdksasas, eaters of raw flesh, who came to my aid now lie dead on the 
ground, slain by Rama’s sharp arrows. If you are at all moved to 
compassion for me or those rdksasas, night-roaming rdaksasa, if you are 
daring and mighty enough to fight Rama, then pluck out this thorn in the 
side of the raksasas, who has made the Dandaka forest his home. If you 
will not slay my enemy Rama today, then I shall not hesitate to take my 
own life right before your very eyes. 

[15-18] “I really think you do not dare to stand face to face with Rama 
in combat when he is armed for battle with his bow. For if you cannot kill 
those mere humans, Rama and Laksmana, then I believe that you simply 
imagine yourself as a hero, and are one who falsely assumes the air of valor. 
So you had better hurry up and leave Janasthana along with your kinsmen. 
For this is no place to live for one with little strength and less courage. 
Otherwise, overwhelmed by R&ama’s blazing energy, you shall instantly 
perish. For Rama, the son of Dasaratha, is endowed with blazing energy; 
and his brother, the one who mutilated me, is immensely powerful as well.” 


Sarga 21 

[1-5] Belittled in this way by Sirpanakha, the heroic Khara replied with 
these extremely harsh words in the midst of the raksasas: “The contempt 
shown you fills me with an unparalleled rage that is as impossible to hold 
back as the great salt sea when it surges. I care nothing for the power of 
Rama, that short-lived mortal. Because of those evil acts of his, he, once 
struck down, is about to lose his life. So stop your tears, do not be 
distraught. For I intend to send Rama and his brother to the abode of Yama. 
And as Rama lies upon the ground, cut down by my battle-axe, his life 
ebbing away, you, raksasa woman, shall drink his hot, red blood.” 

[6-12] She was delighted to hear the words issuing from Khara’s mouth, 
and then, in her foolishness, she began once more to praise her brother as 
the best of raksasas. First abused and then praised by her, Khara addressed 
his general Dusana: “Here are fourteen thousand dreaded raksasas who 
bow to my will and never turn back from battle. Blue-black as storm clouds, 
awesome in their onslaught and savage in their deeds, they are endowed 
with power and dreadful might, and take pleasure in acts of violence against 


the world. Their mouths are huge, their strength is great, their pride like that 
of the tiger. Dear friend, you must assemble these proud rdaksasas, every last 
one. Make ready my chariot at once, dear friend, my bows and brilliant 
arrows, my swords and various sharp javelins. For, skilled in combat, I 
intend to march out at the head of the great descendants of Pulastya and use 
all my battle skills to slay that savage Rama.” 

[13-16] And as he was speaking in this fashion, Dusana brought before 
him his great sun-hued chariot harnessed with purebred, dappled horses. 
Then, filled with rage, Khara mounted his chariot. Ornamented with 
burnished gold, with golden wheels and yoke poles of cat’s-eye beryl, it 
resembled the peak of Mount Meru. It was spacious and decorated with 
auspicious, gilt designs of fish and flowers, trees and rocks, flocks of birds, 
the sun and moon and stars. It was furnished with a battle standard and 
swords, adorned with bells, and harnessed to purebred horses. 

[17—22] Observing him mounted on his chariot, the raksasas of fearsome 
valor took up their positions around him and the powerful Ditsana. And 
when Khara saw all the great raksasa bowmen with their terrible shields, 
arms, and battle standards, he cried out to them from his chariot, “Onward!” 
Then, with their terrible shields, arms, and battle standards, the rdksasa 
army set forth at lightning speed and with a deafening roar from Janasthana. 
The fourteen thousand dreaded rdksasas marched forth from Janasthana, 
obedient to the will of Khara and armed with war hammers, spears, lances, 
and keen battle-axes, with swords, hand-held discuses, and gleaming iron 
cudgels, with javelins and terrible iron clubs and massive bows, with 
maces, swords, cudgels, and vajras held high, fearsome to behold. 

[23—26] Khara watched as the rdksasas of fearsome valor went racing 
ahead, and a moment afterward his own chariot set forth as well. His 
charioteer, reading Khara’s thoughts, urged on the dappled horses all 
ornamented with burnished gold. And as the chariot of Khara, destroyer of 
his enemies, was being driven swiftly forward, it gave out a noise that 
extended to every quarter of heaven and to all points in between. And thus, 
in a towering rage, harshly clamoring, Khara hastened onward like Yama, 
the ender of all things, to slay his enemy, and time and again he urged on 
his charioteer, roaring like a swollen storm cloud bursting with a shower of 
hailstones. 


Sarga 22 

[1-5] As that terrifying army set forth, a rumbling storm cloud, as reddish 
brown as a donkey, ominously showered down water red as blood. The 
swift horses harnessed to Khara’s chariot unaccountably stumbled on a flat, 
flower-strewn stretch of the royal highway. A dark, blood-rimmed disk, like 
the ring of a twirling firebrand, began to cover the sun, maker of day. Then 
a huge and fearsome vulture flew near and, after hovering over it, perched 
upon his battle standard high atop its tall, golden shaft. In the environs of 
Janasthana, flesh-eating birds and beasts circled and sent up their different 
raucous cries, harshly clamoring. 

[6-10] In a dimly sunlit quarter, fearsome jackals raised loud, ghastly 
howls, boding ill for the ydtudhdnas. Terrifying clouds resembling 
crumbled mountains and pouring down blood-red water filled up the sky 
completely so that there were no gaps between them. A dreadful pall of 
darkness descended so densely that it obscured all the cardinal and 
intermediate directions. Twilight, as red as fresh blood, came on before its 
time, and fearsome birds and beasts turned toward Khara and began to 
screech. Jackals, dreadful to behold, those unfailingly ominous portents in 
battle, turned toward the army and began to scream, spitting flames. 

[11-15] A headless corpse resembling an iron club appeared near the 
sun, bringer of light. And Svarbhanu, the demon of the eclipse, engulfed the 
sun before his appointed time. The wind blew fiercely, the sun, maker of 
day, went dark, and though it was not yet nighttime the stars came out, 
shining like fireflies. Birds and fish went into hiding, lotuses withered in the 
ponds, and in an instant trees were stripped of their fruits and flowers. 
Cloud-gray dust swirled up even with no breeze blowing, and sarika birds 
began crying, “vicikiuci!” Meteors, dreadful to behold, came crashing down, 
and a tremor passed through the earth, mountains, forests, and groves. 

[16-20] Wise Khara bellowed from his chariot. His left arm throbbed 
and his voice caught in his throat. As he gazed about, tears came to his 
eyes, and a sharp pain pierced his forehead. But in his delusion, he would 
not turn back. Then, as he watched these hair-raising omens appear, Khara 
laughed and addressed the raksasas with these words: “These are all great 
omens and terrible to see, but why should I in my power give them any 
thought, any more than the strong man gives the weak? With my keen 


arrows I could bring down even the stars from heaven, and in my rage I 
could throw the fear of death into Mrtyu, the god of death himself. 

[21-24] “Raghava is arrogant in his power, and so is his brother 
Laksmana, and I will not return until I have slain them with my sharp 
arrows. My sister shall have her heart’s desire and drink their blood. 
Because of what they did to her, Rama and Laksmana are doomed. Never 
before have I met defeat in combat. You can all bear witness to this. I am 
not telling a lie. Should the king of the gods himself come on his rutting 
elephant Airavata and attack with his vajra in hand, in my rage I could kill 
him in battle. What then of two mere humans?” 

[25—29] His vast army listened to the rdksasa’s bellowing, and ensnared 
as they were in the noose of Mrtyu, it gave them unequaled delight. All the 
great seers, gods, and gandharvas, the perfected beings and celestial bards 
assembled, eager to watch the battle. And having gathered all together, 
those blessed ones said to one another: “May cows and brahmans fare well, 
and all whom the worlds hold in esteem! May Raghava conquer the night- 
roaming rdaksasas, the descendants of Pulastya, in battle just as once Visnu, 
discus in hand, conquered in battle all the bulls among the asuras.” Uttering 
these and many similar remarks, the supreme seers watched the army of 
raksasas, whose lives were soon to end. 

[30-34] Meanwhile, aboard his chariot Khara swiftly sallied forth from 
the vanguard of the army, and, seeing this, other raksasas sallied forth as 
well. Syenagamin, Prthugriva, Yajfasatru, Vihamgama, Durjaya, 
Karaviraksa, Parusa, Kalakarmuka, Meghamalin, Mahamalin, Sarpasya, 
Rudhirasana—these twelve mighty warriors marched forward flanking 
Khara. Also from the vanguard, the four generals, Mahakapala, Sthulaksa, 
Pramathin, and Trisiras, followed Disana at the rear. With terrifying speed, 
lusting for battle, the ferocious army of raksasa warriors advanced against 
the two princes, like a string of eclipsing planets approaching the sun and 
moon. 


Sarga 23 
[1-5] While Khara, harsh in his valor, was making his way to the ashram, 
Rama and his brother saw the very same omens. The appearance of those 
dreadful omens, boding ill for all creatures, was enough to horrify anyone. 
At the sight of them, Rama addressed Laksmana with these words: “Look at 


those great portents of mass destruction, great-armed brother, how they 
appear to foretell the annihilation of all the radksasas. There in the sky, 
ragged and as reddish brown as a donkey, clouds are swirling, raining blood 
and rumbling harshly. My arrows are emitting smoke in eager anticipation 
of battle, Laksmana, and my gold-backed bows are writhing. 

[6-12] “Forest birds are screeching nearby, the sort that lead me to 
believe we may soon find ourselves in danger and our very lives in 
jeopardy. There will no doubt be a great clash of arms. The constant 
throbbing of my arm tells me so. But your face looks bright and clear, my 
heroic brother. This means victory is at hand for us, and defeat for our 
enemy. For when the face of a man preparing for battle darkens over, 
Laksmana, it means his life is nearing its end. Still, for his own good, a wise 
man should take steps against any trouble he foresees before it arrives. 
Therefore, you must take VaidehtT and, with your arrows in hand and 
bearing your bow, seek refuge in a mountain cave, one overgrown with 
trees and hard to penetrate. I do not want you to question this command of 
mine. You must swear by these, my feet to which you bow. Now go, dear 
boy, without delay.” 

[13-15] Thus addressed by Rama, Laksmana took up his bow and 
arrows and sought refuge with Sita in an inaccessible cave. Once Laksmana 
had entered the cave with Sita, Rama said to himself, “Good, it is all 
arranged,” and he then donned his armor. Adorned in his fiery armor, Rama 
resembled a smokeless flame flaring up in the dark. 

[16-21] Taking up his arrows and brandishing his great bow, the mighty 
prince took up his position there, filling the quarters of heaven with the 
sound of his twanging bowstring. Then the gods and gandharvas, the 
perfected beings, celestial bards, and guhyakas turned to one another in 
utter terror and said: “Here are fourteen thousand rdksasas of fearsome 
deeds, while righteous Rama is all alone. How can this be a battle?” Just 
then, with a deep rumbling sound, the army of the yatudhdnas appeared on 
every side with their terrifying armor, weapons, and battle standards. They 
let out roars like lions, shouted at one another, and twanged their bows; 
without letup they stormed about, raising a wild clamor and beating their 
war drums, so that the tumultuous noise filled all the forest. 

[22-27] The noise terrified the animals that ranged the forest, and 
without a backward glance they ran off to where it was quiet. Deep as the 


ocean, bristling with weapons of every sort, the army then advanced against 
Rama. Expert as he was in combat, Rama took in the scene with a glance, 
scanning Khara’s army as it came on ready for battle. He strung his 
awesome bow, drew arrows from his quiver, and filled himself with a 
violent fury so that he might slay all the raksasas. It was impossible even to 
look at him then, enraged as he was and blazing like the fire at the end of a 
cosmic era. The forest deities trembled to see him suffused with such 
blazing energy. Indeed, in his rage Rama had the very look of the god Siva, 
who wields the Pinaka bow, when he was about to destroy the sacrifice of 
Daksa. 


Sarga 24 

[1-5] Approaching the ashram with his escort, Khara spied Rama, destroyer 
of his enemies, standing there enraged, his bow held steady. At the sight of 
Rama, he raised his own taut-strung, harshly twanging bow, and urged the 
charioteer to drive on toward him. At Khara’s command the charioteer 
drove the horses to where great-armed Rama stood alone, brandishing his 
bow. When they saw Khara advancing, all his ministers, night-roaming 
raksasas, formed ranks around him, bellowing loudly. Mounted on his 
chariot in the midst of those yatudhanas, Khara resembled Mars, the red 
planet, rising amid the stars. 

[6-10] Then, in a rage, all the night-roaming rdksasas began to pelt the 
fearsome bowman, invincible Rama, with their various weapons. Consumed 
with fury, the raksasas struck at Rama in combat with war hammers and 
lances, darts, swords, and battle-axes. Like mighty, roaring storm clouds, 
they attacked Rama Kakutstha, eager to kill him in battle. Indeed, like 
massive clouds showering the king of the mountains with torrents of rain, 
the hordes of rdksasas loosed hails of arrows upon Rama. Surrounded by 
hordes of fearsome raksasas, Raghava resembled Siva, the great god, 
surrounded by his hordes of attendants on a moonless night. 

[11-15] With his arrows Raghava received the weapons loosed by the 
ydtudhanas just as the ocean receives the rivers’ floods. When those terrible 
weapons pierced his body, Rama did not waver any more than a great 
mountain wavers beneath the blows of many flaming thunderbolts. Rama 
Raghava was wounded, his whole body smeared with blood, so that he 
looked like the sun, maker of day, when at twilight it is enveloped by 


clouds. The gods, gandharvas, perfected beings, and great seers as well 
sank down in despair to see him all alone, encircled by so many thousands. 
But then Rama flew into a rage, and bending his bow into an arc, he 
unleashed sharp arrows by the hundreds and thousands. 

[16—19] Inescapable, unendurable, like the very noose of Kala, god of 
death, were the straight-flying, heron-feathered arrows Rama shot in battle 
as if for sport. And as if for sport Rama loosed his arrows at the enemy 
soldiers, and, like the nooses fashioned by Kala, they carried off the 
raksasas’ lives. After piercing the bodies of the rdksasas, those arrows, 
drenched in their blood, continued their flight through the sky, gleaming 
with the splendor of blazing fires. Innumerable deadly arrows flew from the 
arc of Rama’s bow, taking the lives of the rdksasas. 

[20-24] With his arrows Rama shattered in battle their bows by the 
hundreds and thousands, shattered their lofty battle standards and armor, cut 
off their heads, their braceleted arms, and their legs firm and muscular as 
elephants’ trunks. Pierced by both broad-headed and iron arrows as well as 
sharp-tipped barbed arrows, the night-roaming rdksasas raised a fearsome 
cry of agony. There was no respite for the army from the moment Rama 
began to ravage them—like fire might a dry forest—with his sharp arrows 
that pierced them to the vitals. In a towering rage, some of the night- 
roaming rdksasas, heroes of fearsome power, continued to hurl lances, 
swords, and battle-axes at Rama. But great-armed Raghava, warding off the 
weapons with his arrows in battle, decapitated them and took their lives. 

[25-28] The surviving night-roaming raksasas ran in despair to Khara, 
seeking refuge from the arrows that ravaged them. Diisana met them, rallied 
them all, and then attacked Kakutstha in a rage, like Yama, the ender of all 
things, attacking Rudra. Reinforced by Diisana, those who had fled took 
courage, and armed with boulders and with sala and tala trees, they charged 
Rama once again. It was amazing, the battle that once more broke out 
between Rama and the raksasas, a tumultuous, immensely frightening and 
hair-raising battle. 


Sarga 25 
[1-6] With his keen arrows, righteous Raghava received the intense, deadly 
hail of trees and boulders. And as he met that hail of weapons, Rama 
narrowed his eyes like a bull and flew into a towering rage in order to slay 


all the raksasas. Possessed with rage and as if blazing with energy, he 
spread his arrows in every direction over Diisana and the army. Then the 
enraged lord of the army, Disana, despoiler of enemies, seized a hair- 
raising iron club that resembled a mountain peak. That iron club was 
encircled with hoops of gold, studded with sharp iron barbs, and smeared 
with the marrow of his foes. Its impact was like that of the vajra or a 
thunderbolt, and it was powerful enough to smash enemy citadels or to 
crush the army of the gods. Seizing this serpentlike iron club, the savage 
night-roaming rdksasa Dusana attacked Rama in battle. 

[7-11] But even as Dusana rushed toward him, Raghava cut off both his 
braceleted arms with two arrows. The massive iron club dropped from his 
severed hand and fell upon the battlefield, like the banner of Sakra falling 
from on high. And Disana, his arms strewn about him, fell to the ground 
like a spirited elephant, its tusks shattered. Seeing Diisana fallen to the 
ground, slain in battle, all beings honored Kakutstha, crying, “Well done! 
Well done!” At this juncture, three soldiers of the vanguard, Mahakapala, 
Sthulaksa, and powerful Pramathin, flew into a rage and in a body attacked 
Rama, bound as they were in the noose of Mrtyu. 

[12—18] The raksasa Mahakapala took up a huge lance, Sthiilaksa seized 
a spear, and Pramathin a battle-axe. When they hurled themselves against 
Raghava, he received them as if they were welcome guests, with his sharp, 
pointed arrows. The delight of the Raghus severed the head of Mahakapala 
and, with a flood of countless arrows, crushed Pramathin. And he so filled 
Sthulaksa’s eyes with sharp arrows that he fell down dead upon the ground, 
like a lofty tree with many branches. Then mighty Rama set about killing 
the remnants of the army with arrows that, ornamented with diamonds and 
gold, resembled purifying fires. His gold-feathered arrows, like smoky 
tongues of fire, the purifier, cut down the rdksasas as lightning bolts fell 
massive trees. With one hundred barbed arrows Rama killed a hundred 
rdksasas, and with a thousand he killed a thousand of them on the field of 
battle. 

[19-24] As the arrows sliced through their armor and ornaments and 
pierced and splintered their bows, the night-roaming rdksasas fell to the 
earth besmeared with blood. Spattered with blood, their hair streaming 
wildly, they fell in combat, strewn upon the treasure-laden earth like kusa 
grass upon a broad altar. The forest was filled with dead raksasas and made 


muddy with their blood and torn flesh; in an instant it had become a place 
of utter terror, a vision of hell itself. Fighting all alone on foot, one man, 
Rama, killed fourteen thousand raksasas of fearsome deeds. Of that huge 
mass of warriors, the only survivors were the great chariot-warrior Khara, 
the rdksasa Trisiras, and, of course, Rama himself, the crusher of his foes. 
Then, when Khara saw that his fearsome army had been slaughtered in that 
great battle by the immensely powerful Rama, he drove toward Rama on his 
huge chariot, like Indra brandishing his lightning bolt. 


Sarga 26 

[1-5] And as Khara drove toward Rama, the lord of the radksasa army 
named Trisiras fell in with him and spoke these words: “Restrain your 
rashness, bold warrior. Command me and you shall see great-armed Rama 
cut down in combat. I give you my solemn promise—I touch my weapon as 
proof—that I shall slay Rama, whom all the raksasas should have slain. I 
shall be his death in battle—or he mine. Restrain your lust for battle and for 
a moment just be a witness. Either you will return to Janasthana delighted 
that Rama has been killed, or, if 1 am killed, you will meet Rama yourself in 
combat.” 

[6-10] Persuaded by Trisiras, who was eager to die, Khara granted him 
permission with the words, “Go, then, and fight.” And so the former set out 
toward Raghava. On a shining chariot harnessed with swift horses three- 
headed Trisiras—a triple-peaked mountain he seemed—charged Rama in 
battle. Like a storm cloud he let loose a vast torrent of arrows, and he let out 
a roar as loud as a war drum when its skin has been moistened with water. 
And when R&aghava spotted the raksasa Trisiras racing toward him, he 
received him with his bow, brandishing his keen arrows. Then a great and 
tumultuous battle took place between Rama and TriSiras as they fought like 
a lion and an elephant, both immensely powerful. 

[11-15] At last, after Trisiras struck his forehead with three arrows, 
Rama was filled with fury and, tolerating no more, said in a passion: “Ha! 
So this is the power of the bold, heroic raksasa, who scratches me on the 
forehead with arrows soft as flowers. Now you must receive my arrows as 
they fly from my bowstring.” Then, having spoken so passionately, in a 
rage, he sank fourteen arrows, like poisonous snakes, into the chest of 
Trisiras. Then, with four strong-jointed arrows, mighty Rama cut down his 


four swift horses. With eight arrows Rama cut down the driver in the 
chariot box and with one more splintered its lofty battle standard. 

[16-20] As Trisiras leapt from his stricken chariot, Rama pierced his 
heart with arrows, and the night-roaming rdksasa stood there, stunned. 
Then, in his boundless power the prince would tolerate no more and, taking 
three sharp arrows, sent them flying and violently severed the raksasa’s 
three heads. Gushing blood and tormented by Rama’s arrows, the night- 
roaming rdksasa fell to the ground where but a moment before his own 
heads had fallen. The surviving raksasas, attendants of Khara, broke ranks 
and fled without stopping like deer frightened by a tiger. After watching 
them running away, Khara then angrily turned away and on his own raced 
toward Rama, just as Rahu, the demon of the eclipse, does the moon. 


Sarga 27 

[1-5] Having seen Diusana killed in battle along with Trisiras and having 
witnessed Rama’s prowess, Khara himself was seized with terror. 'He had 
seen the raksasa army, a great, irresistible force, destroyed by one man, 
Rama; he had seen Disana and Trisiras killed. Observing with a sinking 
heart his force all but destroyed, the radksasa Khara attacked Rama as once 
Namuci attacked Vasava. Forcefully he drew his bow and shot his arrows at 
Rama, blood-drinking iron arrows darting like raging, poisonous snakes. 
Mounted on his chariot, Khara repeatedly twanged his bowstring and 
displayed his missiles as well as his skillful use of the different maneuvers 
with arrows employed in combat. 

[6-10] Catching sight of him, the great chariot-warrior Rama drew his 
huge bow and with his arrows filled up every cardinal and intermediate 
direction. With his unendurable arrows, which gave off sparks like fires, he 
filled up every corner of the sky, as Parjanya, the god of rain, does with his 
downpours. In this way, because of the sharp arrows loosed by Khara and 
Rama, the sky was so completely filled with arrows that there was no space 
between them. Covered by masses of arrows, the sun was blotted out as the 
two struggled together in their fury to slay each other. With both broad- 
headed and iron arrows as well as sharp-tipped barbed arrows, Khara struck 
Rama in battle as one might a great elephant with goads. 

[11-15] All creatures watched as the raksasa kept his position in the 
chariot, bow in hand, looking like Yama, the ender of all things, with his 


noose in hand. Bold as a lion, Khara advanced with a lion’s bold strides, but 
at the sight of him Rama shuddered no more than a lion in the presence of a 
small deer. Mounted on his great sunlike chariot, Khara hurtled toward 
Rama in battle like a moth nearing a flame. Displaying his agility, Khara 
shattered great Rama’s bow and arrow right at the grip. In his fury he took 
up seven more arrows like Sakra’s lightning bolts, and there in battle sank 
them into Rama’s armor. 

[16—20] Struck by the firm-jointed arrows unleashed by Khara, Rama’s 
armor fell to the ground from his body radiant as the sun. As arrows 
plunged into his every limb, Raghava in his rage took on the look of a 
blazing, smokeless fire. To put an end to his foe, Rama, destroyer of his 
enemies, then strung another bow, a great one that gave off a booming 
sound. This was the best of bows, the mighty bow of Visnu that the great 
seer had bestowed on him, and brandishing it, he attacked Khara. Then 
Rama, enraged in combat, took up strong-jointed arrows fletched with 
golden feathers and splintered Khara’s battle standard. 

[21-25] The gorgeous, golden battle standard fell to the ground in 
countless splinters, like the sun falling by order of the gods. Knowing the 
vital spots, Khara, enraged, took aim at his heart and wounded Rama’s body 
with four arrows, as if wounding an elephant with prods. Many arrows were 
sent flying from Khara’s bow, and Rama, his body drenched with blood 
from his wounds, was seized with a wild fury. The best of bowmen grasped 
his bow in the face of this supreme challenge and, supreme archer that he 
was, shot six arrows, all well aimed. He sank one arrow into Khara’s head, 
two into his arms, and with three half-moon-headed arrows struck him in 
the chest. 

[26-30] Enraged and eager to kill the raksasa, the mighty prince then 
shot thirteen iron arrows sharpened on a whetstone and brilliant as the sun, 
bringer of light. With one arrow, powerful Rama demolished Khara’s 
chariot yoke in combat; with four, his four horses; with the sixth, the head 
of his charioteer; with three more he demolished the main yoke pole, with 
two, the axle; with the twelfth, Khara’s bow and arrows. And after wreaking 
this destruction in battle, Raghava, the equal of Indra, laughed as he took up 
the thirteenth arrow like the vajra and pierced Khara. His bow shattered, his 
chariot lost, his horses and charioteer dead, Khara jumped to the ground, 
mace in hand, and took his stand. The gods and great seers then assembled 


in their grand flying palaces, and with their hands cupped in reverence the 
whole assembly joyfully praised the feat of the great chariot-warrior Rama. 


Sarga 28 

[1-5] When Khara, having lost his chariot, took his stand with his mace in 
hand, mighty Rama addressed him—and if his tone of voice was mild, the 
words he used were harsh: “Standing at the head of a great force, a host of 
elephants, horses, and chariots, you have done utterly ruthless deeds that all 
the world finds repugnant. No one who is cruel, does evil deeds, and makes 
creatures tremble can long survive, not even the lord of the three worlds 
himself. For all unite to destroy one whose deeds are brutal and perverse, 
night-roaming rdksasa, just as when a vicious snake comes among them. A 
person may give no thought to the evil he does from greed or lust, but, like 
a lizard that eats hailstones, he will surely see its end result—when he 
comes to grief. 

[6-10] “What then must be the fruit you will reap, raksasa, for slaying 
the illustrious ascetics who live in the Dandaka forest, following the ways 
of righteousness? Savage creatures who do evil and are held in repugnance 
by the world do not long retain their power, like trees cut off at the root. 
Inevitably in the course of time the agent harvests the bitter fruit of his evil 
act, just as trees come into flower with the passing of the seasons. Like 
eating poisoned food, night-roaming rdaksasa, evil deeds in due course bear 
their fruit in this very world. I come as king, night-roaming raksasa, to end 
the lives of evildoers and all who wish the world ill. 

[11-14] “The arrows adorned with gold I unleash upon you shall rend 
your flesh, piercing you as snakes pierce an anthill. And once you have 
been slain in battle, you and your army shall soon follow the righteous men 
you devoured in the Dandaka forest. The supreme seers you killed in the 
past shall now look down upon you, they in their flying palaces and you, 
slain by my arrows, in hell. Fight all you will, try as hard as you can, lowest 
of your kind. I will now strike off your head, which is like the fruit of the 
tala.” 

[15-19] Addressed in this way by Rama, Khara flew into a rage, his eyes 
blazing red. Laughing but blind with rage, he replied to Rama: “How can 
you sing your own praises, son of Dasaratha, when you are so 
unpraiseworthy, simply on the strength of killing some common rdksasas in 


battle? The bold and powerful, those who are truly bulls among men, never 
speak of themselves in the pride of their own might. Only crude and 
common men, Rama, regarded as the scum of the kshatriya order in the 
eyes of all the world, make such empty boasts as you have made. Would 
anyone who is truly brave in battle bring up his family and praise himself— 
and so inopportunely, when the hour of his death 1s at hand? 

[20-24] “Your boasting has only shown how worthless you really are, 
like false gold smelted down in a grass fire. Can you not see me holding up 
my mace and standing before you as unshakable as a richly veined 
mountain that upholds the earth? With mace in hand like Yama, the ender of 
all things, with his noose in hand, I could easily take your life in battle, 
even all life in the three worlds. Granted, I have much to say to you. But I 
will say no more, lest the sun go down and our battle be suspended. By 
killing you now, I shall stop the tears for the fourteen thousand rdksasas 
you have slain.” 

[25-28] Having said this, in a violent rage Khara hurled his mace at 
Rama, a superbly banded mace that blazed like a lightning bolt. The mace 
shot forth in a blaze from Khara’s hand, incinerating trees and shrubs as it 
flew onward. But even as the flaming mace came flying toward him, like 
the very noose of Mrtyu, Rama’s arrows splintered it in midair. Shattered by 
the arrows, the mace fell to the ground like a serpent felled by the power of 
mantras and potent herbs. 


Sarga 29 

[1-5] After shattering Khara’s mace with his arrows, Raghava, who 
cherished righteousness, spoke to him in a passion but with a smile on his 
lips: “Is this all the power you can show me, lowest of raksasas? How 
inferior you are in strength to me, how hollow your boasting! Your mace 
lies here on the ground, shattered by my arrows, and with it any trust in 
your arrogant vaunting is likewise shattered. And when you said, ‘I shall 
stop the tears for the slain raksasas,’ those words were false as well. For I 
will take your life, raksasa, as Garutmant took the drink of immortality, you 
lowly wretch of evil deeds. 

[6—12] “This very day the earth will drink your bubbling, foaming blood 
as you are ripped apart, your throat cut by my arrows. And then, covered 
with dust, you shall lay your arms limply upon the earth and sleep with her 


in a close embrace, as if she were some hard-won woman. And once you lie 
in that deep slumber, you disgrace to the rdksasas, this Dandaka forest shall 
become a place of refuge for all in need of refuge. Once my arrows have 
made the Janasthana your final resting place, raksasa, the sages will wander 
throughout the forest without fear. This very day the raksasa women who 
used to terrify others shall themselves flee in terror and utter desolation, 
their kinsmen dead, their faces bathed in tears. This very day, night-roaming 
raksasa, all of those women of that same race who have husbands such as 
you shall know the meaning of grief. You base-minded wretch of evil 
deeds, ever a thorn in the side of brahmans! Because of you, the sages have 
cast their oblations into the fire in terror.” 

[13—15] But as Raghava was speaking so passionately in this way in the 
midst of battle, Khara replied out of anger, reviling him in the harshest tone: 
“It is only your brash arrogance that makes you so fearless in the very face 
of danger. You have lost all sense of what to say and not to say, because 
Mrtyu has you in his power. For once the noose of Kala is wound around a 
man’s neck, he no longer knows what is or is not to be done, and all the six 
senses fail him.” 

[16-20] Having spoken to Rama in this way, and knitting his brow into a 
frown, the night-roaming raksasa glanced around for a weapon to use in 
battle. He spotted a huge sd/a tree not far away, and biting his lip, he tore 
the tree up by the roots. As he raised it in his arms, the powerful raksasa 
bellowed, and hurling it at Rama he cried out, “You are slain!”” But as the 
tree hurtled toward him, mighty Rama splintered it with a torrent of arrows, 
and then he filled himself with a violent fury in order to kill Khara in battle. 
Breaking out in sweat, his eyes red with rage, Rama pierced Khara in battle 
with thousands of arrows. 

[21—25] His blood flowed in a foaming torrent from the wounds made by 
the arrows, like a stream cascading down Mount Prasravana. Khara 
staggered from the arrows Rama shot in combat, but then, intoxicated with 
the smell of his own blood, he swiftly charged at him. Drenched with blood, 
he threw himself upon him in a wild frenzy, but, practiced in arms, Rama 
sidestepped him with one quick move. Then, in order to slay Khara in 
battle, Rama took up an arrow that resembled fire, the purifier, or a second 
staff of Brahma. It was the arrow given by the wise king of the gods, Indra 
the munificent. 


[26-28] The righteous prince nocked it in order to loose it at Khara. 
Then, loosed by Rama, who had taken up his bow, the great arrow, with a 
crash like a thunderbolt, struck Khara in the chest. Khara fell to the ground 
as the arrow’s fire burned him up the way Andhaka once fell burned to 
ashes by Rudra in the White Forest. Struck by it, Khara fell like Vrtra cut 
down by the vajra, Namuci by the foam of the sea, or Bala by Indra’s 
thunderbolt. 

[29-32] All the royal seers and supreme seers then assembled, and 
jubilantly lauding Rama, they spoke these words: “It was to this end that the 
great and mighty Indra, the chastiser of Paka and smasher of citadels, paid 
his visit to the holy ashram of Sarabhajiga. The great seers thus contrived a 
means of bringing you to this place to slay these savage, evil raksasas. You 
have done what we required, son of DaSaratha, and now the great seers can 
safely follow the ways of righteousness in the Dandakas.” 

[33-35] At that juncture, mighty Laksmana, together with Sita, having 
made his way out of the mountain fastness, happily entered the ashram. 
Then heroic Rama, victorious and honored by the great seers, entered the 
ashram, being reverentially received by Laksmana. And Vaideht warmly 
embraced her husband, delighted to see that he had slain his enemies and 
brought peace to the great seers. 


Sarga 30 

[1-5] Now, when Sirpanakha saw how Rama by himself had slain in battle 
the fourteen thousand rdksasas of fearsome deeds, as well as Diusana, 
Trisiras, and Khara, she once more let out a deafening roar like a storm 
cloud. When she saw the feat accomplished by Rama, impossible for 
anyone else to do, she set out in terror for Lanka, which was protected by 
Ravana. She found Ravana of brightly blazing energy on the terrace of his 
splendid palace, seated with his ministers like Vasava with the Maruts. He 
was seated upon a golden throne radiant as the sun, and he looked like a 
purifying fire on a golden altar blazing with rich oblations. 

[6-10] A hero invincible in combat with gods, gandharvas, spirits, or 
great seers, he looked like Yama, the ender of all things, with his jaws 
agape. He bore thunderbolt and vajra wounds received in clashes with gods 
and asuras, and his chest was marked with raised scars from the tips of 
Airavata’s tusks. He had twenty arms and ten necks. His regalia was 


exquisite. A broad-chested hero, he was marked with all the marks of 
royalty. He sparkled with earrings of burnished gold and the glossy beryl he 
wore. His arms were handsome, his teeth bright white, his mouth was huge, 
and he was as tall as a mountain. In combat with gods his body had been 
wounded in hundreds of places by blows from Visnu’s discus and all the 
other weapons of the gods. 

[11-15] He could swiftly agitate the imperturbable oceans, throw down 
mountaintops, and crush the gods. A breaker of laws and a violator of other 
men’s wives, he constantly used all the divine weapon-spells to obstruct 
sacrifices. It was he who had gone to the city of Bhogavati, defeated Vasuki 
and Taksaka, and abducted Taksaka’s wife. It was he who had gone to 
Mount Kailasa and conquered the man-borne Kubera, stealing his flying 
palace Puspaka, which flies wherever one desires. It was he who in a 
mighty rage would destroy the gardens of the gods, the heavenly forest 
Caitraratha with its lotus pond, and the Nandana forest. 

[16—22] It was he who, tall as a mountain peak, would extend his arms to 
prevent those eminent scorchers of their foes, the sun and moon, from 
rising. It was that resolute one who long ago in the great forest had 
practiced austerities for ten thousand years and unflinchingly cut off his 
own heads as offerings to the self-existent Brahma. It was he who had no 
longer to fear death in combat with any beings—gods, ddnavas, 
gandharvas, pisdacas, great birds, or serpents—any beings but men. It was 
that immensely powerful one who would pollute the holy soma at the sites 
of the oblation, when in the course of their rites the twice-born brahmans 
consecrated it with vedic mantras. He would disrupt their sacrifices at their 
climax, then murder the brahmans. He was savage and wicked, cruel and 
ruthless, delighting in the misfortune of others. He was Ravana, the terror of 
all the worlds. The raksasa woman beheld her savage and powerful brother, 
clad in heavenly garments and jewels, adorned with heavenly garlands, the 
illustrious lord of raksasas, delight of the House of the Paulastyas. 
Sirpanakha, who once lived free from fear but was now beside herself with 
fear and confusion, told him the terrifying story of how the great prince had 
mutilated her. As she showed herself, his eyes grew wide and blazed. 


Sarga 31 


[1-5] As Ravana, who makes the worlds cry out, sat among his ministers, 
Sirpanakha in her rage and desolation addressed him with these harsh 
words: “Absorbed as you are in sensual pleasures, so licentious and 
unbridled, you overlook the one thing you must not, the presence of terrible 
danger. When a lord of the earth is lustful, addicted to vulgar pleasures, and 
a Slave to his passions, his subjects see him as no better than a cremation 
fire. If a king fails to attend to affairs himself and in timely fashion, those 
affairs come to grief, so too does his kingdom and the king himself. The 
ruler of men who is not his own master, grants no audience, or makes no 
use of spies is shunned by men, just as elephants avoid a muddy riverbank. 

[6-10] “If rulers of men are not their own masters and fail to protect 
their realm, their prosperity disappears, like mountains sunk beneath the 
sea. How can you remain king when, though staunchly opposed by gods, 
gandharvas, and danavas, you do not even bother to use spies? Rulers of 
men who do not master espionage, diplomacy, or their treasuries, your 
highness, are no better than common men. Kings are called farsighted 
precisely because, through their spies, they can see anything, however far 
away. But you, surrounded by worthless advisers, I believe, have made no 
use of spies, and thus you are unaware that your people, and Janasthana, 
have been destroyed. 

[11-16] “Fourteen thousand fearsome rdksasas have been killed by a 
single man, Rama, and with them both Khara and Disana. Tireless Rama 
has assaulted Janasthana, and he has thus made the Dandakas safe and won 
security for the seers. But consumed with lust, negligent, and no longer 
your own master, Ravana, you are unaware of the danger present in your 
realm. In times of trouble no one runs to aid a king who has been cruel and 
ungenerous, negligent, haughty, and treacherous. For when a ruler of men is 
arrogant and aloof, conceited and quick to anger, in times of trouble even 
his own people will slay him. A king who ignores his affairs, blind to 
dangers, is quickly toppled from his kingship—and the wretch is then not 
worth a straw. 

[17-23] “Dry logs have some use, even clods of dirt or dust, but not a 
ruler of the earth fallen from power. For no matter how able, a deposed king 
is as useless as a worn-out garment or a crushed garland. But a king who 1s 
alert, well informed, and self-controlled, knowing what must be done and 
acting in keeping with righteousness, enjoys a long reign. The king who, 


though his eyes be closed in sleep, watches with the eye of diplomacy, and 
who shows his grace no less than his wrath, is honored by his people. But 
you are a fool, Ravana, and devoid of such virtues, and so you lack spies to 
tell you of the huge massacre of the raksasas. A king who misjudges his 
enemy and is addicted to sensual pleasures fails to recognize the proper 
time and place for things and gives no thought to weighing the pros and 
cons of an issue. Such a king soon ruins his kingdom and himself.” Ravana 
paid heed as she recited his failings in this fashion, and for some time 
afterward the lord of night-roaming raksasas, with all his wealth and pride 
and power, sat lost in reflection. 


Sarga 32 
[1-3] When the raging Sirpanakha had finished her harsh speech, Ravana 
too was filled with rage, and from where he sat among his ministers he 
began to question her: “Who is this Rama? What does he look like? How 
powerful is he, how valorous? And for what reason has he entered the 
impassable Dandaka forest? What weapon could Rama possibly have with 
which he killed in combat the rdksasas Khara, Diisana, and Trisiras?” 

[4—6] Questioned in this fashion by the lord of the rdksasas, the raksasa 
woman, blind with rage, proceeded to tell all she knew of Rama: “Rama is 
the son of Dasaratha. He has long arms and large eyes and resembles 
Kandarpa, the god of love, though clad in barkcloth and black antelope 
hides. He has a bow like Sakra’s, banded with gold, and, drawing it to its 
fullest, he shoots flaming iron arrows that, like snakes, carry deadly poison. 

[7-11] “I could not even see powerful Rama take up his terrible arrows 
in combat, draw his bow, or shoot. But I could see the army cut down by his 
hail of arrows, like a tall stand of grain is cut down by Indra with a shower 
of hailstones. Fighting on foot, all alone, with those sharp arrows he killed 
fourteen thousand fearsome rdksasas in a mere moment, and a half-minute 
later he killed Khara and Disana as well. He has made the Dandakas safe 
and won security for the seers. I alone barely escaped from the great and 
celebrated Rama. Although he humiliated me, he shrank from killing a 
woman. 

[12—15] “He has a mighty brother, of equal prowess and virtue, who is 
loyal and devoted to him, the brave Laksmana. Implacable and invincible, 
sure of victory with his boldness, power, and intelligence, he is always 


there, Rama’s right arm, a veritable second self. Rama also has a lawful 
wife named Sita, princess of Videha. And what an illustrious woman she is, 
with her large eyes, slender waist, and full hips. No goddess, no gandharva 
woman, no yaksa or kinnara woman, no mortal woman so beautiful have I 
ever seen before on the face of this earth. 

[16-20] “He who claims Sita as his wife and receives her delighted 
embraces would live more happily than anyone else in all the worlds, the 
smasher of citadels, Indra himself, included. She is a woman of good 
character, with a form beyond all praise, a beauty unequaled on earth. She 
would make a perfect wife for you, and you a perfect husband for her. How 
broad her hips, how full and high her breasts, how lovely her face. Why, I 
all but brought her back to you myself to be your wife. The moment you see 
Vaidehi’s full-moon face, you will find yourself at the mercy of the arrows 
of Manmatha, the god of love. If it is your intention to make her your wife, 
put your right foot forward and set out at once to win her. 

[21-24] “And also, lord of rdksasas, please do a favor for the rdksasas 
and kill that cruel Rama, who is living in an ashram. For once you have 
slain him and the great chariot-warrior Laksmana with your sharp arrows, 
you will then happily enjoy Sita, her husband slain, to your heart’s content. 
If what I am saying meets with your approval, Ravana, lord of raksasas, 
you must do as I say without a moment’s hesitation. Now that you have 
heard how the night-roaming rdksasas of Janasthana were killed by the 
straight-flying arrows of Rama, and how Khara and Disana were killed, 
you must act at once.” 


Sarga 33 

[1-5] "When Ravana had heard Sirpanakha’s hair-raising report, he 
dismissed his advisers and turned his thoughts to what he should do. After 
pondering the question, examining it carefully, and weighing the pros and 
cons, the strengths and weaknesses, he decided exactly what to do, and, his 
mind firmly resolved, he made his way to the lovely carriage house. The 
overlord of the raksasas went secretly to the carriage house and ordered his 
driver to make a chariot ready. Thus ordered, the charioteer moved quickly 
and at once made ready the chariot, a splendid one prized by his master. 

[6-10] It was a golden, jewel-encrusted chariot that flew wherever one 
desired. Harnessed to it were donkeys decked out with trappings of gold, 


their faces like those of pisdcas. The majestic overlord of the rdksasas, 
younger brother of the bestower of riches, Kubera, ascended the chariot. 
Then, with the rumble of a storm cloud he set out for the ocean, the lord of 
streams and rivers. Ten-faced Ravana carried with him a white yak-tail fly 
whisk and a white parasol, and he sparkled with jewelry of burnished gold 
and the glossy beryl that he wore. Dressed in exquisite regalia, the twenty- 
armed enemy of the thirty gods and slayer of the principal sages resembled, 
with his ten heads, the ten-peaked king of the mountains. Mounted on his 
chariot that flew wherever one desired, the overlord of the rdaksasas 
appeared like a thundercloud in the sky ringed with lightning and a flight of 
balaka cranes. 

[11-15] Powerful Ravana gazed down upon the rocky coast, dotted with 
thousands of different fruit-bearing and flowering trees. It was filled with 
lotus ponds with cool, clear water and sprawling ashrams with sacrificial 
altars. It was teeming with plantain trees and ddhaki shrubs growing 
densely and coconut palms lending their beauty, along with sdlas, talas, 
tamdlas, and other flowering trees. Supreme seers given to rigorous fasting 
graced it; as did great serpents and birds, gandharvas and kinnaras by the 
thousands; perfected beings who had mastered desire, celestial bards, and 
various kinds of sages—djas, vaikhanasas, mdsas, vdlakhilyas, and 
maricipas. 

[16—20] There were apsarases by the thousands, all skilled in the sports 
of lovemaking. Their jewelry and garlands were heavenly; heavenly too 
was their beauty. It was a place the majestic wives of the gods would visit 
and touch with their majesty, where hosts of danavas wandered, as did the 
gods, who drink the nectar of immortality. It was full of hamsas, krauncas, 
and plavas, and it echoed with the call of sdrasas. There were lovely 
carpets of cat’s-eye beryl, made smooth and glossy by the ocean’s force. 
Hastening onward, the younger brother of Kubera, bestower of riches, saw 
on all sides spacious white chariots that could fly wherever one desired. 
They belonged to those who had conquered higher worlds by their acts of 
asceticism. They were all decked with heavenly garlands, and they gave 
forth the sound of musical instruments and singing. There were gandharvas 
and apsarases to be seen as well. 

[21-28] He saw pleasant forests of sandalwood, thousands of trees with 
gratifying redolence and roots juicy with resin; forests and orchards of fine 


aloewood, noble takkolas and fragrant fruit trees, tamdla flowers and 
marica shrubs; heaps of pearls drying on the shore, carpets of conch shells, 
mounds of coral, mountains of gold and silver everywhere; enchanting 
cascades and pools of clear water. His gaze fell on cities crowded with 
elephants, horses, and chariots, filled with grain and riches, adorned with 
women like perfect jewels. Such was the shore of the ocean, king of rivers, 
everywhere level and smooth, with breezes gently caressing. It was as if the 
very summit of heaven had come into view. And there he saw a banyan tree 
where seers were gathered. 

[29-34] Massive as a storm cloud, its branches extended a hundred 
leagues in every direction; and to one of these branches, long ago, mighty 
Garuda had come, carrying a huge tortoise and elephant on which to feed. 
But the leafy branch suddenly gave way under the weight of mighty 
Suparna, greatest of birds. Upon it supreme seers had gathered together: 
vaikhanasas, masas, valakhilyas, maricipas, ajas, and dhumras. In his 
compassion for them, righteous Garuda rushed up and caught the branch—a 
hundred leagues long—in a single claw, with both the elephant and the 
tortoise clinging to it still. After devouring their flesh, the greatest of birds 
used the branch to lay waste the realm of the Nisadas. He had freed the 
great sages and felt delight beyond compare. And this delight made him 
twice as bold and resolute. He resolved to go in quest of the nectar of 
immortality. Shattering the iron latticework and breaking into the supernal 
treasure-house, he stole the nectar from its hiding place in the palace of 
great Indra. 

[35-38] This was the banyan called Subhadra that Ravana, the younger 
brother of Kubera, bestower of riches, now beheld. Hosts of great seers still 
frequented it, and the claw marks left by Suparna were still to be seen. 
Upon reaching the farther shore of the ocean, the lord of rivers, he spied an 
ashram in a secluded, holy, and lovely stretch of forest. And there he saw 
the rdksasa Marica, who wore black antelope hides, matted hair, and 
barkcloth and practiced rigorous fasting. Ravana met with him according to 
custom, and then, clever speaker that he was, addressed these following 
words to the rdksasa. 


Sarga 34 


[1—5] Ravana said: “Marica, my dear friend, please listen to what I have to 
tell you. I am troubled, and you are my greatest solace when I am troubled. 
You know Janasthana where once dwelt my brother Khara, great-armed 
Diisana, my sister Sirpanakha, the mighty rdksasa Trisiras, an eater of raw 
flesh, and many another heroic night-roaming rdksasa who was tried and 
tested. On my orders the rdaksasas had made their dwelling there, 
oppressing the sages who followed the ways of righteousness in the great 
wilderness—fourteen thousand awesome rdksasas, heroes tried and tested, 
who bowed to the will of Khara. 

[6-10] “But just now these rdksasas of Janasthana, powerful and ever 
vigilant, met in combat with Rama. Rama, in a fury, but without one harsh 
word, set his bow and arrows to work on the field of battle. And with his 
keen arrows this mere man, fighting on foot, killed fourteen thousand 
raksasas of fierce, blazing energy. He killed Khara and struck down Disana 
in combat, he killed Trisiras as well and has made the Dandakas safe. This 
Rama who destroyed the army is a short-lived mortal, a disgrace to the 
kshatriyas, a man whose own father cast him out in anger, together with his 
wife. 

[11-15] “A man of no character, and a cruel, vicious, greedy, 
intemperate fool, he has forsaken righteousness and, in his unrighteousness, 
takes pleasure in others’ misery. And it was he who, without provocation, 
relying only on brute force, mutilated my sister in the wilderness, cutting 
off her ears and nose. He has a wife named Sita, a woman like the daughter 
of the gods. I mean to abduct her by force from Janasthana, and you must 
assist me. For with you and my brothers at my side to assist me, mighty 
Marica, I would think nothing of facing all the gods united in battle. So you 
must assist me, rdksasa, as I know you can, for you have no equal in might, 
in battle, and in pride. 

[16-20] “It is for this purpose that I have approached you, night-roaming 
raksasa. Now listen, and I shall tell you what you can do to assist me. 
Having turned yourself into a golden deer dappled with silver spots, you 
must go grazing near Rama’s ashram within sight of Sita. When Sita sees 
you in the form of this deer, she will surely tell her husband and Laksmana, 
“You must catch it!’ Then, once the two of them are gone and the place 
deserted, nothing can stop me from carrying Sita off, as Rahu, the demon of 
the eclipse, carries off the radiance of the moon. Afterward, with Rama 


weakened over the abduction of his wife, I know that I can easily kill him 
and so gain my innermost heart’s desire.” 

[21-22] But the moment great Marica heard mention of Rama, his mouth 
went dry and he was seized with utter terror. "Well acquainted as he was 
with Rama’s prowess in the great forest, he was terrified, and his heart sank 
in despair. Cupping his hands in reverence, he made a forthright reply for 
both Ravana’s good and his own. 


Sarga 35 

[1-6] After listening to the words of the lord of the raksasas, the wise and 
eloquent Marica replied: “How easy to find those who say what you want to 
hear, your majesty; how difficult to find one who gives—or heeds— 
unpleasant but sound advice. Clearly you know nothing of Rama, since you 
are too careless to make use of spies—not how great his might, how 
distinguished his virtues, and how like great Indra or Varuna he is. I fear no 
raksasa on earth will be safe from harm, my friend. I fear that Rama in his 
rage will empty the world of them. I fear that the daughter of Janaka was 
born to take your life. I fear some awful doom will strike because of Sita. I 
fear the city of Lanka, ruled by a lord like you—dissolute and a slave to his 
passions—will perish, and with it you and all the raksasas. 

[7-11] “A king like you, of poor judgment and poor character, a slave to 
his passions, takes bad advice and ends up destroying his kingdom, his 
people, and himself. Rama, the delight of Kausalya, was not forsaken by his 
father. It is absolutely false to say he knows no bounds, is greedy, of bad 
character, or a disgrace to the kshatriyas. He is not lacking in virtue or 
righteousness, nor is he vicious; on the contrary, he is devoted to the 
welfare of all creatures. When the righteous prince saw how Kaikeyi had 
deceived his father, he accepted forest exile to preserve the truth of his 
father’s word. To please Kaikeyi and his father, Dasaratha, he gave up the 
luxuries of kingship and entered the Dandaka forest. 

[12—17] “Rama is not cruel, dear friend, or stupid or intemperate. You 
must not say such things; they are completely untrue. Rama is righteousness 
incarnate, a just man who strives for truth. He is king of all this world, as 
Vasava is of the gods. How can you hope to violently abduct Vaideht, who 
is protected by her own blazing energy. It would be like taking the sunlight 
from Vivasvant, the sun. You must not rashly enter the fire that is 


unassailable Rama, who blazes up in battle with his bow and sword as 
kindling and his arrows as its flames. Armed with his bow and arrows, this 
hero implacably destroys the armies of his foes. When the mouth of his bow 
gapes wide and blazes and the fiery tongues of his arrows dart out, Rama 
becomes Yama, the ender of all things, himself. Do not get too near him, 
my friend, lest you lose every pleasure, your kingship, and the life you hold 
so dear. 

[18—23] “Janaka’s daughter belongs to one who is of immeasurable 
might. You will not be able carry her off in the forest, as her refuge is 
Rama’s bow. For he loves fair-waisted Sita more than life itself, and she has 
always been a faithful wife. He is a blazing fire, and she the flame that leaps 
from it. What can you possibly gain, overlord of the raksasas, by this futile 
adventure? For the moment you face him in battle it will be the end of you 
—your life, your every pleasure, and your hard-won kingship. Consult with 
all your righteous advisers, with Vibhisana at their head, and only then 
should you decide for yourself. Weigh first the advantages and 
disadvantages, the strengths and weaknesses, and honestly compare your 
power and Raghava’s. Then, once you decide where your true interests lie, 
you should do what is appropriate. As for me, I do not think it is appropriate 
for you to meet the prince of Kosala in battle. Listen for a moment longer to 
my final words, overlord of the night-roaming raksasas, and I shall tell you 
what is fitting and appropriate.” 


Sarga 36 
[1-6] “Once upon a time I too wandered this earth in pride of power, tall as 
a mountain and possessing the strength of a thousand elephants. 
Resembling a blue-black cloud, wearing a crest jewel and earrings of 
burnished gold, and armed with an iron club, I would roam the Dandaka 
forest, feeding on the flesh of seers and striking fear into all the world. But 
then the great sage, righteous Visvamitra, who was terrified of me, came in 
person to the lord of men DaSaratha and addressed him as follows: ‘Let 
Rama vigilantly protect me at the time of the lunar sacrifice, lord of men, 
for a terrible fear of Marica has arisen within me.’ Addressed in this fashion 
by the great and illustrious sage Visvamitra, the righteous King Dasaratha 
replied to him, ‘°Raghava is not yet sixteen years old and is unpracticed in 


arms. I, on the other hand, am prepared to go with all the army at my 
command and slay your enemy, best of sages, just as you desire.’ 

[7-11] “When he was addressed in this way by the king, the sage once 
again said to him: ‘There is no power on earth apart from Rama that is a 
match for that raksasa. A mere boy he may be, but he is mighty and capable 
of subduing him. I will take Rama and go. My blessings on you, slayer of 
your foes.” When he had spoken thus, the sage Visvamitra took the prince 
and returned delighted to his own ashram. Then, once the sage was 
consecrated for sacrifice in the Dandaka forest, Rama took up his position 
nearby, twanging his magnificent bow. He was just a beardless youth, 
standing bow in hand, clad only in a single garment—yet he was dark and 
majestic, with lovely eyes, a topknot, and a garland of gold. 

[12-15] “Resembling the crescent moon rising, Rama shed the radiance 
of his blazing energy over the Dandaka forest. It was then that I came, 
resembling a storm cloud, wearing earrings of burnished gold. Powerful in 
my possession of a boon, I arrogantly approached the ashram. He spotted 
me as soon as I entered, and instantly I raised my weapon, but all he did on 
seeing me was to calmly string his bow. In my folly I was contemptuous of 
Raghava—‘He is just a boy,’ I thought—and so I charged headlong at 
Visvamitra’s altar. 

[16—22] “Then he shot a sharp, enemy-slaying arrow and its impact 
hurled me into the ocean, a hundred leagues away. The force of Rama’s 
arrow carried me far away and dropped me insensible into the bottomless 
waters of the ocean. When, much later, I regained consciousness, dear 
friend, I made my way back to the city of Lanka. Thus did I escape on that 
occasion, but my companions were struck down by this ‘mere boy, 
unpracticed in arms,’ the tireless Rama. So if, despite my warning, you 
quarrel with Rama, it will not be long before terrible misfortune befalls you 
and you perish. And upon the rdksasas—all of whose care it is to master the 
sports of lovemaking and hold crowded fairs and festivals—you shall bring 
down misery and disaster. And so, on account of Maithilt you shall see 
Lanka laid to waste, along with its array of mansions and palaces, and all 
the precious objects that adorn it. For although they may commit no evil 
themselves, the innocent perish through association with evil, like fish in a 
pool of snakes. 


[23-28] “You shall see the rdksasas, who anoint their bodies with 
heavenly sandalwood cream and adorn themselves with heavenly jewelry, 
struck down on the ground through your own transgression. And you shall 
see the surviving night-roaming rdksasas fleeing in the ten directions with 
their wives—if their wives have not been carried off—and seeking refuge in 
vain. Yes, you shall surely see Lanka enmeshed in a net of arrows, engulfed 
in fiery flames, its dwellings burned. You already have thousands of lovely 
women in your harem, your majesty; be content with your own wives, 
rdksasa, and thus preserve your House. If you want to continue enjoying 
your prestige, prosperity, kingship, and your own precious life, you must 
give no offense to Rama. But if, despite this warning from me, your friend, 
you violently assault Sita, then, your army destroyed, you and all your 
kinsmen shall go down to the house of Yama, your lives taken by Rama’s 
arrows.” 


Sarga 37 

[1-5] “Thus did I barely escape him then in battle. But now hear what 
happened next. Although I had been dealt with like this, undaunted, I 
returned to the Dandaka forest accompanied by two raksasas in the shape 
of animals. I roamed the wilderness of the Dandaka as a huge, powerful 
animal with sharp horns and a flaming tongue, feeding on flesh. I roamed 
among sites of agnihotra rituals, places of pilgrimage, and sacred trees, a 
most dreaded creature, Ravana, assaulting the ascetics. Slaughtering the 
ascetics who followed the ways of righteousness in the Dandaka wilderness, 
I would drink their blood and devour their flesh. 

[6-10] “And so, feeding on the flesh of seers, terrifying all who lived in 
the forest, I roamed through the Dandaka, a savage creature drunk on blood. 
Now once, as I was roaming through the Dandaka wilderness, undermining 
righteousness, I again encountered Rama. He had adopted the life of an 
ascetic, given to rigorous fasting and devoted to the welfare of all creatures. 
The beautiful Vaidehi was present too, and the great chariot-warrior 
Laksmana. I felt contempt for mighty Rama, who was living in the forest: 
‘He’s just an ascetic now,’ I thought, recalling our former enmity. In the 
form of an animal, I lowered my sharp horns and attacked him in a towering 
rage. I remembered that earlier blow, and, fool that I was, I sought to kill 
him. 


[11-15] “But he drew his powerful bow and shot three sharp, foe-killing 
arrows, as swift as Suparna or the wind. Those strong-jointed, blood- 
drinking arrows resembled thunderbolts, utterly terrifying, and all three of 
them came at once. But knowing Rama’s prowess, having encountered the 
danger once before, I cunningly dodged them and so escaped while the 
other two raksasas were killed. Escaping Rama’s arrow, barely saving my 
life, I wandered off and came to this place as an ascetic practicing yoga and 
meditation. But still, behind every tree I seem to see Rama, clad in 
barkcloth and black antelope hides, wielding his bow like Yama, the ender 
of all things, himself, with noose in hand. 

[16—20] “Or rather, in my fear I see thousands of Ramas. Ravana, this 
whole wilderness appears to me to have become nothing but Rama. It is 
Rama I see, lord of raksasas, even when no one is near; I see him in my 
dreams and start up, half out of my mind. I am so terrified of Rama that 
even words beginning with the letter ‘r’—such as ‘riches’ or ‘roads’—fill 
me with terror, Ravana. I know full well his power. It is impossible for you 
to fight him, raksasa. So either do battle with Rama or forgive him. Only do 
not mention Rama if you hope to see me again. I say this only for my 
kinsman’s good, for if you fail to heed my words, you and all your kin will 
surely lose your lives in battle, killed by Rama’s straight-flying arrows.” 


Sarga 38 

[1-5] Although Marica had advised him what was best and appropriate, 
Ravana rejected it just as a man on the point of death might his medicine. 
And although Marica had spoken words that were to Ravana’s advantage 
and benefit, still, driven as he was by Kala, the overlord of the rdksasas 
replied to him with these harsh and inappropriate words: “What utter 
nonsense you are telling me, Marica; like seed sown in a desert, nothing at 
all will come of it. Your words cannot dissuade me from cutting down 
Rama in battle. He is, after all, a mere man, an evil, foolish one at that, who 
abandoned his loved ones, his kingship, his mother and father, and went off 
to the forest at a moment’s notice on the orders of a woman. 

[6—10] “And since he killed Khara in battle, I must by all means—and in 
your presence—carry off Sita, the woman he loves more than life itself. 
Such, Marica, is the firm resolve in my heart, and not even all the gods and 
asuras, Indra included, can stop me. You may speak only when asked to 


give arguments for and against, or to say what might be either helpful or 
harmful regarding the decision as to what to do. A wise counselor, if he 
seeks what is best for his king and for himself, should speak only when 
asked, raising his hands cupped in reverence. He must never speak in 
opposition to the overlord of the earth, but offer only beneficial advice 
gently, earnestly, and courteously. 

[11-15] “For a king does not welcome even beneficial advice if it is 
insulting and disrespectful, for he deserves respect. The power of kings is 
immeasurable, for they are able to take on five different forms. They can be 
as hot as Agni, god of fire, as valorous as Indra, king of the gods, as mild as 
Soma, the moon god, as punitive as Yama, the god of death, or as gracious 
as Varuna, god of the waters. Therefore, kings must be shown respect and 
honor in all circumstances. But you are ignorant of what is right and are 
fixed in delusion. In your perversity, raksasa, you speak to me thus so 
harshly when I am paying you a visit. I did not ask you about the 
advantages or disadvantages, or about what would best for me. In this deed 
that needs to be done, sir, you will assist me. You must become a golden 
deer dappled with silver spots and, once you have enticed Vaidehi, you can 
go where you please. 

[16-21] “When Maithilt sees you as an illusory, golden deer, she will be 
wonder struck, and at once she will tell Rama, ‘Bring it to me.’ Then, once 
Kakutstha and Laksmana are gone, | shall carry off Vaideht at my leisure, 
just as thousand-eyed Indra once did Saci. After you have done what I 
require of you, rdksasa, you can go where you please. I shall even bestow 
half my kingdom upon you, if you are true to your vows, Marica. An 
auspicious journey to you, dear friend, and may it lead to the success of our 
undertaking. After I have tricked Raghava and gained possession of Sita 
without a fight, I shall return with you to Lanka, my mission accomplished. 
You will carry through this mission of mine, even if I have to force you. He 
who stands in opposition to a king will never experience happiness. Now, 
should you encounter Rama, there is a possibility that you might lose your 
life; but 1f you oppose me, your death is certain. Consider it carefully in 
your mind and then do as you see fit.” 


Sarga 39 


[1-5] Given this imperious, yet perverse command, the night-roaming 
raksasa Marica made this harsh reply to the overlord of the rdaksasas: 
“What evildoer, night-roaming radksasa, would counsel the destruction of 
your sons, your kingdom, your ministers, and yourself? What malevolent 
wretch could be so wicked, your majesty, as to resent your happiness? Who 
could have advised you that opening the doors of death is sound strategy? It 
is only too clear that your enemies, powerless themselves, hope you will 
perish, night-roaming raksasa, before the onslaught of one even mightier. 
What lowly wretch could have given you this disastrous advice, night- 
roaming raksasa, hoping that you might perish by your own doing? 

[6—10] “Why do you not put to death those advisers, who are worthy of 
execution, Ravana, since they fail to restrain you in every way from this 
evil path. For virtuous ministers must by all means restrain a wayward king 
from taking an evil course. Yet you, who should have been restrained, were 
not restrained. It is through their master’s grace, foremost of conquerors, 
that advisers acquire what righteousness, profit, pleasure, and glory they 
may have, night-roaming raksasa. But all this counts for nothing, Ravana, 
should their master go astray; and if he loses his sense of virtue, all the 
people come to grief. For kings are the source of both righteousness and 
victory, foremost of conquerors. Therefore, the lord of men must be 
protected in all circumstances. 

[11-15] “But the brutal man will not safeguard a king’s position, night- 
roaming rdksasa, nor will the perverse or undisciplined man. For the king 
and with him all those advisers who counsel brutal measures are quickly 
overthrown, like chariots driven too fast down uneven roads by incompetent 
charioteers. In this world, many virtuous people who practice their proper 
duties perish with all that is theirs through the faults of others. Subjects 
under the protection of a perverse and brutal master, Ravana, prosper no 
more than do sheep under the protection of a jackal. Thus, all the raksasas 
of whom you, Ravana, are such a cruel, imprudent, intemperate king, shall 
inevitably perish. 

[16-20] “You are bringing down upon your head a dreadful, 
unfathomable disaster. What good can come of this if you should perish 
along with your army? For once he has slain me, Rama will kill you, though 
I at least will find fulfillment in dying at the hand of my enemy. You should 
consider me dead the instant Rama sets eyes on me, and know that you 


yourself and all your kinsmen are dead the moment you carry off Sita. If 
with my help you abduct Sita from the ashram, you shall cease to exist, and 
so shall I, and Lanka and all the rdksasas. I have your best interests at heart, 
night-roaming rdksasa, in giving you this warning, yet you ignore my 
words. But then, a man on the point of death, his life breaths fading, will 
not heed his friends’ beneficial advice.” 


Sarga 40 

[1-3] Then, after Marica had spoken harshly in this fashion, he was 
despondent. But terrified of the lord of night-roaming rdaksasas, he said to 
Ravana: “Let’s go. The minute Rama sets eyes on me again, bearing his 
sword and his bow and arrows, then, his weapon upraised to slay me, he 
will put an end to my life. But what can I do in the face of a person as evil- 
minded as you? So here, I am coming, my dear friend. Good luck to you, 
night-roaming rdksasa.” 

[4-6] The raksasa was delighted by his words, and embracing him 
warmly, he spoke these words: “These are the proud words I had wanted to 
hear from you. Before you were like some other night-roaming rdaksasa; 
now you are the real Marica. So please quickly mount my flying chariot, 
adorned with jewels and harnessed with pisdca-faced donkeys.” 

[7-11] Ravana and Marica then boarded the palatial chariot and at once 
left the circle of ashrams behind. And so, viewing the towns far below, the 
expanses of forest, the mountains, streams, kingdoms, and cities, they 
arrived in due course in the Dandaka forest. And then Ravana, the overlord 
of the raksasas, together with Marica beheld Raghava’s ashram. Then, 
alighting from the gold-adorned chariot, Ravana took Marica by the hand 
and said: “What you see here, surrounded by plantain trees, is the site of 
Rama’s ashram. Quickly now, my friend, please do what we came here to 
do.” 

[12-16] Upon hearing Ravana’s words, the raksasa Marica then turned 
himself into a deer and began to graze near the entrance to Rama’s ashram. 
His antlers were tipped with fine gems, his face mottled dark and light, one 
part like pink lotuses and the other like blue ones. His ears were like 
sapphires or blue lotuses, his neck was gently elongated, his belly gleamed 
like sapphire. His flanks were like the pale, velvety madhuka flower, and 
golden lotus shoots, and his hooves glowed like cat’s-eye beryl. He was 


slim with slender legs and was brilliantly endowed with a tail tinged with 
every color of the rainbow, Indra’s weapon. He was covered with all sorts 
of precious stones that lent him a glossy and captivating hue. For indeed, in 
a mere moment, the rdksasa had become an exquisite deer. 

[17-20] And then, that raksasa took on a lovely and captivating form, 
variegated with different precious metals. Shedding a brilliant radiance over 
the forest and Rama’s ashram, he wandered about grazing in the grasslands, 
just like a deer, in order to entice Vaidehi. Dappled with hundreds of silver 
spots, a lovely sight to see, he grazed among the trees, breaking off and 
nibbling the tender shoots. He wandered slowly, here and there, through the 
plantain grove and among the karnikara trees, at a slow pace, trying to stay 
within range of Sita’s vision. 

[21-24] The great deer, its back variegated like a blue lotus, was 
resplendent as it wandered at will near Rama’s ashram. Going back and 
forth again and again, appearing suddenly here and suddenly there, the 
splendid deer wandered about. One moment he would frisk about, then lie 
upon the ground; he would approach the ashram’s entrance and then move 
off to a herd of other deer. And then once more he would return with the 
other deer following behind, hoping Sita would notice him, this raksasa 
who had become a deer. 

[25-32] He roamed about, gamboling in graceful circles. The other deer 
stared at him, as did the other forest creatures. They came close and sniffed 
him, and then all scampered off in the ten directions. For he was still a 
raksasa, of course, who delighted in killing animals. But to conceal his true 
nature he did not eat these forest animals, even when they touched him. 
Now at that very moment, lovely-eyed Vaidehi, who was busy gathering 
blossoms, came out beyond the trees. The fair-faced woman with her 
intoxicating eyes wandered about gathering blossoms: karnikara, asoka, 
and mango. The beautiful, fair-faced lady, who did not deserve life in the 
wilderness, caught sight of the jewel-studded deer, his limbs sparkling with 
gems and pearls. PWith her sparkling teeth and ruby lips she stood there, 
eyes blossoming with wonder, staring longingly at the deer and his silvery 
hide. And the illusory deer watched Rama’s beloved too, and wandered all 
about there, illuminating the forest, so it seemed. And when Sita, daughter 
of Janaka, saw that jewel-studded deer, the likes of which no one had ever 
seen before, she stood lost in sheer wonder. 


Sarga 41 

[1-6] The flawless beauty with full hips and a complexion of polished gold 
was picking flowers when she spotted the deer with his beautiful flanks of 
gold and silver hue. In delight she cried out to her husband and to 
Laksmana, who stood armed and ready. At her call, Rama and Laksmana, 
those tigers among men, glanced up in Vaideht’s direction and saw the deer. 
When he saw it, Laksmana at once became suspicious and said to Rama: “I 
am sure that deer is none other than the raksasa Marica. When kings on a 
hunt enter the forest in delight, Rama, this evil creature, who can take on 
any form at will, assumes this or that disguise and kills them. He is an 
expert in illusion, tiger among men, and this 1s the illusory form of a deer he 
has taken on, as dazzling as a mirage. 

[7-11] “For nowhere in all the world, Raghava, master of the world, 
does there exist such a deer, sparkling with gems. Without a doubt, this is 
an illusion.” But even as Kakutstha was speaking in this fashion, bright- 
smiling Sita interrupted—her heart ravished by the disguise—and said in 
great delight: “Respected husband, what an exquisite deer! He has stolen 
my heart away. Please catch him for me, my great-armed husband. He shall 
be our plaything. Here at our ashram many beautiful animals come 
wandering in droves: yaks and gaur, apes, herds of nilgai, monkeys, and 
kinnaras. Lovely and powerful animals are always grazing here, my great- 
armed husband. 

[12—16] “But never before have we seen an animal such as this, your 
majesty, none so brilliant, tame, and radiant as this magnificent deer. His 
body sparkles with different colors and is speckled with chips of precious 
stones; he illuminates the entire forest, shining like the hare-marked moon. 
Oh! What coloring! What beauty! What sweet sounds he makes! He has 
utterly stolen my heart away, this marvelous, sparkling deer. If you can 
catch him alive, the wonderful deer will be a thing to marvel at, a source of 
wonder. And when our sojourn in the forest has ended and we are back in 
the kingdom once again, this deer will adorn the women’s quarters. 

[17-21] “The heavenly form of this deer will be a source of wonder for 
Bharata, my brother-in-law, and for my mothers-in-law as well, my lord. 
But if you cannot catch the splendid deer alive, tiger among men, then his 
hide would be a source of great pleasure to me. For were the creature to be 
killed, I should like his golden skin to be stretched over a cushion of straw, 


to make a seat. You might think it willful, heartless, or unladylike of me, 
but I am so filled with wonder at the beauty of this creature. Even the mind 
of Raghava is lost in wonder at the sight of him. For, with his golden hide 
and horns of precious gems, he shows all the brilliance of the morning sun, 
all the luster of the starry heavens.” 

[22—27| When Raghava heard these words of Sita’s and looked at the 
amazing deer, he addressed his brother Laksmana in delight: “Just see how 
Vaidehi longs to have this deer, Laksmana. Because of his surpassing 
beauty he shall die today. ‘For not even in the renowned forest of Nandana, 
nor in famous Caitraratha, let alone on earth, Saumitri, is any such deer to 
be found. The lovely patterns on the deer’s hair, both with the nap and 
against it, are brilliantly flecked with chips of gold. And look how when he 
yawns his gleaming, flamelike tongue darts from his mouth like lightning 
from a cloud. His face gleams with sapphire and crystal, his belly glows 
with conch shell and pearl. Indeed, this indescribable deer could beguile the 
heart of anyone. 

[28—32] “Anyone would be lost in wonder to see this heavenly form 
fashioned of every precious stone, glittering like gold. Both for meat and 
sport, Laksmana, kings armed with bows go hunting and kill animals in the 
deep forest. And in the deep forests they also gather riches with 
determination, precious metals of all sorts, veined with gems and gold. But 
here is all the wealth a man could ask for, Laksmana, riches enough to swell 
his coffers, just as Sukra’s coffers come to be swelled with all the wealth 
men dream of. Those who know the theory behind material success and 
those who achieve it, Laksmana, say a man in want of something should go 
and get it without hesitation. 

[33-37] “So fair-waisted Vaideht shall indeed sit with me upon the 
precious golden hide of this rare deer. There is no hide, I would guess, 
whether of antelope, gazelle, goat, or sheep, that could be so soft to the 
touch. This majestic deer and the deer constellation that moves through the 
sky are both heavenly. On the other hand, if this turns out to be an illusion 
on the part of that raksasa, as you have told me, Laksmana, then it is my 
duty to slay him. For the savage, uncontrolled Marica does roam the forests 
injuring the bulls among sages. 

[38-42] “He has killed many an overlord of the people, expert bowmen 
all, while they were out hunting, and so this deer, if it be he, must be slain. 


Long ago Vatapi lived in this place. Overpowering the ascetic brahmans, he 
would kill them from within their stomachs, just as her embryo kills a she- 
mule. But after a long time, on one occasion while wandering the world, he 
encountered the great sage, the mighty Agastya, who, imbued with his 
blazing energy, made a meal of him. Then, at the conclusion of the feast the 
holy one perceived that Vatapi was about to assume his true form again. 
Smiling, he said to him: ‘It was reckless of you, Vatapi, to overpower the 
best of the twice-born in this wide world of living beings. And because of 
that you are now to be digested.’ 

[43-49] “Just as happened with Vatapi, Laksmana, no raksasa who 
treats with scorn someone like me—I who am constant in righteousness and 
self-controlled—can hope to live. Now that he has fallen into my hands, I 
will kill him, just as Agastya slew Vatapi. But you, delight of the Raghus, 
must remain here armed and on your guard to protect Maithili. For our first 
duty is to her. Meanwhile, Saumitri, I intend to go at once to either kill or 
capture the deer. Just see how Vaidehi longs for the hide of this deer, 
Laksmana. And because of his splendid hide, this deer shall die today. So 
stay in the ashram with Sita, Laksmana, and be on your guard. Meanwhile, I 
will kill that speckled deer with a single arrow, and, when I have done so, I 
will take its hide and come back at once. Together with the wise, devoted, 
and immensely powerful bird Jatayus, you must stay close to Maithili. Be 
on your guard every moment, Laksmana, and suspicious of everything.” 


Sarga 42 

[1-6] Once he had instructed his brother in this way, the mighty prince, 
delight of the Raghus, strapped on his gold-hilted sword. He then strapped 
on a pair of quivers and took up his thrice-curved bow—his true ornament 
—and set off at a rapid pace. When the deer spied the lord of kings rushing 
toward him, it led him on, now vanishing through fear, then showing 
himself again. With sword strapped on and holding his bow, Rama ran 
toward the deer, seeing its form shimmering before him. At one moment he 
would spot it running through the deep forest, temptingly near, and would 
take his bow in hand, only to look once more and find the deer beyond the 
range of an arrow. In some stretches of the forest it came into view, seeming 
to fly through the sky in frightful panic, only to disappear once again. 


[7-11] Like the disk of the autumnal moon veiled in ragged clouds, he 
was visible one minute and invisible at a distance the next. And so, now 
appearing, now disappearing, he drew Raghava far away, and Kakutstha, 
hopelessly deluded by him, flew into a rage. Then, completely exhausted, 
the deer halted and withdrew to a shady spot in the meadow, not far away, 
where it appeared surrounded by other forest deer. Spying the deer, mighty 
Rama was determined to kill it. The powerful prince nocked his stout bow 
and drew it back powerfully. Taking aim at the deer, he loosed a gleaming, 
blazing missile fashioned by Brahma that glared like a snake as it darted 
forth. 

[12-15] ‘That supreme arrow violently penetrated Marica’s illusory deer 
form and, like a bolt of lightning, pierced his heart. The deer leapt high as a 
tala tree and with a ghastly shriek fell to the ground, tormented by the 
arrow, his life ebbing away. And as MaAarica lay there dying, he abandoned 
his illusory form. Realizing that his time had come, he cried out, “Alas! 
Sita! Laksmana!” in a voice exactly like that of Raghava. Pierced to the 
vitals by that incomparable arrow, the huge raksasa Marica abandoned his 
deer form and assumed his real one and lost his life. 

[16-21] For once he was struck down by that arrow, he became a 
rdksasa again, with huge fangs, a necklace of gold, sparkling earrings, and 
every other ornament to adorn him. When he saw that fearsome-looking 
raksasa, fallen to the ground, Rama immediately turned his thoughts to 
Sita, remembering what Laksmana had said and thinking: “The raksasa 
died only after crying out at the top of his voice, ‘Alas! Sita! Laksmana!’ 
What will be Sita’s state after hearing that? And great-armed Laksmana, 
what will be his state?” As these thoughts came to righteous Rama, the hair 
on his body bristled with dread. Then Rama’s despair gave way to a feeling 
of fear that shot through him with sharp pangs. For upon hearing that cry, 
he realized that he had actually slain a rdksasa in the form of a deer. After 
killing another chital and taking its meat, he hurriedly retraced his steps to 
Janasthana. 


Sarga 43 
[1-6] Meanwhile, when Sita heard that cry of distress, in exactly the same 
voice as her husband’s, off in the forest, she said to Laksmana: “Go and find 
out what has happened to Raghava. For my heart—my very life—is jarred 


from its place by the sound of his crying in deep distress that I heard so 
clearly. You must rescue your brother, who was crying out in the forest. Run 
to your brother at once, for he needs help! He has fallen under the power of 
the rdksasas, like a bull fallen among lions.” But even though he was 
addressed in this way, Laksmana, heeding his brother’s command, did not 
go. 

[S—8] Then the daughter of Janaka angrily said to him: “You wear the 
guise of a friend to your brother, Saumitri, but act like his foe, refusing to 
aid him in his extremity. You hope that Rama perishes, Laksmana, because 
of me. I think you would be happy should some disaster befall your brother. 
You have no real affection for him, so you stand there calmly even without 
being able to see that immensely splendid prince. For with him in danger 
and me here, how could I prevent what you came here with the sole 
intention of doing?” 

[9-13] Having been spoken to in such a way by Sita, princess of Videha, 
Laksmana, overwhelmed with tears and grief, replied to her as she stood 
there as frightened as a doe: “My lady, there is no one, god or man, 
gandharva, great bird, raksasa, pisdca, kinnara, animal, or dreaded danava 
—no one, fair lady, who could match Rama, the peer of Vasava, in battle. 
Rama cannot be killed in battle. You must not speak this way, for I dare not 
leave you in this forest without Raghava. His power cannot be withstood, 
not by any powers however vast, not by all three worlds up in arms, or the 
immortal gods themselves, together with their lord. 

[14—18] “So let your heart rest easy; give up this anguish. Your husband 
will soon return after killing that splendid deer. That was clearly not his 
voice, or any belonging to any divinity. It was an illusion on the part of that 
raksasa \ike a mirage. Rama entrusted you to me as a sacred trust, shapely 
Vaidehi. I dare not leave you here alone. Then, too, dear lady, because of 
the slaughter at Janasthana and the killing of Khara, we have incurred the 
enmity of the night-roaming raksasas. Raksasas delight in causing harm, 
Vaidehi, they make all kinds of noises in the deep forest. You need not 
wotry.” 

[19-24] Now, although what Laksmana said was true, Sita was enraged 
by his words. Her eyes blazed bright red as she made this harsh reply: 
“Ignoble, cruel man, disgrace to your House! How pitiful this attempt of 
yours. I feel certain you are pleased with all this, and that is why you can 


talk the way you do. It is not surprising, Laksmana, for rivals to be so evil, 
cruel rivals like you are always plotting in secret. You treacherously 
followed Rama to the forest, the two of you alone. You have either been put 
up to this by Bharata or are secretly plotting to get me. I am married to 
Rama, a husband dark as a lotus, with eyes like lotus petals. How could I 
ever give my love to some ordinary man? I would not hesitate to take my 
life before your very eyes, Saumitri, for I could not live upon this earth one 
moment without Rama.” 

[25-31] Addressed in this harsh and hair-raising way by Sita, Laksmana 
maintained his self-control, and with his hands cupped in reverence, he 
replied to her: “I dare not answer you back, Maithili, for you are a deity to 
me. And yet inappropriate words from a woman are hardly surprising. For 
this is the nature of women the whole world over. Women care nothing for 
righteousness, they are fickle, sharp-tongued, and divisive. May all the 
inhabitants of the forest give ear and bear me witness how my words of 
reason met so harsh a reply from you. Curse you and be damned, that you 
could so suspect me when I am only following the orders of my guru. How 
like a woman to be so perverse! I am going to Kakutstha. Good luck to you, 
fair woman. May the spirits of the forest, each and every one, protect you, 
large-eyed lady. But how ominous the portents that manifest themselves to 
me! I pray I find you here when I return with Rama.” 

[32-37] Now, when Laksmana addressed her in this fashion, Janaka’s 
daughter began to weep. Overwhelmed with tears she hotly replied: “Parted 
from Rama I will drown myself in the Godavari, Laksmana, I will hang 
myself or abandon my body in some desolate place. Or I will drink deadly 
poison or throw myself into a fire, eater of oblations. I would never touch 
any man but Raghava, not even with my foot!” Thus reviling Laksmana, 
Sita in her sorrow wept sorrowfully and struck her belly with her fists. At 
the sight of large-eyed Sita so deeply anguished and weeping, Saumitri was 
beside himself and tried to comfort her, but she would say nothing more to 
her husband’s brother. Then, cupping his hands in reverence and bowing 
slightly, Laksmana, the self-controlled prince, said farewell to Sita. And as 
he set out to find Rama, he looked back at Maithill again and again. 


Sarga 44 


[1-5] Raghava’s younger brother, angered at being spoken to so harshly and 
sorely longing for Rama, then set forth without further delay. This was just 
the opportunity ten-necked Ravana had been waiting for, and he took 
advantage of it at once. Assuming the guise of a wandering mendicant, he 
approached Vaidehi. He was clad in a soft ochre robe, decked out with a 
topknot, parasol, and sandals, and with a fine staff and water pitcher slung 
over his left shoulder. And thus in the guise of a mendicant, he approached 
Vaidehi. Endowed with immense power, he advanced upon her who had 
been abandoned in the forest by both brothers, just as pitch darkness 
advances upon the twilight, when both the sun and moon have set. He gazed 
at the illustrious young princess as ominously as an occluding planet might 
gaze upon the star Rohini when the hare-marked moon is absent. 

[6—11] Perceiving the savage creature of evil deeds, the trees that grew in 
Janasthana stopped rustling as the wind ceased to blow. Seeing him looking 
around with his blood-red eyes, the swift current of the Godavari River 
began to slacken in fear. Ten-necked Ravana had waited for this opportunity 
that Rama had given him. And so, in the guise of a mendicant, he drew 
closer to Vaidehi. As Vaidehi sat grieving for her husband, the unholy 
Ravana in the guise of a holy man edged closer to her, like the slow-moving 
planet, Saturn, closing in on the bright constellation Citra. In the guise of a 
holy man that evil creature was like a deep well concealed by grass. And he 
stood watching Vaidehi, the illustrious wife of Rama—a beautiful woman 
with lovely teeth and lips, and a face like the full moon—as she sat in the 
leaf hut tormented with grief and tears. 

[12-16] The evil-minded, night-roaming rdksasa stole ever closer to 
Vaidehi, who was dressed in garments of yellow silk, her eyes like lotus 
petals. Riddled with the arrows of Manmatha, the god of love, and yet 
intoning the sounds of the vedas, the overlord of the raksasas appeared 
before the deserted hut and courteously spoke. Ravana began to praise her, 
that loveliest of women in the three worlds, a radiant beauty, like the 
goddess Sri herself without her lotus, with these words: “Who are you, 
golden woman dressed in garments of yellow silk? Wearing a lovely 
garland of lotuses, you resemble a lotus pond yourself. Are you Hr, the 
goddess of modesty, or Kirti, the goddess of fame? Are you Sri or lovely 
Laksmi or perhaps an apsaras, lovely lady? Could you be Bhiti, the 


goddess of prosperity, shapely woman, or free-spirited Rati, the goddess of 
pleasure? 

[17-21] “Your teeth are bright white, tapered, and even; your eyes are 
large and clear, rosy at the corner, black in the center. Your hips are full and 
broad, your thighs as smooth as an elephant’s trunk. And these, your 
delightful breasts, how round they are, so ‘firm and ‘gently heaving; how 
full and lovely they are, as smooth as two ¢dla fruits, with their nipples 
standing stiff and the rarest gems to adorn them. Graceful lady with your 
lovely smile, lovely teeth, and lovely eyes, you have swept my heart away 
just as a river in flood sweeps away its banks. Your waist I could compass 
with my fingers; how fine is your hair, how firm your breasts. No goddess, 
no gandharva woman, no yaksa or kinnara woman, no mortal woman so 
beautiful have I ever seen before on the face of this earth. 

[22-26] “Your beauty, foremost in all the worlds, your delicacy and 
youth, and the fact of your living here in the woods stir the deepest feelings 
in my heart. Bless you, you should leave here; this is no place for you to be 
living. For this is the lair of fearsome raksasas, who can take on any form at 
will. Instead, you should be moving about in the finest palaces, in luxuriant, 
fragrant city gardens. I think that you deserve the finest garlands, 
beverages, and raiment, and the finest husband, my lovely, black-eyed lady. 
Could you be one of the Rudras or Maruts, sweet-smiling, shapely woman, 
or one of the Vasus, perhaps? You look like a goddess to me. 

[27-30] “But gandharvas do not go here, nor do gods or kinnaras, for 
this is the lair of the raksasas. How is it you have come here? There are 
monkeys here and such wild beasts as lions, leopards, tigers, bears, hyenas, 
and adjutant storks. How is it you do not fear them? And the fearsome 
elephants that go running wild, maddened by rut—how is it you do not fear 
them, lovely lady, all alone in the deep wilderness? Who are you? To whom 
do you belong, where do you come from, my precious, and why are you 
wandering all alone through the Dandakas, haunted by the fearsome 
raksasas?”’ 

[31-34] Praised in this way by evil Ravana and seeing he had come in 
the garb of a twice-born brahman, Maithili honored him with all the acts of 
hospitality due a guest. First, she brought forward a cushion and offered 
water for his feet, and then she called him when food was ready, for he had 
a kindly appearance. So when Maithill saw that he had come in the garb of 


a twice-born—a brahman with a begging bowl and saffron robe—when she 
saw these accoutrements, it was impossible for her to refuse him, and so she 
extended him an invitation befitting a brahman, telling him: “Here is a 
cushion, brahman, please be seated and accept this water for your feet. Here 
I have made ready for you the best fare the forest has to offer. You may 
partake of it freely.” 

[35-36] So Maithilt extended him a cordial invitation, and as Ravana 
gazed at her, the wife of the lord of men, he confirmed his resolve to take 
her by force and, with that, consigned himself to death. Her husband in his 
honest garb had gone out on the hunt, and she waited for him and 
Laksmana, looking around. But she saw neither Rama nor Laksmana—only 
the vast, green forest. 


Sarga 45 

[1-5] Questioned in this way by Ravana, who had come in the guise of a 
mendicant to carry her off, Vaideht, of her own accord, now began to tell 
him about herself. Sita reflected for a moment: “Being a brahman and a 
guest, he might curse me if I do not reply.” She then spoke these words: “I 
am the daughter of Janaka, the great king of Mithila. Bless you, foremost of 
twice-born brahmans, my name is Sita, and I am the wife of Rama. "For 
twelve years I dwelt in the House of Raghava, enjoying such pleasures as 
mortals enjoy and every luxury. vThen, in the thirteenth year, the king in 
concert with his kingly counselors approved the royal consecration of my 
husband. 

[6—10ab—874*] “But just as the preparations for Raghava’s consecration 
were under way, my mother-in-law named Kaikeyi asked her husband for a 
boon. For Kaikeyt had married my father-in-law in exchange for a favor. 
Thus, she had two things she now could demand of her husband, the best of 
kings and a man who always kept his word: one was the consecration of 
Bharata, the other, my husband’s banishment, saying: ‘From this day forth I 
will not eat, drink, or sleep. I will put an end to my life if Rama is 
consecrated.’ ~And as Kaikeyi was speaking in such a fashion, my father- 
in-law, who had always shown her respect, pleaded with her with offers of 
commensurate riches. But she would not do what he begged of her. *Rama, 
my husband, of immense blazing energy, was then twenty-five years old, 
while I had just passed my eighteenth birthday. 


[10cd—15] “YHis name is renowned throughout the world, his eyes are 
large, his arms strong. He is virtuous, honest, truthful, and devoted to the 
welfare of all beings. And then, when Rama came into his father’s presence 
for the consecration to begin, it was Kaikeyi who addressed my husband, in 
a rush of words: ‘Listen to me, Raghava, and hear what your father has 
decreed. The kingship is to be given to Bharata uncontested. And as for 
you, you are to live in the forest for nine years and five. You must go into 
banishment, Kakutstha, and save your father from falsehood.’ Without a 
trace of fear my husband, Rama, answered Kaikeyi with the words, ‘So be 
it,’ and firm in his vows, did just as she had told him. For Rama has taken a 
solemn vow, brahman, one never to be broken: always to give and not 
receive, to tell the truth and not lie. 

[16—20] “Now Rama has a companion, his half brother Laksmana, a 
tiger among men and heroic slayer of his enemies in battle. This brother 
Laksmana, who keeps to the ways of righteousness and is firm in his vows, 
followed—bow in hand—when Rama went into banishment with me. And 
so the three of us were driven from the kingdom for the sake of Kaikeyt. 
Thus, it is under compulsion, best of twice-born brahmans, that we now 
wander the dense forest. So rest a moment; or you can even stay here if you 
like. My husband will soon return bringing an abundance of food from the 
forest. But please tell me truthfully your name, your brahmanical lineage, 
and your family. How is it, twice-born brahman, that you wander all alone 
in the Dandaka forest?” 

[21-27] And as Sita, the wife of Rama, was speaking in this fashion, 
immensely powerful Ravana, overlord of the raksasas, made this chilling 
reply: “I am the one who terrifies the worlds, with all their gods, asuras, 
and great serpents. For, Sita, 1 am Ravana, the supreme lord of the hosts of 
rdksasas. Now that I have set eyes on you, flawless, golden lady clad in 
silk, I shall no longer take any pleasure in my own wives. From one place 
and another I have carried off many splendid women. But, bless you, you 
must become the chief queen over every one of them. In the middle of the 
ocean lies my vast city known as Lanka, perched upon a mountain peak and 
ringed by the sea. There, my lovely Sita, you shall stroll with me through 
the woodlands, never longing for this life you are leading in the wilderness. 
Five thousand servant women all adorned with ornaments shall wait upon 
you, Sita, if you become my wife.” 


[28—31] As she was addressed in this way by Ravana, Janaka’s daughter, 
that faultless beauty, was enraged and with utter contempt for the raksasa 
replied: “I am faithful to Rama, my husband, who is the equal of great 
Indra, as unshakable as a great mountain, and as imperturbable as the great 
sea. I am faithful to Rama, the great-armed, broad-chested prince, who 
moves with the boldness of a lion, a lionlike man, a lion among men. I am 
faithful to Rama, the king’s most cherished son, a great-armed, mighty 
prince of wide renown and strict self-control, whose face is like the full 
moon. 

[32—36] “But as for you, you are a jackal in the presence of a lioness, to 
come here seeking me, whom you can never have. You could no more touch 
me than touch the radiance of the sun. Surely you must be seeing the many 
golden trees of death, ill-fated Ravana, if you seek to possess the beloved 
wife of Raghava. You are seeking to pluck the fangs from the mouth of a 
venomous serpent or a swift and ravenous lion, the foe of all beasts. You 
wish to carry off Mandara, greatest of mountains, in your hand, or to drink 
the deadly kalakuta poison and go on your way, taking no harm of it. You 
are rubbing your eye with a needle, licking a razor with your tongue, if you 
seek to violate the beloved wife of Raghava. 

[37-40] “You are seeking to swim across the ocean with a boulder tied 
around your neck, or to carry off the sun and moon with your bare hands, if 
you seek to assault the beloved wife of Raghava. If you saw a blazing fire 
and sought to carry it away in a piece of cloth, that would be like seeking to 
carry off the virtuous wife of Rama. You are seeking to walk atop a row of 
iron-tipped lances, if you seek to violate the proper wife of Rama. As 
different as a lion and a jackal in the forest, the ocean and a rivulet, rare 
wine and sour gruel, so vast is the gulf between Dasarathi and you. 

[41-43] “As different as gold and lead, sandalwood paste and muck, a 
bull elephant and a cat in the forest, so vast is the gulf between Dasarathi 
and you. As different as Garuda, the son of Vinata, and a crow, a peacock 
and a cormorant, a sdrasa crane and a vulture in the forest, so vast is the 
gulf between you and Dasarathi. As long as Rama, the equal in majesty to 
thousand-eyed Indra, walks the earth armed with his bow and arrows, you 
may carry me off but can never enjoy me, any more than a fly can swallow 
and digest a diamond.” 


[44-45] Such were the words the innocent woman addressed to the evil 
night-roaming radksasa, but a shudder passed through her body, and she 
began to quiver like a slender plantain tree tossed by the wind. And when 
Ravana, mighty as Mrtyu himself, observed how Sita was trembling, he 
thought to terrify her still further by telling of his House, his power, the 
name he had won for himself, and the deeds he had done. 


Sarga 46 

[1-5] As Sita was speaking in this manner, Ravana flew into a rage, and, 
knitting his brow into a frown, he harshly replied: “I am half brother to the 
lord of wealth Vaisravana, lovely lady. My name, bless you, is Ravana, the 
mighty ten-necked one. In fear of me the gods, gandharvas, pisdcas, great 
birds, and serpents all flee, just as all creatures in fear of death. Over some 
matter, my half brother, Vaisravana, and I came into conflict, and so, in 
anger, I attacked and defeated him in battle. Tormented by fear of me, he 
left his own prosperous realm and now dwells on Kailasa, highest of 
mountains, with only men to convey him. 

[6—9] “For the flying palace that flies wherever one desires, the splendid 
Puspaka, once belonged to him. But I took it through my valor, my beauty, 
and now use it to travel through the sky. At the mere sight of my face, 
Maithilt, once my anger has been provoked, the gods with Indra at their 
head flee in terror. In my presence the wind blows cautiously, and the sun 
with his scorching rays makes them cool in fear. The leaves on the trees 
stop rustling, and the rivers slacken their current wherever I am, wherever I 
go. 

[10-13] “On the far shore of the ocean lies my city, Lanka, thronged 
with fearsome rdksasas. It is as splendid as Indra’s Amaravatt. It is a 
beautiful, dazzling city surrounded by a white rampart, with gateways made 
of gold and towers of cat’s-eye beryl. It is crowded with elephants, horses, 
and chariots, and the sound of musical instruments resounds there. Its 
gardens are beautiful, filled with trees bearing any fruit one wants. 

[14-18] “Living there with me, proud princess Sita, you shall forget 
what it was like to be a mortal woman. For enjoying not only the pleasures 
mortals enjoy, lovely lady, but divine pleasures too, you shall soon forget 
that short-lived mortal, Rama. So feeble is his valor that King DaSaratha, in 
order to enthrone a favored son, was able to drive him into the forest, 


firstborn though he was. What use is this witless Rama to you, large-eyed 
woman, a miserable ascetic who lets himself be deposed from the kingship? 
The lord of all raksasas has come here in person, of his own accord, out of 
love. Please do not reject him, who is so deeply wounded by the arrows of 
Manmatha, the god of love. For if you reject me, timid lady, you shall live 
to regret it, just like Urvast after she spurned, with her foot, as it were, 
Purtravas.” 

[19-23] Addressed in this fashion, Vaidehi was overcome with rage. Her 
eyes grew red, and though all alone in that deserted spot, she made this 
harsh reply to the lord of rdksasas: “How can you want to commit such an 
outrage, you who claim Vaisravana as your brother, a god to whom all 
beings pay homage? The rdksasas shall inevitably perish, Ravana, all who 
have you for their king, a cruel, imprudent, intemperate king. A man might 
abduct Indra’s wife, Saci herself, and still escape with his life, but for him 
who carries me, the wife of Rama, off, there is no hope of life. Yes, one 
might steal Saci of incomparable beauty from the hand that wields the 
thunderbolt and yet long remain alive. But for you, raksasa, if you assault a 
woman like me, there can be no escape, even should you drink the nectar of 
immortality.” 


Sarga 47 

[1-4] Hearing Sita’s words the powerful ten-necked Ravana clapped his 
hands and made ready to assume his massive form. And he once more 
addressed Maithili, still more harshly than before: “It seems you did not 
hear, madwoman, when I spoke of my strength and valor. I can lift the earth 
in my arms while standing in the sky. I can drink up the ocean. And I can 
slay even Mrtyu, death himself, in battle. I can shatter the earth with my 
sharp arrows, madwoman, or bring the sun to a halt. I can take on any form 
at will. You see before you a husband ready to grant your every wish.” 

[S—10] And as Ravana was speaking thus in his wild rage, his yellow- 
rimmed eyes turned fiery red. Then, suddenly, Ravana, the younger brother 
of Vaisravana, abandoned the kindly form of a beggar and assumed his true 
shape, one like the appearance of Kala, god of death, himself. His eyes 
blazing bright red, with his earrings of burnished gold, and with bow and 
arrows, he became once more the majestic, ten-faced, night-roaming 
rdaksasa. Abandoning the guise of a mendicant, he assumed his own true 


form again, the colossal form of Ravana, overlord of the raksasas. With his 
eyes blazing bright red in his rage, lowering like a bank of storm clouds, 
and clad in a red garment, Ravana stood before Maithilt. He glared at her, 
that perfect jewel of a woman, with her jet-black hair and her radiance, 
which was like the sun, bringer of light, and the fine clothes and ornaments 
that she wore. And he said: 

[11-14] “If you seek a husband renowned throughout the three worlds, 
shapely woman, then be mine; for I am a lord worthy of you. If you will 
love me forever, I shall be a lover to win your praise, and never, my beauty, 
will I do anything to displease you. Give up your love for this mortal 
creature and bestow your love on me. What possible virtues could make 
you love this short-lived Rama, a failure, stripped of kingship? You fool! 
You think you are so wise. He is a simpleton, who, at the bidding of a 
woman, abandoned his kingdom and loved ones to come and live in this 
forest, the haunt of wild beasts.” 

[15-20] And after speaking in this way to Sita, the princess of Mithila, 
who deserved the same kindness she always showed others, Ravana seized 
her as the planet Mercury might seize the star Rohini in the sky. With his 
left hand he seized lotus-eyed Sita by her hair and with his right hand by her 
thighs. When the forest divinities saw him, who, with his long arms and 
sharp fangs resembled a mountain peak racing along like Mrtyu, god of 
death, they fled, overpowered by fear. Then, with a harsh rumble, Ravana’s 
huge chariot appeared. It was fashioned through the power of illusion, had 
wheels of gold, and was harnessed with donkeys. With loud, harsh threats 
he then clutched Vaidehi to his side and forced her aboard the chariot. 
Caught in Ravana’s grip and wild with despair, the illustrious Sita screamed 
at the top of her voice, crying, “Rama!” But Rama was far off in the forest. 

[21—25] Filled with desire for her who did not desire him, Ravana flew 
up, holding her writhing like the wife of a serpent lord. As the lord of the 
raksasas carried her off through the sky, she screamed shrilly like a woman 
gone mad, in agony, or delirious, crying: “Alas, great-armed Laksmana! 
You have always sought favor with your guru. Do you not realize that I am 
being carried off by a raksasa, who can change his form at will? And you, 
Raghava, you renounced all life’s pleasures, everything of value, for the 
sake of righteousness. Don’t you see me being carried off in defiance of all 
that is right? And surely, slayer of your enemies, you are the one to 


discipline wrongdoers. Why then don’t you punish so evil a creature as 
Ravana? 

[26-30] ““Of course, the consequences of wrongdoing do not manifest 
themselves immediately. Time is a factor in this, as in the ripening of grain. 
And as for you, Ravana, Kala must have robbed you of your senses to do 
what you have done. You shall receive a terrible punishment from Rama, 
one that will end your life. Just see how Kaikeyi and all her kinsmen have 
accomplished their desire; since Rama’s lawful wife has been taken from 
him, that illustrious prince whose sole desire is righteousness. I call upon 
you, Janasthana, and the blossoming karnikara trees to tell Rama at once 
that Ravana is carrying off Sita. And I respectfully salute you, Mount 
Prasravana, with your flower garlands and massive peaks. Please tell Rama 
at once that Ravana is carrying off Sita. 

[31-36] “And I respectfully salute you, Godavari River, alive with the 
call of hamsas and sdrasa cranes: please tell Rama at once that Ravana is 
carrying off Sita. And you too, divinities who inhabit the different trees of 
this forest, I bow in homage to you all. Please tell my husband that I have 
been carried off. And all you creatures that live in this place, I appeal to you 
as well for refuge, all you flocks of birds and herds of beasts. Tell my 
husband that the woman he loves more than life itself is being carried off, 
that Sita has been helplessly carried away by Ravana. Once the powerful, 
great-armed prince discovers where I am—even should it be in the next 
world—he will come in all his valor and bring me back, no matter if it were 
Yama Vaivasvata himself, the god of death, who had carried me off. 
Jatayus, you must tell Rama and Laksmana accurately about my abduction. 
You must report everything to them, omitting nothing!” 


Sarga 48 
[1-5] Hearing the commotion, Jatayus, who had been asleep, looked up and 
quickly spotted Ravana and Vaideht. Perched in a tree, the great keen- 
beaked and majestic bird—who looked like a mountaintop—then called out 
these fitting words: “Ten-necked Ravana, I am Jatayus, the immensely 
powerful king of vultures, who keeps to the immemorial ways of 
righteousness and puts his trust in truth. Rama, the son of Dasaratha, is king 
of all the world, the equal of great Indra and Varuna, and dedicated to the 
welfare of all people. The fair-hipped woman you now seek to carry off 


belongs to him, the master of the world. Her name is Sita, and she is his 
illustrious and lawful wife. 

[6-10] “How could any king who keeps to the ways of righteousness 
defile the wife of another man, and a king’s wife at that, who is inviolable 
above all? It is a despicable thing, immensely powerful Ravana, to defile 
the wife of another. Put such a thought out of your mind. A wise man 
should not do what others would censure. One must consider the wives of 
other men as no less inviolable than one’s own. It is according to the 
conduct of their king, delight of the Paulastyas, that the learned decide 
questions of profit, pleasure, or righteousness that are not settled in the 
sastras. For a king is himself righteousness, pleasure, and the ultimate 
repository of wealth; the king is the root from which all conduct springs, be 
it good or evil. You are evil and reckless by nature, foremost of raksasas. 
How could you possibly have secured your lofty position of power? It is as 
if a sinner had acquired a golden celestial chariot. 

[11-15] “Indeed, it is true that one can never change one’s lustful 
nature. A noble person will not long dwell in the house of the wicked. 
Immensely powerful and righteous Rama has never wronged you in your 
city or your kingdom. Why then are you wronging him? If Khara came to 
Janasthana on Sirpanakha’s behalf and, overstepping all bounds, was slain 
by tireless Rama, tell me now in all honesty, what wrong is Rama guilty of 
that you should flee, carrying off this woman, the wife of the master of the 
world? You must release Vaidehi at once or he shall consume you with his 
terrible, scorching eye, just as Indra’s thunderbolt consumed the demon 
Vrtra. 

[16—21] “You do not realize that you have bound a venomous serpent in 
the hem of your cloak. You do not see that the noose of Kala is wound 
around your neck. A man should bear only a load, my friend, that does not 
cause him to collapse. He should eat only the food he can digest without 
making him sick. For who would attempt a deed that can bring him no 
righteous merit, no worldly fame or glory, nothing but physical pain? I was 
born sixty thousand years ago, Ravana, and all that time I have justly 
reigned in the kingship of my fathers and forefathers. Although I am old 
and you are young and equipped with your chariot, armor, and your bow 
and arrows, still, you shall not take Vaideht and go your way unscathed. 
You cannot carry off Vaidehit by force before my very eyes, any more than 


one can refute the immutable text of the vedas by arguments tricked out 
with logic. 

[22—27] “So stand a while and fight, Ravana, if you are such a hero. You 
shall soon be lying upon the ground, slain like Khara before you. For Rama, 
this man clad in barkcloth, has often killed daityas and danavas in battle, 
and he shall soon slay you in combat as well. But I myself must do what I 
can. Both princes are far away, and no doubt your hasty departure, coward, 
is from your fear of them. As long as there is life in me, you shall not 
abduct the lovely, lotus-eyed Sita, beloved queen of Rama. Come what may, 
I will serve the great prince Rama, and DaSaratha too, even should it cost 
me my life. So stand, ten-necked Ravana, stand but a moment. Look, I offer 
you the hospitality of battle to the death. I will hurl you from your splendid 
chariot, night-roaming rdksasa, like ripe fruit from its stalk.” 


Sarga 49 

[1-7] Although he was properly addressed in this way by Jatayus, Ravana 
flew into a rage, and all his twenty eyes began to blaze like fire. His eyes 
red with rage, and wearing earrings of burnished gold, the impetuous lord 
of raksasas attacked that lord of birds. There then arose a tumultuous clash 
between them there in the deep forest like that of two thunderclouds 
clashing in the sky, driven by the wind. It was an amazing battle that took 
place between the vulture and the raksasa, such as two lofty, garlanded 
mountains might have fought when they still had their wings. The powerful 
night-roaming raksasa showered the vulture king with terrible broad- 
headed and iron arrows as well as sharp-tipped barbed arrows. But the 
vulture Jatayus, lord of birds, withstood that hail of arrows, Ravana’s 
missiles, in battle. And that immensely powerful foremost of birds inflicted 
many wounds on his body with his sharp-taloned feet. 

[8-13] Then, in a rage, ten-necked Ravana, eager to crush his enemy, 
took up ten terrible arrows, each one of them like the rod of Mrtyu, the god 
of death. And with his bow fully drawn, mighty Ravana shot those keenly 
honed, terrible, spike-tipped arrows. Flying straight, they pierced the 
vulture. And yet Jatayus, seeing Janaki weeping in the raksasa’s chariot, 
ignored the arrows and attacked again. With his talons the mighty lord of 
birds shattered Ravana’s pearl-studded bow and all his arrows, and with his 
wings he battered his shield that blazed like fire. Unleashing all his power 


in combat, Jatayus then killed Ravana’s team, those unearthly fleet donkeys 
with the faces of pisdcas and breastplates made of gold. 

[14-18] Next he smashed the great splendid chariot that could fly 
wherever one desired, along with its yoke pole, its sparkling wheels of 
gems and gold that made it gleam like fire, as well as its yak-tail fly whisks 
and its parasol as radiant as the full moon. Ravana, his bow shattered, his 
chariot gone, and his steeds and charioteer slain, fell to the ground, 
clutching Vaidehi to his side. When the creatures of the forest saw Ravana 
fallen to the ground from his shattered vehicle, they honored the vulture 
king, crying, “Well done! Well done!” with shouts of commendation. But as 
Ravana saw that the aged king of the birds had exhausted himself, he leapt 
up again in delight, still holding Maithilt. And yet, even as he set off in 
delight, clutching Janaka’s daughter to his side, the vulture king Jatayus 
flew up after him and spoke these words: 

[19-23] “This is the wife of Rama, whose arrows strike like 
thunderbolts. Can you not see, Ravana, you fool, that carrying her off will 
lead to the slaughter of the radksasas? You, your allies and kinsmen, your 
ministers, your army, and your retainers are gulping virulent poison just as a 
thirsty man might gulp water. Those who recklessly ignore the 
consequences of their acts quickly perish, and so will you. You are caught 
fast in the noose of Kala. Where can you go to free yourself from it? You 
are like a fish once it has swallowed a baited hook for its own destruction. 
For, Ravana, the two unassailable Kakutstha Raghavas will never forgive 
your assault upon their ashram. 

[24—28] “A coward, you have done something condemned by the whole 
world in taking the path of a thief, not of a hero. So stand for a moment and 
fight, Ravana, if you are brave enough. You shall soon be lying upon the 
ground, slain like your brother Khara. When a man’s death is near, he will 
perform some act of unrighteousness that leads to his own destruction, and 
this 1s exactly what you have done. And what man, after all, would do a 
deed whose consequences are sure to be evil? No one would, not even the 
lord of the world himself, the blessed self-existent Brahma.” And, having 
spoken these fitting words, the mighty Jatayus hurled himself violently 
upon the back of the rdksasa, ten-necked Ravana. 

[29-35] Then seizing him with his sharp talons, he began to tear at him 
on every side, as would a mahout riding an unruly elephant. He tore at him 


with his talons, sank his beak into his back, and ripped out his hair, armed 
only with his claws, wings, and beak. Again and again the vulture king 
tormented him, until the raksasa began to shake, his lips trembling with 
fury. Harried and beside himself with rage, Ravana struck at Jatéyus with 
his palm, all the while clutching Vaidehi tightly to his left side. But Jatayus, 
the foe-taming lord of birds, got clear and with his beak tried to wrench 
apart his ten left arms. In a rage, ten-necked Ravana released Sita and 
pummeled the vulture king with fists and feet. Then, for a time, there was a 
struggle between the foremost of the raksasas and the foremost of birds, 
both incomparable in valor. 

[36-40] But as the bird persevered in his struggle on Rama’s behalf, 
Ravana drew his sword and cut off his wings, his feet, and his flanks. His 
wings severed by the rdksasa of savage deeds, the vulture fell stricken to 
the ground, his life ebbing. Seeing Jatayus, drenched with blood, fallen 
upon the earth, Vaidehi ran to him in sorrow as if he were her kinsman. The 
lord of Lanka stood watching as Jatayus fell back to the ground, his body as 
blue-black as a storm cloud, his chest milk white, his noble power like a 
forest fire suddenly extinguished. But as the bird lay struck down to the 
ground and crushed before Ravana’s onslaught, moon-faced Sita, daughter 
of Janaka, took him in her arms and wept. 


Sarga 50 

[1-5] The overlord of the raksasas watched as the vulture, his life ebbing 
away, fell writhing to the ground, not far from Raghava’s ashram. But the 
woman whose face was like the moon, overlord of stars, began to lament 
bitterly when she saw the vulture king cut down by Ravana. And the lovely 
woman called out in terror, as if they were nearby and could hear her: 
“Whenever good or evil is about to befall a person, portents inevitably 
appear, signs such as the sight or screeching of birds. Therefore, Rama, 
surely you must know that a terrible disaster threatens you? Surely, 
Kakutstha, it is because of me that birds and beasts are fleeing. Kakutstha! 
Laksmana! Save me!” 

[6-10] While Vaideht was lost in helpless lamentation, her garlands 
crushed and her jewelry in disarray, Ravana, overlord of the rdaksasas, 
rushed up to her. She clung to a massive tree, twining herself around it like 
a vine while the overlord of the raksasas shouted over and over again, “Let 


go! Let go!” As she, whom Rama had left all alone in the forest, cried out, 
“Rama, Rama!” Ravana, like Yama, the ender of all things, seized her by 
the hair—thereby condemning himself to death. As Vaidehi was being 
assaulted, the whole world without end, including all things that move and 
do not move, was enveloped in a blinding darkness. And watching with his 
divine eye poor Sita being assaulted, the majestic Grandfather Brahma saw 
the outrage upon her and said, “What had to be done has been done.” 

[11-15] The supreme seers who dwelt in the Dandaka forest, their body 
hair bristling, trembled as they watched the assault upon Sita. Even as she 
cried out, “Rama, Rama!” and “Laksmana!” Ravana, overlord of the 
raksasas, took her and flew up into the sky. All adorned in ornaments of 
burnished gold and dressed in garments of yellow silk, the princess looked 
like a streak of lightning flashing from a storm cloud. Her yellow garment 
billowed out and made Ravana blaze all the more brilliantly, like a 
mountain engulfed in flames, while the lotus petals worn by beautiful 
Vaidehi, coppery and fragrant, were scattered over Ravana. 

[16—20] Her golden silks, billowing out in the sky, resembled a cloud 
stained copper by the reddish rays of the midday sun. As she was clutched 
to Ravana’s side way up in the sky, her radiant face, without Rama, no 
longer shone, like a lotus ripped from its stalk. It looked like the rising 
moon breaking through the tatters of a storm cloud. Her flawless and 
unblemished face, the color of a lotus calyx, with its smooth forehead and 
lovely hair, its fine nose and soft ruby lips, adorned with white, lustrous, 
and shining teeth, was now streaked with tears through her weeping. But 
still her beautiful, golden face, as lovely as the moon, was quivering before 
the lord of raksasas, and, like the moon appearing by day, it shone but 
faintly, without Rama. 

[21—25] Maithilt was golden skinned, and pressed against the blue-black 
raksasa, she resembled the golden star that glitters within a sapphire. Fair 
as a lotus, golden hued, with ornaments of burnished gold, the daughter of 
Janaka in Ravana’s embrace looked like a streak of lightning entering a 
storm cloud. The sound of Vaidehi’s ornaments made the overlord of the 
raksasas still more like a rain cloud, pure blue-black and now sounding as 
well. A shower of blossoms fell all over the ground, dropping from the 
crown of Sita’s head as she was carried off. And driven by the force of his 
onrush, it went swirling back all over ten-necked Ravana. 


[26-30] The cascade of blossoms came swirling back around 
Vaisravana’s younger brother, like the brilliant wreath of stars that swirls 
around Meru, foremost of mountains. Vaidehi’s jewel-studded anklet was 
shaken from her foot, and with a sweet jingling sound it fell like an arc of 
lightning. With her complexion pale pink as a tree’s new shoot, Vaidehi lent 
a glow to the raksasa’s blue-black limbs, like a golden girth upon an 
elephant. In the natural radiance of her beauty, Sita resembled a comet in 
the sky as VaiSravana’s younger brother rose into the sky and carried her 
away. Her flame-colored ornaments were scattered, jingling, across the 
ground, falling like stars from the firmament when their store of merit has 
been exhausted. 

[31-36] Shining like the moon, the overlord of stars, Vaidehi’s pearl 
necklace slipped from between her breasts and fell like the Ganges 
descending from heaven. Their tops shaken by the wind of Ravana’s flight, 
the trees with their flocks of various birds seemed as if they were crying 
out, “Do not be afraid!” >’With their lotuses overturned, their fish and water 
creatures frightened, and with sighs rising from their vaporous waters, the 
lotus ponds seemed to be grieving for Maithili as if for a friend. From every 
side lions, tigers, deer, and birds swarmed together and went running after 
them in a fury, chasing Sita’s shadow. And as Sita was being carried off, the 
mountains too, with their waterfalls for their tearful faces and their high 
peaks for their upraised arms, seemed to be weeping. At the sight of Vaideht 
being carried off the majestic sun, maker of day, was as if despondent, his 
radiance dimmed and his glowing orb pallid. 

[37-42] “There is no such thing as righteousness, much less truth, 
uprightness, or kindliness, if Ravana can carry off Vaidehi, the wife of 
Rama,” so all creatures, gathered in groups, seemed to mourn. Even the 
young of the forest creatures, their faces desolate, began to weep. And 
although their eyes were clouded by falling tears, they kept gazing upward 
in their fright. The divinities of the forest too were seized with violent 
trembling in every limb, to see the wretched plight of Sita, to hear her loud 
wailing. Again and again, glancing down at the earth, Vaidehi cried out in 
her sweet voice, “Laksmana! Rama!’ Her hair was disheveled, her 
auspicious bindi smeared, and yet she remained defiant as ten-necked 
Ravana carried her off, to his certain destruction. Maithill was a woman of 
bright teeth and lovely smile, but now, as she was separated from all her 


family, unable to see Raghava and Laksmana, and oppressed with a 
crushing burden of fear, her face was drained of color. 


Sarga 51 

[1-5] When Janaka’s daughter Maithili saw that Ravana was flying up into 
the sky, she was stricken with misery and extremely terrified at the grave 
danger facing her. Her eyes red with rage and weeping, Sita addressed the 
fierce-eyed overlord of the rdksasas as he carried her off, weeping pitifully 
and crying: “Do you feel no shame at what you are doing, base Ravana, to 
steal me away when you knew I was alone and then to flee? Surely it was 
you, you vicious coward, who, wishing to carry me off, lured my husband 
away by means of someone taking on the form of a deer through the power 
of illusion. And you also struck down the one who tried to rescue me. How 
great the valour that you showed, lowest of raksasas! For I was not won by 
you after you proclaimed your name in battle. 

[6-10] “How is it that having done so contemptible a deed as this, 
carrying off a woman left all alone, one who belongs to another man, you 
are not ashamed? Men throughout the world will speak of this despicable 
deed you have done, so savage and unrighteous. And you pride yourself on 
being brave. A curse upon that courage and strength you bragged about. A 
curse upon such behavior as yours, which will disgrace your House in the 
eyes of all the world. But what can be done when you are fleeing so 
quickly? Were you to stop for but a moment, you would not leave here 
alive. For if you were to come within the sight of those two princes, you, 
together with your whole army, would not live a moment longer. 

[11—15] “For you could no more withstand the touch of their arrows than 
a sky-going bird can withstand the touch of a raging forest fire. Do yourself 
a favor, Ravana, a good and decent thing, and please let me go. For if you 
do not let me go, my husband will be enraged over your assault on me, and 
he and his brother will bring about your destruction. The very purpose for 
which you forcibly abducted me, you lowly wretch, will have been in vain. 
For being at the mercy of my enemies and denied the sight of my godlike 
husband, I could not long survive. Surely you are heedless of your own 
welfare and safety, just like a mortal who, at the hour of his death, gives 
himself over to perverse actions. 


[16-20] “For all people on the point of death reject what is good for 
them. And I can almost see the noose of Kala wound around your neck. 
And so, ten-faced Ravana, if you can feel no fear in the perilous position 
you are in, then clearly you must be seeing those golden trees. And soon, 
Ravana, you shall see the fearsome river Vaitarani running in torrents of 
blood and the terrifying forest with sword blades in place of leaves. And 
you shall see the spiny sd/mali tree—its flowers of burnished gold, its 
foliage of precious beryl—all studded with of thorns of iron. For, pitiless 
Ravana, as you have so wronged the great prince, you shall survive no 
longer than if you had drunk poison. 

[21—25] “Thus, Ravana, you are caught in the irresistible noose of Kala. 
Where can you go to find safety from my great husband? In a mere instant, 
even without his brother, Raghava slaughtered fourteen thousand rdaksasas 
in battle. How then could that powerful hero, skilled in all divine weapons, 
fail to kill you with his keen arrows when you have stolen his cherished 
wife?” Such and more were the harsh words Vaidehi cried out in pitiful 
lamentation, overpowered by grief and fear while still clutched to Ravana’s 
side. But even as the radiant young princess uttered those many anguished 
and pitiful words of lamentation, evil Ravana carried her off struggling and 
trembling in her every limb. 


Sarga 52 

[1-5] As Vaidehi was being carried off, she saw no one who might help her 
until she caught sight of five huge monkeys on a mountain peak. The large- 
eyed, fair-hipped Maithili let fall her golden silk shawl among them, along 
with her lovely ornaments, hoping, “They might inform Rama.” Thus, she 
unfastened her garment and let it fall with her jewelry among those 
monkeys, but ten-necked Ravana in his excitement was unaware that she 
had done so. The great, tawny-eyed bulls among monkeys looked up 
unblinking at large-eyed Sita as she cried out. Across Lake Pampa the lord 
of the rdksasas made his way, heading toward the city of Lanka, still 
clutching the weeping Sita. 

[6-10] Wildly excited, Ravana carried her off at his side, although she 
was his own death like a sharp-fanged, venomous serpent. He passed over 
forests and rivers, mountains and lakes, speeding through the sky like an 
arrow shot from a bow. Reaching the ocean, the lair of whales and dolphins, 


the indestructible abode of Varuna, and the final recourse of rivers, he set 
out across it. As he carried Vaidehi over Varuna’s abode, the waves heaved 
in agitation, and the fish and serpents were trapped deep below. Then 
celestial musicians hovering in midair raised a clamor, and perfected beings 
cried out, “This is the end of Ravana!” 

[11-13] With Sita struggling at his side—his own death in bodily form— 
Ravana entered the city of Lanka. Making his way through the well-ordered 
streets of the city, he entered his inner apartments through the maze of 
closely guarded gates. There Ravana deposited her, as the asura Maya 
might one of his illusory creations, and black-eyed Sita sat lost in grief and 
utter confusion. 

[14-16] Ten-necked Ravana then turned and spoke to some pisdca 
women, fearsome to behold: “See that no one, male or female, visits Sita 
without my permission. Pearls and gold, raiment and jewelry, whatever she 
may want is to be given her, for such is my will. And let none of you speak 
one unkind word to Vaidehi, intentionally or not, if you value your lives at 
all.” Having instructed the raksasa women in this fashion, the mighty lord 
of raksasas l\eft the inner apartments. 

[17-20] And as he pondered what to do next, he encountered eight 
immensely powerful raksasas, eaters of raw flesh. Seeing them, mighty 
Ravana, deluded by the boon he had been granted, addressed them, 
flattering their might and power: “Quickly now, take every kind of weapon 
and hasten at once to Janasthana, once Khara’s abode but now his final 
resting place. You must live there in Janasthana, for it is empty now that the 
raksasas have all been killed. Trust in your virile power and put all your 
fears aside. 

[21—25] “The vast army I had stationed in Janasthana has been destroyed 
in battle—Dusana and Khara among them—by Rama’s arrows. Because of 
this, I feel rage surging uncontrollably within me, such rage as I have never 
felt before. Rama has aroused in me deep, ferocious enmity. And I must 
avenge the hostility of this enemy; for I shall find no sleep until I slay him 
in combat. Only after I have slain Rama, the murderer of Khara and 
Disana, will I find contentment, like a pauper obtaining wealth. While you 
are living in Janasthana, you must report on Rama’s activities and tell me 
precisely what he is doing. 


[26-29] “You must all proceed with vigilance, night-roaming rdksasas, 
at the same time making every effort to bring about Raghava’s death. I have 
witnessed your power on the field of battle many times, and that is why I 
am dispatching you to Janasthana.” Having received these generous 
compliments, the eight rdksasas respectfully saluted Ravana, left Lanka 
secretly, and set forth together for Janasthana. Ravana was overjoyed to 
have seized Sita Maithili, to have her in captivity, and to have incited the 
implacable enmity of Rama. In his delusion, the raksasa rejoiced. 


Sarga 53 

[1-5] After having instructed the eight fearsome and immensely powerful 
rdksasas, Ravana in his mental derangement believed that he had 
accomplished his goal. Pierced as he was by the arrows of Kama, the god of 
love, his thoughts turned to Vaidehi, and he hurriedly reentered his lovely 
dwelling to see her. On entering his residence, Ravana, overlord of the 
raksasas, saw Sita lost in grief in the midst of the raksasa women. Her face 
was drenched with tears, she was wretched and crushed under a heavy 
weight of grief. She was like a boat upon the open sea buffeted by gusting 
winds and about to sink; like a doe that has strayed from the herd and been 
brought to bay by hounds. Wretchedly she hung her head as the night- 
roaming raksasa advanced. 

[6-10] She was overpowered by grief, wretched, and powerless, but the 
overlord of the raksasas forced her to come and see his dwelling, which 
was like a mansion of the gods. It consisted of an array of palaces and 
mansions with thousands of women in attendance; it was home to all kinds 
of birds, and all kinds of precious objects embellished it. There were pillars 
that ravished the eye, elaborately worked in burnished gold, crystal, silver, 
diamond, and beryl. War drums like those in heaven echoed through 
archways of burnished gold as he climbed with her up an elaborate golden 
staircase. It had magnificent windows made of ivory and silver, screened in 
by latticework of gold, and looking out onto row upon row of palaces. 

[11-15] Ten-necked Ravana showed Maithili the different quarters of his 
residence all brilliantly whitewashed and sparkling with precious stones. 
Sita stood lost in grief as Ravana showed her the pools and ponds blanketed 
with flowers of every variety. After the evil-minded Ravana had shown her 
all his splendid abode, he said to Vaidehi, daughter of Janaka: “There are 


three hundred and twenty million night-roaming raksasas, not including the 
aged and children, Sita, and of all these awesome creatures I am master. 
Myriads stand at the bidding of me alone. 

[16—20] “The reins of all my royal power are in your hands, and my life 
too, large-eyed lady. For you are more precious to me than the very breath 
of life. In my inner apartments there are many thousands of women. Be 
mistress of them all, beloved Sita. Please be my wife. Enough! What need 
have you for further thought? Please accept my plea. Be gracious to me in 
my torment. Please give me your love. Lanka is surrounded by the sea, as 
far as a hundred leagues. Not even the asuras and the gods, including Indra 
himself, could assault it. Nor do I know of anyone in all the worlds, god or 
yaksa, gandharva or seer, whose might is equal to mine. 

[21—27] “What use have you for Rama—that weakling deposed from his 
kingship, that miserable, short-lived ascetic, a mere man? Give your love to 
me alone; I will be a worthy husband for you. For youth is fleeting, 
timorous Sita. Make love with me here and now. Do not imagine that you 
will ever see Raghava again. He cannot possibly come here, fair-faced Sita. 
For who is able to reach here even in his dreams? One could no more bind 
with ropes the wind racing through the sky, nor grasp the brilliant flame of a 
blazing fire. In all the three worlds, my beauty, I know no one strong 
enough to take you away when you are guarded by my arms. So, still damp 
with the water of the royal consecration, you must reign over this great 
kingdom of Lanka. And in perfect contentment you must make love with 
me. Through your sojourn in the forest you have expiated any misdeeds in 
your former lives. And here you shall enjoy the rewards of the 
righteousness you have practiced. 

[28-31] “Here every garland is charged with heavenly fragrance, 
Maithilt, and the ornaments are only the finest. Come enjoy it all with me. 
And here is the sunlike flying palace called Puspaka, which I took by force 
from my brother Vaisravana. It is spacious, lovely, and swift as thought. 
Enjoy yourself in it with me, fair-hipped lady. But your clear, lotuslike face, 
a vision of delight—how pale it looks and sad, my fair-hipped beauty. 

[32-35] “So enough of your reticence, Vaidehi, born of your fear of a 
lapse in righteousness. “The love I have for you, my lady, will be 
sanctioned by the seers. See, I press my heads to your smooth feet. Be 
gracious to me at once, for I am your slave, utterly under your spell. But not 


in vain are these words I speak through parched lips; not in vain does 
Ravana bow down his head to any woman.” Having thus addressed 
Maithili, the daughter of Janaka, Ravana, having fallen under the power of 
fate, thought, “She is mine!” 


Sarga 54 

[1-5] When she had been addressed in this fashion, Vaidehi, although 
drawn with grief, was unafraid, and, placing a straw between them, she 
replied: “There once was a king named DaSaratha, an unshakable bulwark 
of righteousness, known far and wide as a man true to his promises. He had 
a son named Rama Raghava, who is famed for his righteousness throughout 
the three worlds. His arms are long and his eyes are large, he is my husband 
and my god. He was born into the House of Iksvaku, a prince with the 
shoulders of a lion and radiant splendor. And he is the one, together with his 
brother Laksmana, who shall take your life. Had he been there to see your 
violent assault on me, you would now be lying in Janasthana, slain in battle 
just like Khara. 

[6-10] “Fearsome looking and immensely powerful though they are, all 
the raksasas you have sent forth shall find themselves impotent against 
Rama, like the venom of serpents against Suparna. The golden arrows 
loosed from his bow will tear apart their bodies just as the Ganges’s waves 
do her banks. Even if you are invulnerable to the asuras or gods, Ravana, 
you have now aroused the bitter enmity of someone you shall not escape 
alive. Some life is still left you before powerful Raghava makes an end of 
it, but how precious little you have, like a victim bound to the sacrificial 
post. If Rama were merely to glance at you with his eyes blazing with rage, 
raksasa, you would be destroyed that very instant, utterly consumed. 

[11-15] “For he who could destroy the moon in the sky, or send it 
crashing to earth, or even dry up the ocean, can free Sita here. You shall 
lose your senses, your strength, your majesty, and your life. Because of 
what you have done, Lanka shall become a city of widows. This evil deed 
of yours, in taking me from the forest and away from my proper place 
beside my husband, will not bring you any pleasure. For my splendid 
husband has divine powers, and all the time he has been living in the 
desolate Dandaka forest, he has trusted in his own might and feared 


nothing. With hails of arrows in combat, he shall rob you of your power, 
your might, and this brash arrogance of yours. 

[16—20] “For when, ordained by Kala, the destruction of their lives is at 
hand, men grow reckless in their actions and fall under the sway of Time. 
The moment you assaulted me, lowest of the raksasas, Kala overtook you, 
and it can only end in the slaughter of the rdksasas, your women, and 
yourself. For an outcaste cannot desecrate an altar in the place of sacrifice, 
equipped with the ladles and other utensils, and sanctified by the vedic 
mantras of twice-born brahmans. This body of mine is devoid of sensation; 
throw it into bondage or have it killed. For I care nothing about preserving 
it, or my life either, raksasa. I will not subject myself to censure in the eyes 
of the world.” And when she had uttered these extremely harsh words there, 
Vaidehi Maithili said nothing further to Ravana. 

[21—24] Now, when he had heard Sita’s harsh and hair-raising words, he 
replied with words meant to inspire terror: “Now you listen to what I have 
to say, my lovely Maithilt. If, sweetly smiling woman, within the space of 
twelve months, you do not come to me, my cooks will chop you into bite- 
sized bits for my breakfast.” Then, having spoken these harsh words, 
Ravana, who makes his foes cry out, spoke in a rage to the raksasa women: 
“Quickly send me the most fearsome-looking and deformed rdaksasa 
women, flesh-eating, blood-guzzling creatures. Have them humble her pride 
at once.” 

[25—29] Women then appeared at his command, deformed and fearsome 
to behold. They cupped their hands in reverence to him and then surrounded 
Maithilt. Shaking and seeming to shatter the very earth with his heavy 
tread, the fearsome-looking king, Ravana, addressed them: “Take Maithili 
into the middle of the asoka grove. Keep her surrounded there and guard 
her closely. There, using both fearsome threats and gentle coaxing, break 
Maithill’s will, as one would with a cow elephant in the forest.” Thus 
commanded by Ravana, the raksasa women seized Maithili and went to the 
asoka grove. 

[30-32] That grove was filled with all kinds of flowering and fruit- 
bearing trees, the sort that produce whatever one wishes; birds flocked there 
too, singing sweetly at every season. But Maithili, the daughter of Janaka, 
finding herself at the mercy of the raksasa women, was engulfed in grief 
like a doe in the midst of tigresses. They glared at her through misshapen 


eyes and made brutal threats until she could find no peace; and when she 
thought back on her husband and her dear brother-in-law, she was nearly 
insensible under a crushing weight of grief and fear. 


Sarga 55 

[1-5] Meanwhile, after killing the raksasa Marica, who could take on any 
form at will and had been wandering about in the form of a deer, Rama 
quickly headed back on his path. He hurried on, eager to see Maithilt, when 
from behind him a cry rang out, the ghastly cry of a jackal. Recognizing the 
jackal’s ominous and hair-raising cry and uneasy at the sound, he thought: 
“Alas! It bodes ill when a jackal howls. I can only hope that Vaideht is safe 
from the raksasas who might devour her. ““But what if Laksmana heard the 
scream that Marica, in his deer form, cried out in imitation of my voice? 

[6-10] “The moment he heard the cry, Saumitri would leave Maithili— 
who would send him herself—and rush to my side. The raksasas must have 
joined forces in plotting Sita’s death. Marica became a golden deer to draw 
me away from the ashram. Then, once he had led me away and been struck 
by my arrow, he turned back into a raksasa and called out the words, ‘Oh 
Laksmana, I have been hit!’ I only hope the two of them are safe without 
me to protect them in the forest. For I have aroused the rdksasas’ enmity by 
the events in Janasthana. And now I see many terrible portents.”” Brooding 
in this way after hearing the jackal’s cry and thinking how he had been 
lured away by the rdksasa in the form of a deer, Rama made his way back 
to Janasthana, filled with dread. 

[11-15] The birds and beasts approached and circled, keeping the 
despondent and downhearted prince on their left, uttering fearsome cries. 
Soon after seeing these most terrible portents, Raghava spied Laksmana 
coming his way, his usual radiance dimmed. A little way further on 
Laksmana, distraught and sorrowful, met the equally distraught and 
sorrowing Rama. But then Laksmana’s eldest brother began to rebuke him 
for coming and leaving Sita alone in the desolate, raksasa-haunted forest. 
The delight of the Raghus took hold of Laksmana’s left hand, and though 
his voice was sweet as ever, he spoke words that were harsh and full of 
pain: 

[16—20] “Oh no! Laksmana, what a terrible thing you have done, dear 
brother, in leaving Sita and coming here! I trust that she is safe. But I have 


no doubt whatsoever, heroic brother, that the daughter of Janaka has been 
either lost or devoured by the forest-roaming rdksasas. For so many evil 
omens have appeared before me. Tell me, Laksmana, will we find Sita safe 
and sound? It was a rdksasa in the guise of a deer that lured me far off as I 
followed him. After much effort I somehow managed to hit him, and, as he 
lay dying, he turned back into a rdksasa. | am sick at heart and wretched at 
what has happened, Laksmana; my left eye is throbbing fitfully. Sita no 
doubt is gone. For she has been carried off, dead, or has wandered off by 
some path.” 


Sarga 56 

[1-5] When the righteous son of Dasaratha saw how downcast Laksmana 
was, and how he had come into the desolate forest without Vaidehi, he 
began to question him closely: “Where is Vaidehi, Laksmana? How could 
you have come here leaving her, who followed me when I set forth to the 
Dandaka forest? Where is slender-waisted Vaidehi, the woman who shares 
my sorrow as I roam about the Dandakas, driven from my kingdom? Where 
is Sita, so like a daughter of the gods, my life companion? I cannot bear to 
live—even for a moment—without her, mighty Laksmana. For without the 
daughter of Janaka, her complexion like burnished gold, I would not desire 
lordship over the whole earth, Laksmana, or even over the immortal gods 
themselves. 

[6-10] “I hope that Vaideht whom I love more than life itself is still 
alive. Dear brother, I hope that my banishment will not have been for 
nothing. I trust that with me dead because of Sita and with you out of the 
way, Saumitri, KaikeyT will now be happy, with all her wishes fulfilled. I 
suppose that now poor Kausalya, having lost her only son, will be forced to 
wait upon Kaikeyi, who will have achieved her every goal, dear brother, 
having both the kingship and her son. I am returning to the ashram to see if 
virtuous Vaideh?t is still alive. If I find that she is gone, Laksmana, I will end 
my life. For if I come back to the ashram and Sita Vaidehi cannot speak to 
me once more with her smile, then I shall die, Laksmana. 

[11-17] “So please tell me, Laksmana, whether poor Vaideh?t is still alive 
or not. Or have rdksasas devoured her because of your carelessness? 
Vaidehi is young and delicate and has never known suffering before. Surely 
she will be rendered desolate by the grief of her separation from me. It must 


surely have frightened even you when that cunning, evil-minded rdksasa 
cried out ‘Laksmana!’ at the top of his voice. I suspect Vaidehi must have 
heard that voice just like my own and in her panic sent you off at once to 
find me. And you did the worst possible thing. By abandoning Sita in the 
forest, you have given the cruel rdksasas an opening for wreaking their 
vengeance. The flesh-eating rdksasas are aggrieved over Khara’s death; and 
doubtless those fearsome creatures have killed Sita. Ah, I am truly 
drowning in disaster at every turn! What am I to do now, destroyer of your 
enemies? I fear what I am sure to find.” 

[18-20] Brooding in this way over fair-hipped Sita, Raghava hastened 
back to Janasthana together with Laksmana. Rebuking his anguished 
brother, feeling hungry, tired, and thirsty, distraught and sighing until his 
mouth was parched, he reached their dwelling and found the place empty. 
The heroic prince rushed into his ashram, searching every spot where they 
used to enjoy themselves. And then, as he stood in their dwelling, he was 
deeply afflicted and, his body hair bristling, he thought, “It is just as I 
feared.” 


Sarga 57 

[1-4] Now, as the two of them were making their way back after Saumitri 
had arrived from the ashram, Rama, the delight of the Raghus, in the 
anguish of his sorrow, questioned him at length. He asked him: “Why did 
you come without Maithilt when I left her alone in the forest only because I 
trusted you? As soon as I saw you coming without Maithilt, Laksmana, my 
mind was deeply afflicted, knowing that the great evil it feared was true. 
My left eye was throbbing, my arm and heart as well, from the moment I 
saw you in the distance, Laksmana, coming down the path without Sita.” 

[S—8] Addressed in this fashion, Saumitri Laksmana of auspicious marks 
plunged even deeper into sorrow, and he made this reply to the sorrowful 
Rama: “It was not of my own volition that I left her and came here; it was 
only when urgently pressed by her that I came to you. Maithilt heard those 
words that sounded just like her husband crying out, ‘Oh Sita! Oh 
Laksmana! Save me!’ And once she had heard that cry of pain, in her love 
for you, Maithill, weeping and beside herself with fear, said to me, ‘Go! 
Go!’ 


[9-13] “Again and again Maithili pressed me, saying, ‘Go!’ But in my 
full confidence in you I spoke these words: ‘I know of no raksasa that 
could present any danger to him. Remain calm, it is not as it seems; 
someone else has uttered that cry. For, Sita, how could your husband ever 
utter such base and contemptible words as, “Save me!” when he himself 
could save the thirty gods? No, someone else, for some reason, must have 
imitated my brother’s voice and raised that strident cry of “Save me, 
Laksmana!” So do not give way to agitation like some common woman. So 
enough of this yielding now to weakness, compose yourself, do not be 
anxious. For in all the three worlds there exists no man—nor will there ever 
be—who could defeat Raghava in battle.’ 

[14-17] “But even though I spoke to Vaidehi in this way, she was in a 
disordered state of mind and, through streaming tears, made this cruel reply: 
“You have your wicked designs set wholly on me. But even if you bring 
about your brother’s death, you shall never have me. You followed Rama 
here because you are in league with Bharata; and that is why you now 
refuse to help him when he is crying out so piercingly. You are a secret 
enemy who followed along for the purpose of having me. You have been 
waiting for Raghava to give you an opportunity, so now you won’t go to 
him.’ 

[18—25] “When Vaidehi had addressed me in this fashion, I flew into a 
rage, and with eyes red and lips quivering in anger, I left the ashram.” But 
as Saumitri was speaking in this fashion, Rama, beside himself with 
anguish, said: “Dear brother, you did wrong in coming here without her. 
You know full well that I am capable of defending myself against raksasas, 
and yet you left Maithilt just because of words she spoke in anger. I am not 
at all pleased with you for deserting Maithili and coming here just because 
you heard a few harsh words from an angry woman. By all means, you 
behaved badly, in that when pressed by Sita, you succumbed to anger and 
did not carry out my orders. The raksasa who took the form of a deer and 
drew me from the ashram now lies slain by my arrow. I nocked an arrow to 
the bow, drew it, and struck him as if in sport. He let out a cry of distress, 
and, relinquishing the form of a deer, he turned back into a raksasa adorned 
with bracelets. But no sooner did my arrow strike him than he assumed my 
voice and, with an anguished cry, uttered those dreadful words that carried 
far, and made you leave Maithili and come.” 


Sarga 58 

[1-5] Now, as Rama was hastening back, he felt a fitful throbbing below his 
left eye; he stumbled too, and a fit of trembling seized him. He saw many 
evil omens one after another and he said, “Can all be well with Sita?” 
Racing along, he longed for the sight of Sita, but when he saw that their 
dwelling was empty, his heart sank. Then, frantic, the delight of the Raghus 
wandered around the cottage grounds, searching everywhere. He gazed at 
the leaf hut, but without Sita it looked to him like a lotus pond when Sri, 
goddess of beauty, is gone and winter has ravaged it. 

[6-9] The cottage grounds were empty and, with the trees rustling, they 
almost seemed to weep. The flowers had faded, the birds and beasts had 
fallen still, and the forest divinities had departed. The place had lost its 
splendor and looked ravaged, with its barkcloth garments and sacred kusa 
grass scattered about, and its cushions in disarray. At the sight of all this 
Rama began to lament again and again, crying: “She is lost or dead, carried 
off or devoured! Or else perhaps she is afraid and hiding, or has fled into 
the forest. Or perhaps she has gone to pick flowers or fruits? Maybe she 
went to the lotus pond or to the river for water.” 

[10—15] And thus he went on searching but could not find his beloved in 
the forest. With his eyes red with grief he looked, in his grief, like a 
madman. Rama raced from tree to tree, from river to river, and to the 
mountains, and, immersed in a murky ocean of grief, he lamented, crying to 
the trees: “O kadamba! Have you perhaps seen my beloved who was so 
fond of kadambas? Please tell me—if you know—what happened to my 
fair-faced Sita. And you, bilva, please tell me if you have seen her. Her 
breasts are like your bi/va fruits, her limbs as smooth as your young shoots, 
and she was clad in yellow silk. Or perhaps you, arjuna—she loved the 
arjunas as well—you can tell me about my beloved, whether the timorous 
daughter of Janaka is alive or not. And surely the kakubha must know about 
Maithili, her thighs as smooth as kakubha limbs, for how lush its vines 
appear, its shoots and blossoms. 

[16—20] “Since bees are buzzing about this tilaka here, foremost of trees, 
it must surely know about her who loved the tilakas so well. Asoka, ‘free 
from grief’! Grief is tearing at my heart. Let me take on your name ‘asoka’ 
too, by quickly showing me my beloved. And if, tala, you have seen a 
woman with breasts like your ripe fruits, please tell me about her if you feel 


any pity for me. Jamba! If you have seen Sita with her complexion like 
river gold, if you have any knowledge of my beloved, do not hesitate to tell 
me. Or you there, you deer, do you know anything of fawn-eyed Maithilt? 
My beloved might be among the does, as her darting glances are so like 
theirs. 

[21-25] “And you, elephant, I am sure you would recognize her if you 
had seen her, for her thighs are just as smooth as your trunk. Tell me, best of 
elephants. And if you, tiger, have seen my beloved Maithili, her face like 
the moon, please tell me in full confidence; do not be afraid. Why are you 
running away, my lotus-eyed beloved? Surely I just saw you hiding behind 
that tree. Why won’t you speak to me? Stop, please stop, my fair-hipped 
lady! Have you no pity for me? You never used to play such pranks. How 
can you ignore me? Your yellow silk clothes have given you away. Run all 
you like, fair-faced woman, for I have spotted you. But stop, if you have 
any feeling for me. 

[26-32] “But surely, that is not she. The sweet-smiling girl must have 
come to harm—surely that is the only reason she would ignore me in my 
plight. Plainly the girl has been devoured by flesh-eating raksasas who tore 
my beloved apart, limb from limb, when I left her alone. That full-moon 
face of hers with flashing earrings, that perfect nose, those lovely teeth and 
lips, have all been eclipsed, I am sure of it, swallowed up in darkness. Even 
as she was lamenting, my beloved’s soft, lovely throat, pale as the campaka 
flower and adorned with her lovely necklace, was devoured. And surely, as 
she flailed about, her arms, soft as a spray of leaves, were devoured, along 
with her bracelets, armlets, and trembling hands. I abandoned the girl only 
to have her devoured by rdksasas, like a woman left behind by a caravan, 
and devoured despite having many kinsmen. Alas, great-armed Laksmana! 
Do you see my beloved anywhere? Alas, my beloved, my beautiful Sita! 
Where can you have gone?” 

[33-35] «Lamenting again and again in this fashion, Rama ran from 
wood to wood—rushing on impulse from one place to scour another 
compulsively, or wandering like a madman—obsessed with the search for 
his beloved. Through forests and thickets, over rivers and hills and 
mountain cascades, he rushed about, wandering without rest. After he had 
traversed the vast, deep forest and explored the whole of it, his hopes of 


finding Maithili remained unfulfilled, and so he redoubled his efforts in 
searching for his love. 


Sarga 59 

[1-5] When Rama, son of DaSaratha, found the ashram empty, the leaf hut 
vacant, the seats all in disarray, and not finding Vaidehi, he searched 
everywhere for her; he stretched out his lovely arms and cried out: “Where 
is Vaidehi, Laksmana? To what region could she have gone? Who has 
carried off my beloved, or devoured her, Saumitri? Sita, if you are hiding 
behind a tree to play a joke on me, enough of your joking. Come to me now, 
for Iam overwhelmed with sorrow. For the fawns that used to play with you 
so trustingly, dear Sita, are lost in worry and tearful without you. 

[6-10] “Surely the great king, my father, will shortly see me in the other 
world, as I will be dead from the crushing grief of Si1ta’s abduction. And my 
father will surely say to me, ‘How dare you—after I had given you an order 
and you had made a solemn vow—come into my presence before the 
appointed time?’ And it is certain that in that other world he will curse me 
with the words, ‘Damn you!’ as a wayward, ignoble son who went back on 
his word. Oh where have you gone, my fair-waisted wife, leaving me here 
helplessly stricken with grief, miserable, and pitiful? You have shattered all 
my dreams, vanishing just as a good reputation leaves a dishonest man. 
Without you I shall die.” 

[11-16] Lamenting in this fashion in the bitter anguish of his sorrow, 
Rama Raghava longed for the sight of Janaka’s daughter Sita, but he could 
not find her. Then, failing to find Sita, the son of Dasaratha sank down in 
despair like an elephant in deep mud. Then Laksmana, with Rama’s best 
interests at heart, earnestly addressed him with these words: “Do not 
despair, my heroic, great-armed brother. You together with me must make 
continued efforts. For this forest has many lovely caverns in it. And Maithili 
loves to roam the woods and is intoxicated with the forest. She must have 
gone into the forest or down to the beautifully flowering lotus pond. 
Perhaps Vaideht went down to the river, where fish abound and the rushes 
grow thick. Or maybe she is hiding somewhere in the woods, aiming to 
frighten us, bull among men, or put us to a test. If you approve, majestic 
Kakutstha, let us at once exert ourselves to search for Janaka’s daughter and 


scour the entire forest where she is sure to be. Only do not let your mind 
give way to grief.” 

[17-20] Addressed with Laksmana’s heartfelt words, Rama composed 
himself and began to search with Saumitri. The two sons of Dasaratha 
looked everywhere for Sita, thoroughly scouring the forests and mountains, 
the rivers and lakes, the slopes of the mountain, its caves and peaks. But 
still they could not find her. After searching all over the mountain, Rama 
said to Laksmana, “Saumitri, I have seen not a trace of Vaideh1 anywhere 
on this lovely mountain.” 

[21-25] And as Laksmana, consumed with sorrow, wandered back 
through the Dandaka forest, he answered his brother of brightly blazing 
energy: “My wise brother, you shall recover Janaka’s daughter Maithili as 
surely as great-armed Visnu recovered the earth after having bound the 
asura Bali.” But even though he was addressed in this fashion by heroic 
Laksmana, Raghava, his mind clouded with sorrow, in a wretched voice 
could only reply: “The whole forest has been searched carefully, wise 
brother, the flowering lotus ponds and this mountain as well, with all of its 
many caverns and streams. But I have seen not a trace of Vaidehi, who is 
dearer to me than life itself.”” And as he wretchedly lamented in this fashion, 
Rama was momentarily overpowered by his agonizing grief over Sita’s 
abduction and fainted. 

[26-29] Becoming weak in every limb, he sank down insensible, 
unconscious in the misery of his anguish, and heaving deep and burning 
sighs. Lotus-eyed Rama sighed again and again and, in a voice choked with 
sobs, again and again cried out, “Oh my beloved!” Righteous Laksmana, 
humbly and with his hands cupped in reverence, tried every possible way to 
comfort the brother he so deeply loved. But Rama paid no heed to the 
words that fell from Laksmana’s lips, and he cried out over and over for his 
vanished, beloved Sita. 


Sarga 60 
[1-4] Rama was desolate and addressed Laksmana in a tone of utter 
desolation: “Go down at once to the Godavari and look around. Perhaps 
Sita went to the river to fetch lotuses.” Thus instructed by Rama, Laksmana 
set off again at a quick pace for the charming Godavari River. Then, after 
searching it with its many bathing spots, Laksmana reported to Rama: “I 


cannot find her at the bathing spots, and she does not hear me when I call. I 
cannot imagine, Rama, anywhere slender-waisted Vaideht, the one relief of 
all our troubles, could possibly be.” 

[S—9] But upon hearing Laksmana’s words, Rama, desolate and beside 
himself with anguish, went down to the Godavari River himself. 
Approaching her, Rama cried, “Where is Sita?” But neither the creatures 
there nor the Godavari River could tell Rama that she had been carried off 
by the lord of raksasas who deserved only death. But although those 
creatures pressed the river, calling out, “Tell him about his beloved!” she 
did not tell him about Sita’s fate, though Rama asked her so piteously. For 
the river, in recalling the appearance and deeds of evil-minded Ravana, 
would not tell him about Vaidehi out of fear. 

[10-14] As the river had given him no hope of finding Sita, and in the 
agony of not finding Sita, Rama said to Saumitri: “What unwelcome words 
shall I say, Laksmana, when I meet Janaka and Vaidehi’s mother and she is 
not with me? Where has Vaidehi gone, she who dispelled the grief I 
suffered while, deprived of my kingship, I subsisted on forest fare in the 
wilderness? How long the nights will seem to me as I lie awake, the 
princess gone from my sight, without the support of my kinsmen. I will 
roam through Janasthana, by the Godavari, and over Mount Prasravana 
here; I will continue roaming everywhere on the chance of finding Sita.” 

[15-21] Now, as the brothers were conversing in this fashion, they spied 
a trail of flowers that had fallen upon the earth. At the sight of that shower 
of blossoms that had fallen to the ground, heroic Rama was overcome with 
sorrow and sorrowfully said to Laksmana: “I recognize these flowers here, 
Laksmana: I gave them to Vaidehi in the woods and she put them on.” 
Then, having spoken to Laksmana in this fashion, that bull among men, 
great-armed Rama, growing furious, cried out to the mountain, like a lion 
roaring at a puny deer: “Mountain! Show me the gold-hued, golden Sita, 
lest I bring all your slopes crashing down. You shall be burned to ashes by 
the fire of my arrows and rendered forever uninhabitable, devoid of grass, 
trees, and even mere sprouts. Or, this very day, I will dry up this river here, 
Laksmana, if it does not at once tell me about my moon-faced Sita.” 

[22—25] As Rama spoke thus in his fury, with his eyes seeming about to 
scorch everything, he spied on the ground the huge footprints of a raksasa. 
These were the winding footsteps of Sita and the rdksasa. His heart racing 


in agitation, he said to his dear brother: “Look, Laksmana, here are bits of 
gold broken off the ornaments belonging to Vaidehi, and here are her 
various garlands, Saumitri. And look, Saumitri, the ground is spattered 
everywhere with drops of blood sparkling like those bits of burnished gold. 

[26-30] “Laksmana, I believe that the rdksasas, who can take on any 
form at will, have wantonly butchered Vaideht, torn her limb from limb, or 
devoured her. Or perhaps, Saumitri, two rdksasas quarreled over Vaidehi 
and had a fearsome battle here. Whose bow is this lying broken on the 
ground, dear brother? It is huge, studded with pearls, and adorned with 
burnished gold. And whose golden armor is this lying shattered on the 
earth, shining like the morning sun, and studded with bosses of cat’s-eye 
beryl? Whose parasol is this dropped on the earth with its handle broken, 
dear brother, a hundred-ribbed parasol festooned with heavenly wreaths? 

[31-35] “Whose donkeys are these that have been killed in battle, huge, 
awesome creatures with golden breastplates and the faces of pisacas? And 
whose is this war chariot, overturned and broken, shining like blazing fire, 
the purifier, and fitted out with a battle standard? Whose arrows are these, 
splintered and scattered about, all adorned with gold, their shafts made long 
as a chariot axle to do their terrible work? Just see, dear brother, my hatred 
of the savage-hearted rdksasas, who can change their shapes at will, has 
grown a hundred times more deadly than before. Poor Sita must be dead, or 
must have been devoured or carried off into the deep forest. Her 
righteousness could not save Sita as she was being carried off into the great 
forest. 

[36-40] “Since Vaideht has been devoured or carried off, which 
creatures in this mortal world or even which gods have been able to injure 
me? But then, any creature, Laksmana, knowing no better, will despise a 
man of compassion, however heroic he may be, even if he be the creator of 
the worlds himself. The thirty gods themselves must surely think me 
powerless, because I have been mild, compassionate, and self-restrained, 
striving only for the welfare of the world. Just see how in my case, 
Laksmana, a virtue has become an evil. But now I will efface it—as the 
great rising sun effaces the light of the hare-marked moon—in order to 
exterminate the raksasas and all beings. No yaksas, gandharvas, or pisdcas, 
no rdksasas, kinnaras, or humans shall be left in peace, Laksmana. 


[41-46] “Watch now, Laksmana, as I fill the sky with missiles and 
arrows, leaving no space whatever for the creatures that move about the 
three worlds. I will bring the host of planets to a standstill, darken the 
moon, maker of night, paralyze both fire and wind, blot out the light of the 
sun, bringer of light. I will smash the mountain peaks, dry up the rivers and 
lakes, uproot every tree, vine, and shrub, and cause the ocean to vanish. If 
the gods do not restore Sita to me safe and sound this very instant, they 
shall witness the full extent of my power, Saumitri. Not a single creature, 
Laksmana, shall escape into the sky as the arrows loosed from my 
bowstring form a net without a gap. Behold now, Laksmana, the devastation 
caused by my iron arrows, the birds and beasts driven wild and ravaged, the 
world plunged into chaos, from one end to the other. 

[47-52] “Because of what happened to Maithili, I will shoot my 
unstoppable arrows, drawn back to my ear, and thus rid the world of all 
pisacas and raksasas. Now the gods shall witness the power of my arrows 
when I loose them in anger. They shall see how far they carry when, my 
patience exhausted, I release them. No god or daitya, no pisdaca or raksasa 
shall survive when in my rage I lay waste the universe. The worlds of the 
gods, danavas, and yaksas, as well as that of the raksasas, shall come 
crashing down one upon the other as the torrents of my arrows fly, 
smashing them to pieces. I will obliterate the boundaries of all these worlds 
with my arrows. For in my rage, I cannot be withstood, just like old age or 
Mrtyu, Kala or fate, which no creature has ever defied, Laksmana, of this 
there is no doubt. So, unless they show me Sita, the blameless Maithili with 
her lovely teeth, I will overturn this world, mountains and all, its great 
serpents and humans, its gandharvas and gods.” 


Sarga 61 
[1-5] Thus anguished and tormented by the abduction of Sita, Rama was 
prepared to annihilate the worlds, like the fire at the end of a cosmic era. He 
kept glancing at his taut-strung bow, racked incessantly with sighs, and 
raging like Rudra himself when he sought to slay the victim at Daksa’s 
sacrifice. Seeing Rama in a rage such as he had never seen before, 
Laksmana cupped his hands in reverence and addressed him through a 
mouth gone dry with fear: “You have always been so mild in the past, self- 
restrained, and dedicated to the welfare of all creatures. Do not abandon 


your true nature, yielding to rage. The splendor of the moon, the radiance of 
the sun, the movement of the wind, the patience of the earth—all this is 
constant; so too is your incomparable glory. 

[6-10] “I do not know whose war chariot this was, with all its weapons 
and accoutrements, or who broke it and why. A battle must indeed have just 
ended here, prince; the place looks so dreadful, torn up by hooves and 
wheels, and spattered with drops of blood. But only one rdksasa seems to 
have engaged in this fight, not two, foremost among the eloquent, for I find 
no footprints left by a great army. And you must not destroy the worlds 
because of one single being. Lords of the earth must be gentle and calm, 
and must mete out commensurate punishment. You have always been the 
refuge of all creatures, Raghava, their ultimate resort. Which of them would 
ever look with approval upon the loss of your wife? 

[11-16] “The rivers, oceans, and mountains, the gods, gandharvas, and 
danavas would no more do you an injury than the pious would harm a man 
consecrated for a rite. What you must do, your majesty, 1s to track down the 
one who carried off Sita, with me at your side, your bow in your hand, and 
the supreme seers to help us. We shall search the seas, mountains, and 
forests, all the dreadful caverns, the lotus ponds, and mountain streams. We 
shall search relentlessly through the worlds of gods and gandharvas, until 
we track down the one who carried off your wife. And afterward, if through 
conciliation the thirty gods do not restore your wife, lord of Kosala, then 
you shall do what the hour demands. If you cannot recover Sita by 
peaceful means, by conciliation, tact, or diplomacy, only then, lord of men, 
should you unleash hails of your gold-fletched arrows, the equals of great 
Indra’s vajra.” 


Sarga 62 
[1-5] But having momentarily calmed Rama, who was consumed with 
grief, helplessly lamenting, and insensible in the grip of profound stupor, 
Laksmana Saumitri bowed down and pressed his head to his brother’s feet, 
trying to rouse him with these words: “Your birth was obtained by King 
Dasaratha only through performing great austerities and a great sacrificial 
rite, just as the immortal gods obtained the nectar of immortality. Your 
virtues had so won his heart that when he was separated from you, the king 
and lord of the earth became a god, as we heard from Bharata. If even you 


cannot endure the sorrow that has befallen you, Kakutstha, what other 
ordinary and weaker person will ever be able to? 

[6-10] “If in your sorrow you consume the worlds with your blazing 
energy, tiger among men, where are your subjects to find relief when they 
are in torment? This is the way of the world. Yayati, son of Nahusa, 
ascended to the world of Indra, and then misfortune touched him. Then 
there is our father’s purohita, the great seer Vasistha. A hundred sons were 
born to him in a single day, but all of them were later killed. And even the 
mother of the world, the goddess to whom all people pay homage, the earth 
herself—as we see, my truthful brother—is subject to earthquakes. Then 
too, the immensely powerful sun and moon, the two eyes of the universe, 
upon which everything is founded, are sometimes eclipsed. 

[11-16] “Thus, bull among men, even the greatest beings, the gods 
themselves, cannot escape destiny, no more than can all other embodied 
beings. One hears that even among the gods, Sakra and the rest, misfortune 
no less than good fortune is to be found. You should not agonize, then, tiger 
among men. Whether Vaideht is simply lost or has, in fact, been carried off, 
you must not grieve, blameless hero, like some ordinary man. Men like you 
do not grieve, Rama, for they always see things as they truly are. However 
great their difficulties, their sight remains unclouded. Consider the matter 
clearly in your mind, best of men. For it is by applying their minds that the 
wise distinguish right from wrong. Without doing this, without carefully 
weighing an action and examining its advantages and drawbacks, the 
desired result is never attained. 

[17—20] “In the past, my heroic brother, it was always you who advised 
me. Indeed, who would presume to advise you, unless it were Brhaspati 
himself, the preceptor of the gods? Your intellect is too profound for even 
the gods to fathom, wise brother. I am merely trying to rouse your reason, 
which grief has lulled to sleep. You must be aware of your powers, which 
are as much divine as human, bull of the Iksvakus. So direct your efforts to 
slaying only your enemies. What benefit would accrue to you, bull among 
men, in causing universal destruction? No, instead you must identify only 
your one evil enemy and eradicate him.” 


Sarga 63 


[1-3] Raghava, elder brother though he was, had no sooner heard the wise 
speech Laksmana had uttered than he, who recognized its essential truth, 
accepted it. Great-armed Rama then restrained his towering wrath, and, 
leaning on his shining bow, he said to Laksmana: “What then are we to do, 
dear Laksmana, where are we to go? Think of some way that I may see Sita 
once again.” 

[4-7] Laksmana then replied to Rama, who was racked with anguish: 
“You must search here, throughout Janasthana as it is infested with raksasas 
and densely covered with trees and vines. There are mountain fastnesses 
here, gorges, ravines, and dreadful caverns everywhere that harbor herds of 
different kinds of beasts. Together with me you must carefully search the 
abodes of the gandharvas and the places where the kinnaras dwell. Great 
and wise men like you, bull among men, are no more shaken in times of 
trouble than mountains are shaken by gusts of wind.” 

[8—11] Encouraged in this way by Laksmana, Rama set out with him to 
traverse the entire forest, still enraged and with a fearsome, razor-headed 
arrow affixed to his bow. It was then that he saw illustrious Jatayus, the bird 
huge as a mountain peak, where he lay fallen on the ground drenched with 
the blood of his wounds. At the sight of this creature the size of a mountain 
peak, Rama said to Laksmana: “Without a doubt this is the one who has 
devoured Sita, the princess of Videha. This is clearly a raksasa who roams 
the woods in the form of a vulture. And there he sits at his ease, after 
having devoured large-eyed Sita. I will kill him with my fearsome, flame- 
tipped, straight-flying arrows.” 

[12-19] Having spoken in this fashion, Rama nocked a razor-headed 
arrow to his bow and, as if shaking the ocean-bounded earth, rushed toward 
the vulture in a rage. But then, in an extremely desolate voice, and vomiting 
foaming blood, the bird addressed Rama, son of DaSaratha: “She for whom 
you search the deep forest as though for a healing herb, long-lived Rama, 
your queen, and my life as well, have both been taken by Ravana. I saw 
your queen as mighty Ravana was carrying her off, Raghava, when you and 
Laksmana had left her all alone. I rushed to Sita’s aid and gave battle, and 
hurled Ravana to the ground along with his smashed chariot and royal 
parasol. This broken bow is his, this is his shield, and this his war chariot, 
Rama, smashed in the battle. But when I was exhausted, Ravana drew his 


sword and cut off my wings, and then, taking Sita Vaidehi, he flew up into 
the sky. You need not kill me, as I have already been slain by the radksasa.” 

[20-26] When Rama heard his tale—a tale he cherished, since it 
concerned Sita—he embraced the vulture king and then, along with 
Laksmana, he wept. Rama was overcome with sorrow as he gazed at him 
gasping for breath all alone in that trackless, inaccessible forest, and he said 
to Saumitri: “Expulsion from the kingdom, living in the forest, Sita lost, this 
bird slain—misfortunes such as mine might burn up even fire, the purifier, 
itself. Were I to try to cross the surging ocean, surely with my luck even that 
lord of rivers would dry up. In all this world, with its fixed and moving 
contents, there exists no one more luckless than I, no one entangled in a net 
of calamity so vast as mine. Here now my father’s friend, the aged king of 
the vultures, lies upon the ground, struck down because of my reversal of 
fortune.” Having spoken in this way, Raghava, along with Laksmana, 
caressed Jatayus again and again, showing him all the affection of a son for 
his father. Rama embraced the vulture king as he lay there spattered with 
blood, his wings severed, crying, “Where is Maithilt, as dear to me as life 
itself?” He then fell to the ground. 


Sarga 64 

[1-7] As he gazed upon the vulture, who had been struck down by the 
savage Ravana, Rama addressed Saumitri, his staunchest friend: “No doubt, 
this sky-going bird took pains on my behalf and that is why the rdksasa 
struck him down in combat. Now he is about to lose his life, the hardest loss 
of all. But Laksmana, some breath still remains in his body. He is gazing 
up, though feebly, and his voice has failed. Bless you, Jatayus, if you can 
still speak, please tell me about Sita, and how you yourself met your end. 
For what reason did Ravana carry off Sita? What wrong have I ever done 
Ravana, that he should carry off my beloved? And Sita’s ravishing, 
moonlike face, what did it look like, foremost of birds? And what words did 
she utter at that moment? What powers does this rdksasa possess, what 
does he look like, what feats has he accomplished, and where is his 
dwelling, dear elder? Please tell me as I am questioning you!” 

[8—14] As Rama lamented endlessly, Jatayus, with a heavy heart, gazed 
up at him and replied in the faintest voice: “It was Ravana, the lord of the 
raksasas, who carried her off through the sky, resorting to his prodigious 


power of illusion replete with winds and storms. When I was exhausted, my 
son, the night-roaming rdksasa cut off my wings, and taking Sita, the 
princess of Videha, he set forth, heading south. My breath is coming harder, 
Raghava, everything is swimming before my eyes. I see the golden trees 
now and their hair consisting of usira grass! Ravana left with Sita at the 
hour called Vinda, ‘Finding.’ Wealth lost at this hour is soon recovered by 
its owner. But he was unaware of it, Kakutstha, and like a fish that takes the 
hook, he shall soon perish. Do not be anguished over the daughter of 
Janaka. You shall soon kill the raksasa in battle and once again delight in 
Vaidehi’s company.” 

[15-18] The vulture had been lucid while replying to Rama, but he was 
nearing death; blood mixed with bits of flesh had begun to dribble from his 
beak. He said, “It was Visravas’s son himself, the brother of Vaisravana 
... but with this, the lord of birds released his last breath. “Speak! Speak!” 
Rama cried, cupping his hands in supplication, but the breath of life had left 
the vulture’s body and passed into the sky. The vulture’s head dropped to 
the earth, his legs stretched out rigidly, his body was convulsed and then fell 
back to the ground. 

[19-25] Rama gazed at the vulture, at his reddish eyes and lifeless 
corpse that looked like a mountain, and then, in the desolation of his many 
sorrows, he said to Saumitri: “This bird had lived in peace for many years 
in this abode of the rdksasas, roaming here through the Dandaka forest. He 
was born a long time ago and lived for many years, and now he lies here 
slain. For time indeed is inescapable. Just see, Laksmana, this vulture who 
went to the aid of Sita and was killed in my service by the still more 
powerful Ravana. On my account the lord of birds relinquished the great 
ancestral kingship of vultures, and laid down his life as well. You see, 
Saumitri, everywhere, even among those born as animals, can be found 
good creatures that follow the ways of righteousness, that are brave and 
provide a sure place of refuge. Dear brother, scorcher of your foes, my 
sorrow over Sita’s abduction has not been so hard to bear as the death of 
this vulture in my cause. 

[26-30] “This lord of birds to me is just as worthy of reverence and 
esteem as the majestic and illustrious King Dasaratha. Saumitri, fetch some 
wood. I will kindle fire, the purifier, for I wish to cremate the king of 
vultures, who died for my sake. I will place him on the pyre, Saumitri, and 


cremate him, the lord of the world of birds, slain by the savage raksasa. O 
noble king of the vultures, may you go to the state attained by sacrificers, 
the state attained by those who keep the sacred fires, who do not turn their 
back in battle, who make gifts of land. May you go to that very state on 
taking leave of me, and, when I have purified you, may you proceed to the 
highest of worlds.” 

[31-36] And having said this, and having placed the lord of birds upon 
the blazing pyre, righteous Rama cremated him as sorrowfully as if he were 
a kinsman. Powerful Rama together with Saumitri then went into the forest, 
killed several large, fat gazelles, and spread their parts about the bird. 
Illustrious Rama carved off the flesh of the gazelles, cut it into chunks, and 
laid it on the lovely green grass as an offering to the bird. Rama quickly 
intoned for him the prayer for reaching heaven, the one that twice-born 
brahmans recite for men who have died. Both princes then went down to 
the Godavari River and poured the funerary libation for the king of the 
vultures. Struck down in battle after accomplishing a glorious and most 
difficult feat, the king of vultures was purified according to the custom of 
the great seers and attained the holy state, which brings felicity. 


Sarga 65 

[1-4] After making the funerary libation of water for Jatayus, the two 
Raghavas set forth and went westward, scouring the forest for Sita. Armed 
with bows and arrows and swords, the Aiksvakas then turned south, striking 
out on an unbeaten path. It was nearly impassable, so densely overgrown, 
everywhere choked with shrubs and trees and vines, fearsome to behold. 
But the mighty princes forced their way along it, bearing southward, and 
soon they had traversed that vast and fearful wilderness. 

[S—11] When they had gone some six miles beyond Janasthana, the 
Raghavas, of immense blazing energy, entered the dense Kraufica forest. It 
resembled a vast bank of clouds, and everywhere it seemed to be bustling 
with life. Lovely flowers of all colors could be found there, and flocks of 
birds and herds of beasts. Tormented by the loss of Sita, the brothers began 
to search the woods eager to find her, stopping only now and then to rest. 
But then mighty Laksmana of blazing energy, a man of courage, character, 
and honesty, cupped his hands in reverence and addressed his still mightier 
brother: “My arm has started throbbing powerfully and my mind is uneasy 


and I see mostly inauspicious omens. So be prepared, my noble brother, and 
heed my sound advice. For to me, at least, these omens foretell some 
imminent peril. That bird there is a varculaka, ‘the deceiver,’ most ominous 
of birds. His cries would seem to foretell our defeat in battle.” 

[12-15] As they carried on their energetic search through the entire 
forest, a tremendous noise broke out that seemed to shatter the forest. The 
deep woods seemed altogether enveloped in wind; the noise coming from 
the forest seemed to fill the very heavens. Seeking the source of the noise, 
Rama, along with his younger brother, came upon a huge, barrel-chested 
raksasa in a thicket. The two of them drew near, and there, facing them, 
stood the giant Kabandha, a creature without head or neck, his face set in 
his belly. 

[16—21] His body hair was thick and wiry; he towered before them like a 
mountain, a savage creature like a black storm cloud and with a voice like 
thunder. And in his chest, darting glances, thick lashed, tawny, prodigious, 
wide, and terrible, was a single eye. Endowed with massive lips and fangs, 
he was licking his huge mouth while devouring enormous and fearsome 
bears, lions, elephants, and deer. Contorting his two fearsome arms, each 
one of them a league in length, he was seizing with his hands all sorts of 
animals: bears, deer, and flocks of birds. He drew in the leaders of herds of 
deer and tore them apart as he stood there blocking the path the two 
brothers were taking. The two withdrew then to the distance of a league and 
stared at the huge, ferocious, and terrifying Kabandha wrapped up in his 
own arms. 

[22—26] But then, stretching out these prodigious arms a full league, he 
seized the Raghavas both at once, squeezing them with all his might. 
Despite their own great arms and fiercely blazing energy, despite their 
swords and stout bows, the mighty brothers were caught and helplessly 
drawn in. Great-armed Kabandha, foremost of the danavas, then said to 
them: “Who are you two bull-shouldered men, bearing such great swords 
and bows? By entering this fearsome region, you have offered yourselves to 
me as prey. State your purpose and your reason for coming here. With your 
bows and arrows and swords, looking like two sharp-horned bulls, you have 
entered the region where I dwell tormented by hunger—indeed, you have 
entered my very mouth, and your lives are forfeited.” 


[27-31] When Rama heard what the evil Kabandha said, he spoke to 
Laksmana with a mouth gone suddenly dry: “We go from bad to worse, 
truly valiant brother. We have not found my beloved, but instead a dreadful 
calamity that may prove fatal. How great is the power of Kala over all 
creatures, Laksmana! Look at you and me, tiger among men, the two of us 
stunned by one calamity after another. Is not fate far too much for any 
creature to endure, Laksmana? Mighty heroes, practiced in arms, can be 
overcome by Kala and fall on the field of battle like dikes of sand.” 
Speaking in this fashion, the glorious, valiant son of Dasaratha, whose 
courage was true and firm, observing the stubborn courage of Saumitri, 
steadied his heart by an act of will. 


Sarga 66 

[1-4] When he saw that the brothers Rama and Laksmana were entangled 
in the snare of his arms, Kabandha spoke these words: “Why did you linger, 
you bulls among kshatriyas, when you could plainly see I was tormented by 
hunger? Having lost your wits, you must have been designated by fate to be 
my prey.” At this, Laksmana, racked with pain yet resolved to resist 
courageously, said what the moment and their safety demanded: “Very soon 
this disgrace to the raksasas will bolt us down. Come, let us cut off his 
massive arms at once with our swords.” 

[S—8] Aware of what the time and place required, the Raghavas took 
their swords and then cut off his horribly bristling arms at the shoulder. 
With a stroke the skillful Rama cut off his right arm—the sword passed 
cleanly through—and mighty Laksmana the left. His arms cut off, the great- 
armed raksasa collapsed, roaring like a thundercloud, making the heaven, 
the earth, and every direction resound. The danava stared at his severed 
arms, engulfed in an ocean of blood, and wretchedly now asked the mighty 
princes, “Who are you two?” 

[9-12] As Kabandha spoke in this way, the good prince, powerful 
Laksmana of auspicious marks, told him about Kakutstha. “This is the heir 
of the Iksvaku dynasty. His name is Rama, and all people have heard of 
him. As for me, know that I am Laksmana, his younger brother. My brother, 
who has the powers of a god, was living in the desolate forest when a 
raksasa carried off his wife. It is in search of her that we have come here. 
But who are you, and how do you come to be hobbling about in the forest, 


with your legs broken, your flaming mouth in your chest like a headless 
trunk?” 

[13—15] And when Laksmana had spoken to him in this way, Kabandha, 
remembering what Indra had once told him, was overjoyed and replied with 
these words: “Welcome, tigers among men! How fortunate at last to see 
you, how fortunate that you have severed my arms from their sockets. 
Listen now, tiger among men, as I tell you exactly how it was, through my 
evil conduct, that I came to suffer such deformity.” 


Sarga 67 
[1-4] “Once upon a time, great-armed prince, powerful and valiant Rama, I 
was as handsome as the sun, or moon, or Sakra; I was endowed with an 
unbelievably beautiful form, and so, was famous throughout the three 
worlds. But I would take on this other colossal form, Rama, to terrify the 
worlds. I would go from place to place striking terror into seers who dwelt 
in the forest. Then one time I enraged the great seer named Sthilasiras. For 
I assaulted him in this form while he was gathering different foods of the 
forest. Glaring at me, he called down this dreadful curse: “You shall have 
this ferocious and repulsive form forever!’ 

[S—10] “But I begged the enraged seer to set a limit to the curse 
provoked by my insulting him. And he uttered these words: “When Rama 
cuts off your arms and cremates you in the desolate forest, then you shall 
regain your own grand and lovely form.’ You must know, Laksmana, that I 
am the son of Danu and was once radiantly handsome. It was in 
consequence of Indra’s wrath that I acquired this form on the field of battle. 
I had propitiated Grandfather Brahma through intense austerities. He 
granted me long life, but then madness took hold of me. The thought 
occurred to me: I have secured long life. What can Sakra do to me? I acted 
on it and assaulted Indra in battle. The hundred-jointed vajra that came 
hurtling from his hand drove my head and lower limbs right into my trunk. 

[11-17] “I begged him to send me to the house of Yama, the god of 
death, but he refused, and told me, ‘The Grandfather has spoken; his words 
must prove true.” Then I said to him: “But I cannot eat, the blow of your 
vajra has broken my lower limbs, my head and mouth. How then am I to 
live at all, let alone for so long?’ Sakra then provided me with those arms, a 
league in length, and fashioned a sharp-fanged mouth set within my paunch. 


With those long arms I was able to pull in creatures of the forest—lions, 
tigers, elephants, deer—from all around me and devour them. And Indra 
also told me, ‘When Rama together with Laksmana shall cut off your arms 
in combat, then you shall go to heaven.’ You must surely be that same 
Rama, bless you, for no one else could ever kill me, Raghava, just as the 
great seer said. Now, I will give you some good advice, bull among men, 
and make known to you an ally, once the two of you have purified me with 
fire.” 

[18—23] When he had been told all of this by Kabandha Danu, righteous 
Raghava spoke these words as Laksmana listened: “Ravana easily carried 
off my illustrious wife, Sita, when I was absent from Janasthana with my 
brother. But I know only the rdksasa’s name. We do not know what he 
looks like, where he lives, or the full extent of his power. It is only right to 
take pity on men who have been running in circles like this, helpless and 
sick with grief, and who are ready to be of service. So we will fetch dry 
branches broken off over time by elephants, prepare a huge pit, and cremate 
you in it, mighty Kabandha. But first you must tell us about Sita, if in truth 
you know. By what route was she carried off, to what destination? Oh, do 
me this one great kindness!” 

[24-31] When Rama had addressed him thus with these splendid words, 
Kabandha Danu, a skillful speaker, said to Raghava: “I do not possess 
divine knowledge, and I know nothing of Maithili. But I will tell you who 
does know, once I have been cremated and have regained my true form. For 
you see, my lord, until I am cremated, I can acquire no knowledge of the 
mighty raksasa who carried off Sita. For my vast knowledge was 
completely destroyed by the curse I brought upon myself when I acquired 
this form so repulsive to all the world. But come, before Savitr, the sun, his 
horses weary, sets, you must cast me into a pit, Rama, and cremate me in 
accordance with ritual precept. Once I am cremated by you in a pit 
according to established usage, mighty prince, delight of the Raghus, I shall 
tell you of one who will know about the raksasa. You would do well to 
form a friendship with him, Raghava. For he adheres to established usage, 
and, pleased, he will, acting swiftly, render you assistance. And there is 
nothing in the three worlds of which he is ignorant, Raghava, since he once, 
for some reason, circumambulated all the worlds.” 


Sarga 68 

[1-6] When Kabandha had finished addressing those two mighty lords of 
men, they went to find a cleft in the mountain and to kindle fire, the 
purifier. With huge flaming brands Laksmana lit the pyre all around, until it 
was completely engulfed in flames. The purifying fire burned slowly as the 
body of Kabandha melted, for it was solid fat, like a lump of butter. But 
then suddenly, shaking the pyre, he ascended like a smokeless flame, a 
mighty creature wearing a pair of spotless garments and a heavenly garland. 
With a sudden rush he flew up in delight from the pyre, luminous and 
dressed in immaculate raiment, adorned with jewelry on every limb. Upon a 
luminous, glorious flying palace harnessed with hamsas he stood in all his 
brilliance, shedding luster in the ten directions. 

[7-10] And then, hovering in midair, Kabandha said to Rama: “Raghava, 
listen carefully to how to recover Sita. There are six measures to bring to 
bear on every question, Rama. But when the wick runs out on a man, he is 
hounded by adversity. Adversity threatens you. You and Laksmana are all 
alone, and as a result this calamity, this assault upon your wife has befallen 
you. Therefore, best of friends, you must at all costs find a friend, for unless 
you do—I foresee it in my thoughts—you shall not succeed. 

[11-15] “Now listen to what I am about to tell you, Rama. There is a 
monkey named Sugriva. His brother Valin, a son of Indra, has banished him 
in a fit of rage. On the lofty mountain Rsyamitka, in the beautiful environs 
of Lake Pampa, the steadfast, mighty Sugriva has taken up residence with 
four other monkeys. You must go there at once, Raghava, and forthwith 
secure him as your comrade, sealing your compact in the presence of a 
blazing fire to avoid any treachery. Do not be disdainful of the lord of 
monkeys. Sugriva is very powerful and can take on any form at will. He 
now finds himself in need of help and always honors claims of gratitude. 
The two of you can at once accomplish his purpose. But whether or not his 
needs are met, he shall accomplish your purpose. 

[16-22] “He is the son of Rksarajas but the flesh-and-blood child of 
Surya, bringer of light. He has been wandering along Lake Pampa in dread 
of Valin ever since the latter wronged him. At Mount Rsyamika, where the 
forest dweller is residing, you must lay down your arms and secure the 
monkey as your comrade at once, pledging your word. For, through his 
skill, that elephant among monkeys has found out every dwelling place of 


those creatures that feed upon the flesh of men. Nothing in this world 
happens without his knowing of it, Raghava, tamer of your foes, wherever 
the thousand-rayed sun shines. With the help of the monkeys he will search 
the rivers and high hills, the mountain fastnesses and caverns, until he finds 
your wife. He will dispatch huge monkeys, Raghava, in every direction to 
hunt for Sita, who, separated from you, will be grieving. Whether your 
flawless beloved is on the very summit of Mount Meru, or has gone down 
to the depths of the underworld, Patala, that foremost of leaping monkeys 
will kill the raksasas and restore her to you.” 


Sarga 69 

[1-5] Now, after making known to Rama the way to recover Sita, 
Kabandha, who understood the matter at hand, addressed him again, in 
words relating to that matter: “Here is a safe path, Rama, leading to the 
west, where those pleasant flowering trees can be seen, jambus, priyvalas, 
panasas, plaksas, banyans, tindukas, asvatthas, karnikaras, mangoes, and 
so on. Climb them or fell them by force to the ground, but you must taste 
their fruits, which are like the nectar of immortality, before you proceed. 
Then you must continue your journey through those lovely regions, from 
mountain to mountain and forest to forest, mighty princes, and you will 
come to the lotus pond known as Pampa. 

[6-10] “It is free from pebbles, weeds, and pitfalls, Rama, its bathing 
spots are level, its bed soft sand, and it is covered with beautiful lotuses and 
water lilies. Hamsas, plavas, krauncas, and ospreys flock to the waters of 
Lake Pampa, Raghava, sending up their clear calls. The birds are not 
alarmed by the sight of men, so blessed are they in their ignorance of 
slaughter. And you will surely eat some, for they are plump as balls of 
butter. And there are fish in Lake Pampa, Rama, rohitas and vakratundas 
and nalaminas—choice, fleshy ones, and not too bony. Laksmana, in his 
constant devotion to you, will shoot them with his arrows and bring them to 
you—scaling them, stripping off their fins, and roasting them on iron spits. 

[11-15] “And while you are eating your fill of fish on a bed of flowers 
from Lake Pampa, Laksmana can easily draw some water and give you a 
drink from a lotus petal. It is silvery, crystal clear water, deliciously cool, 
safe, and healthful, and charged with the scent of lotuses. There are also 
handsome, plump wild boars that roam the forest, making their lairs in 


mountain caves. You will get to see them at Lake Pampa, best of men, when 
they come thirsting for water and begin to bellow like bulls. And when you 
take a stroll at dusk, you will forget your grief, Rama Raghava, viewing the 
cool waters of Lake Pampa, the flowers massed on the tilaka and naktamdla 
trees, blossoming water lilies and lotuses, the trees festooned with garlands. 

[ 16—20] “But no man shall ever wear those garlands. For in that place the 
students of Matanga once lived, seers who practiced deep meditation. They 
groaned under the heavy burden of fetching their guru food from the forest, 
so that drops of sweat dripped steadily from their bodies to the ground. And 
these were turned into garlands by the ascetic power of the sages; they 
sprang up from the drops of sweat and can never perish, Raghava. Even 
today in that very place their servant can still be found, Kakutstha. She is an 
ascetic named Sabari, who has lived a very long time. She has always been 
devoted to righteousness, and once she sees you, godlike Rama, you to 
whom all beings pay homage, she shall go to the world of heaven. 

[21-25] “There, Rama, situated on the western shore of Lake Pampa, 
you will find the site of that incomparable but hidden ashram. Elephants 
cannot come there and attack that ashram or surrounding woodland because 
of the provisions of the seer Matanga. In that forest grove like Nandana, the 
parkland of the gods themselves, filled with all sorts of birds, you will enjoy 
yourself happily. Now, Mount Rsyamtka with its flowering trees is just to 
the east of Lake Pampa. It is a noble mountain fashioned long ago by 
Brahma, very difficult indeed to scale, and with elephant calves standing 
guard around it. When a man goes to sleep on the peak of that mountain, 
Rama, whatever treasure he may acquire in his dreams, he is sure to obtain 
when he wakes. 

[26—29] “But no one of wicked deeds or any evil man may ascend it. For 
raksasas would seize him in his sleep and kill him on the spot. From there, 
Rama, you can hear the loud trumpeting of the elephant calves that live in 
Matanga’s wilderness and come to play in Lake Pampa. And there are 
furious bull elephants too, their hides dark as storm clouds, which wander 
in herds or all alone, running with streams of ichor. They come to drink the 
clear, cool, healthful water there, and then they withdraw, plunging back 
into the forests where they make their homes. 

[30-32] “Now, in this mountain, Rama, a large cave is visible. Its mouth 
is blocked by a boulder, which makes it all but impossible to enter. At the 


front entrance to the cave there is a large and pleasant pool of cool water, 
and abundant roots and fruits can be found nearby. Trees of every sort 
surround it. It is there that Sugriva lives with four other monkeys, though he 
sometimes stays on the summit of the mountain.” 

[33-36] Having thus instructed Rama and Laksmana, the mighty 
Kabandha blazed there in the sky in all his garlands and radiance, shining 
like the sun, bringer of light. As Rama and Laksmana set forth, they called 
out “Farewell!” to illustrious Kabandha, who remained hovering nearby in 
the air. “May you achieve success,” Kabandha replied as he took leave of 
the joyful princes, ready to set forth himself. Then, cloaked in the majesty 
of a body that was like the sun, bringer of light, his true form that he had 
now regained, and gazing down at Rama from the sky, Kabandha said one 
last thing, “You must secure that alliance!” 


Sarga 70 

[1-6] Heading west, the king’s sons set out on the road Kabandha had 
shown them, which led through the forest to Lake Pampa. Rama and 
Laksmana observed the honey-sweet fruit trees densely clustered on the 
hillsides, but they pressed on, eager to find Sugriva. After spending the 
night on a mountain slope, the Raghavas, delights of their House, arrived at 
the western shore of Lake Pampa. On reaching the western shore of lotus- 
covered Pampa, they saw nearby the pleasant ashram of Sabari. When they 
reached the ashram, a pleasant spot encircled by trees, they glanced about 
and then made their way to Sabari. Upon seeing the princes, the perfected 
woman rose with her hands cupped in reverence, and then she grasped the 
feet of Rama and of wise Laksmana. 

[7-8] Rama then addressed the woman, an ascetic of austere vows: “I 
trust your holy practices thrive and that all obstacles to them have been 
overcome. I trust you fast and control your anger, great ascetic, that your 
vows of self-denial have been fulfilled. I trust the obedience you have 
shown your guru has been justly rewarded, soft-spoken lady, and that you 
have found peace of mind.” 

[9-13] Questioned in this way by Rama, the aged ascetic Sabari, who 
was perfected and had won the esteem of all perfected beings, stood before 
him and replied: “When you arrived at Mount Citraktta, those I had been 
serving departed and ascended to heaven upon flying palaces of 


incomparable radiance. And those great and illustrious seers, wise in the 
ways of righteousness, told me, ‘One day Rama shall come to this holy 
ashram of yours. You are to receive him, and Saumitri too, as guests. Once 
you have beheld him, you shall ascend to the highest imperishable worlds.’ 
On your behalf, bull among men, I have collected different sorts of forest 
food from where it grows on the banks of Lake Pampa, tiger among men.” 

[14-16] Thus addressed by Sabari, righteous Raghava replied to the 
woman, who clearly had never been kept in ignorance: “*"From Kabandha 
Danu I have heard all about the power of those great ascetics. With your 
consent I would like to witness it with my own eyes.” When Sabari heard 
the words that issued from Rama’s mouth, she went with the two princes 
and showed them around the great forest. 

[17-20] Then Sabari said: “The place you see here, delight of the 
Raghus, so like a bank of clouds, where birds and beasts congregate, is 
known as the Forest of Matanga. Here, splendid prince, is where those 
purified sages, my gurus, would pay homage to the lakeside shrine with 
mantras and offer it sacrifice to the accompaniment of vedic mantras. To 
this altar sloping westward my honored gurus would bring flowers in hands 
trembling with weariness and make their offerings. You can see how, by the 
power of their asceticism, best of the Raghus, the altars have remained 
incomparably luminous until today, shedding their splendor in every 
direction. 

[21-24] “Since the weariness brought on by fasting had enfeebled them, 
they could not go there themselves. Just see how they used the power of 
thought to bring the seven seas here all together. After bathing they would 
hang their barkcloth garments here on the trees, and even today they remain 
moist in places, delight of the Raghus. You have seen the entire forest and 
heard all there is to hear. I should like now to take leave of you and give up 
this body of mine. Now I wish to enter the presence of those purified sages 
to whom this ashram once belonged and whom I used to serve.” 

[25-27] When Raghava heard these words, so perfect in their 
righteousness, his face beamed with delight, and, together with Laksmana, 
he replied: “You have my leave. You may go.” With R&ama’s leave she 
immolated herself in the purifying fire, and, resembling a blazing purifying 
fire herself, she went straight to heaven. Sabari then, by virtue of her 


meditation on the Self, went to the holy place where those accomplished 
great seers rejoice. 


Sarga 71 

[1-5] When Sabari had gone to heaven through her own virtuous deeds, 
Raghava paused to reflect in the company of his brother Laksmana. And, 
reflecting on the power of those great sages, righteous Raghava addressed 
Laksmana, who stood at his service with single-minded devotion: “We have 
seen the ashram, dear brother, that belonged to those accomplished seers, a 
place of many wonders, where deer and tiger live at peace and birds of 
every species make their home. At the bathing spots of the seven seas we 
have bathed as custom requires and made offerings to the spirits of our 
ancestors. The misfortune that has hounded us has vanished, Laksmana, and 
good fortune is at hand—it must be, since now my mind 1s once again filled 
with joy. 

[6-10] “I know in my heart, tiger among men, that soon good fortune 
will reveal itself. So come, let us go down to lovely Lake Pampa. Not far 
from there stands Mount Rsyamitika, the place where righteous Sugriva, 
offspring of AmsSumant, the many-rayed sun, has been living with four 
other monkeys in constant fear of Valin. I am impatient to meet the monkey 
chief Sugriva, dear brother, since the search for my Sita now depends on 
him.” As Rama was speaking in this way, Saumitri said this: “Let us hurry 
then and go, for my own heart is no less impatient.” 

[11-17] The supreme lord of the people then left the ashram with 
Laksmana and went down to Lake Pampa. They gazed over the vast forest, 
everywhere luxuriant with flowers and tall trees, alive with the calls of 
koyastis, peacocks, satapatras, kicakas, and all kinds of other birds. Rama 
felt a pang of desire at the sight of the different kinds of trees and ponds as 
he made his way to the last and finest of the pools of Lake Pampa. It was 
called the Pond of Matanga and was fed by water from far away. On 
reaching the pool, Rama entered it to bathe. Rama, son of DaSaratha, was 
sick with grief as he entered Lake Pampa through its covering of lotuses. 
There were pleasant groves clustered around the lake, brilliant with tilakas, 
asokas, pumnagas, bakulas, and uddalas. Its water was full of lotuses but 
brimming and crystal clear, with turtles and schools of fish. The beaches 
were of soft sand, and there were beautiful trees upon the banks, with vines 


growing twined about them like fast friends. It was the haunt of kinnaras, 
great serpents, gandharvas, yaksas, and raksasas, a lovely treasure-house of 
cool water surrounded by all kinds of trees and vines. 

[18-22] The pool was thickly covered with lilies, water flowers, and 
lotuses; and with the coppery red of the day lotuses, the white circles of the 
night water lilies, and the blue clusters of sky lotuses, it looked like a many- 
colored blanket. It was bordered by a grove of flowering mangoes, where 
the cries of peacocks echoed. As mighty Rama, son of Dasaratha, looked at 
Lake Pampa with Saumitri, he began to lament from the keen desire he felt. 
Adorned with tilaka, bijapura, banyan, and sukladruma trees, along with 
karavira and pumnaga trees in blossom, as well as bhandira, nicula, asoka, 
saptaparna, ketaka, atimuktaka, and various other trees, and also shrubs of 
malati and kunda, Lake Pampa resembled a beautifully adorned woman. 

[23—26] Now, near its bank could be seen the mountain mentioned 
before, the one known as RSyamitika, ornamented with veins of ore and 
many-colored flowering groves. It was the dwelling place of the powerful 
tawny monkey named Sugriva, the son of great Rksarajas. He then said to 
the valiant Laksmana, “Go now, bull among men, and find Sugriva, king of 
the monkeys.” So, with his gaze fixed on the forest, Rama, having gradually 
traversed the long road, reached his distant goal. And there he beheld Lake 
Pampa with its lovely groves and flocks of countless birds. 

The end of the Aranyakdanda. 


a Emendation: see PVR 3: 363. 
b Emendation: See PVR 3: 363. 
c Emendation: see PVR 3: 363. 
d Emendation: see PVR 3: 363. 
e Emendation: see PVR 3: 363. 
f Emendation: see PVR 3: 363. 
g Emendation: see PVR 3: 363. 
h Emendation: see PVR 3: 363. 
i Emendation: see PVR 3: 363. 
j Emendation: see PVR 3: 363. 
k Emendation: see PVR 3: 363. 
| Emendation: see PVR 3: 363. 
m Emendation: see PVR 3: 363. 
n Emendation: see PVR 3: 363. 
o Emendation: see PVR 3: 363. 
p Emendation: see PVR 3: 363. 


q Emendation: see PVR 3: 363. 
r Emendation: see PVR 3: 363. 
s Emendation: see PVR 3: 363. 
t Emendation: see PVR 3: 363. 
u Emendation: see PVR 3: 363. 
v Emendation: see PVR 3: 363. 
w Emendation: see PVR 3: 363. 
x Emendation: see PVR 3: 363. 
y Emendation: see PVR 3: 363. 
z Emendation: see PVR 3: 363. 
aa Emendation: see PVR 3: 363. 
bb Emendation: see PVR 3: 363. 
cc Emendation: see PVR 3: 363. 
dd Emendation: see PVR 3: 364. 
ee Emendation: see PVR 3: 364. 
ff Emendation: see PVR 3: 364. 
gg Emendation: see PVR 3: 364. 
hh Emendation: see PVR 3: 364. 


Chapter 4 
The Kiskindhakanda 


Sarga 1 

[1-4] When Rama arrived with Saumitri at that lake overflowing with 
lotuses, water lilies, and fish, his passions overflowed, and he lamented. As 
soon as he saw it, he trembled with rapture. Yielding to the power of love, 
he said to Saumitri: “Saumitri, see how lovely the forest 1s around Lake 
Pampa. Its crested trees are as splendid as mountains. But anguish still 
torments me, as I grieve over Bharata’s sorrow and the abduction of 
Vaidehi. 

[S—11] “And yet this grassy plot, deep green and yellow, glistens 
brightly, carpeted with many-colored blossoms from the trees. With gentle 
breezes and with blossoms and fruits growing on the trees, this fragrant 
spring month is a time of heightened passion, Saumitri. And look, Saumitri, 
beautiful flowering thickets are pouring down showers of blossoms, like 
clouds releasing showers of rain. Forest trees of every kind, shaken by the 
force of the wind, are scattering blossoms on the ground among the lovely 
stones. In glades fragrant with honey, where bees hum, a gentle breeze is 
blowing, cooled by sandalwood trees. The mountains, with beautiful tall 
trees blossoming near their lovely crests, look as if their peaks were 
touching. And look at these karnikara trees everywhere in full flower: they 
are like yellow-robed men covered with gold ornaments. 

[12-16] “This springtime, resounding with birdsongs of every kind, only 
inflames my pain, Saumitri, for I am without Sita. Overcome by grief, I am 
tormented by love, while the joyous kokila, raising its voice, calls out to me. 
This datyuhaka crying joyously by the lovely forest cataract makes me 
grieve, Laksmana, for I am possessed by love. Birds united with their mates 
rejoice in flocks of their own kind, Saumitri. Delighted by the hum of 
bumblebees, they make a sweet sound. Overpowered by care and grief, 
Saumitri, I am tormented by that fawn-eyed woman and by the cruel breeze 
from the spring forest. 


[17-19] “The peacocks circled by peahens on the mountain ridges 
heighten my desire, though I am already filled with desire. See, Laksmana, 
how this peahen sick with love dances before her dancing peacock mate on 
the mountain ridges. Surely the peacock’s beloved was not carried off by a 
rdksasa in the forest. But for me, living without Sita in this month of 
flowers is unbearable. 

[20—25] “Consider, Laksmana, in these forests rich with the burden of 
their blossoms now that the cool season has passed, how unfruitful the 
blossoms will be for me. As if to challenge one another, the joyful birds in 
flocks utter sweet cries, maddening me with desire. In the power of another, 
Sita, my sweet-speaking, dark beloved with eyes like lotus petals, must 
surely grieve as I do. This gentle, cooling breeze, fragrant with flowers, 
feels like fire, the purifier, to me as I think of my dear wife. She is gone; but 
now the crow, that bird who once cried out while flying through the sky, is 
singing joyfully in a tree. The very bird who, flying through the sky, once 
foretold Vaidehi’s abduction will now lead me to my large-eyed wife. 

[26-31] “Listen, Laksmana! Here in the forest the sound of birds 
warbling in the blossoming treetops increases my desire. And look, 
Saumitri, among Pampa’s brightly colored rows of trees, red lotuses shine 
in the water like the newly risen sun. With its clear waters, filled with red 
and blue lotuses and fragrant water lilies, Lake Pampa is crowded with 
hamsas and kdrandavas. Always full of cakravaka birds, its forests 
enclosing bright glades, Pampa is resplendent with herds of elephants and 
deer seeking its waters. My eyes long to see the petals of the lotus buds, 
Laksmana, for they are like Sita’s eyelids. Like Sita’s sighs, the captivating 
wind blows, passing through the trees after mingling with lotus filaments. 

[32-34] “Look, Saumitri, there on the southern slope of Pampa’s 
mountain stands the splendid flowering column of the karnikara tree. This 
king of mountains, richly adorned with veins of minerals, releases dust of 
many colors scattered by the force of the wind. And the mountaintops, 
Saumitri, seem to be all aflame with lovely kimsuka trees, leafless and in 
full bloom. 

[35-41] “Here, growing on the banks of the Pampa, are dense and 
honey-fragrant masses of mdlatt and mallika jasmine, and blossoming 
karavira trees; and ketaki and sinduvara trees and vasanti creepers in full 
bloom, and mddhavi creepers full of fragrance and kunda_ bushes 


everywhere; and ciribilva, madhuka, vanjula, bakula, campaka, and tilaka 
trees, and also flowering ndga trees; and nipa, varana, and kharjura trees in 
full bloom. And ankola, kuranta, cirnaka, and paribhadraka trees; mango 
and pdtali trees as well, and also blossoming koviddra, mucukunda, and 
arjuna trees are seen on the mountain peaks; and ketaka and uddalaka trees 
too, and sirisa, simsapa, dhava, sadlmali, red kimsuka, kurabaka, tinisa, 
naktamdla, candana, and syandana trees and shrubs as well. Many beds of 
red and yellow have formed from the countless blossoms scattered on the 
mountainsides, Saumitri. 

[4246] “Look, Saumitri, blossoms are bursting forth on the trees, now 
that the cold has ended; for in spring, trees blossom as if to rival one 
another. And see, Saumitri, how Lake Pampa with its cool waters 
abounding in blue lotuses is sought after by cakravakas, frequented by 
karandavas, filled with plavas and krauricas, and visited by boars and deer. 
Pampa looks even lovelier with its warbling sky-going birds. Joyful birds of 
every kind seem to inflame my love as | think of my dark, lotus-eyed 
beloved whose face is like the moon. And look, there on the brightly 
colored mountainsides the deer are with their does, while I am parted from 
my fawn-eyed Vaidehi.” 

[47-49] Lamenting in this way, his mind assailed by grief, he gazed at 
the lovely flowing waters of beautiful, auspicious Pampa. Anxious and 
assailed by sorrow, great Rama intently examined the entire forest with its 
waterfalls and caves. Then, after deliberating with Laksmana, he set forth. 
Those two set out together for the mountain Rsyamtika where Sugriva and 
his monkeys dwelt. But the tawny monkeys were terrified when they saw 
powerful Raghava and Laksmana. 


Sarga 2 
[1-6] Now, when Sugriva saw the brothers Rama and Laksmana, those two 
great warriors bearing the finest weapons, he became alarmed. That bull 
among monkeys looked anxiously in all directions and could not settle 
down anywhere. Beholding those two powerful men, the terrified monkey 
could not steady his mind, and his heart sank. Righteous Sugriva was 
deeply distressed as he reflected and weighed the alternatives with all his 
followers. As he watched Rama and Laksmana with great anxiety, the lord 
of leaping monkeys Sugriva said to his companions: “Surely Valin has sent 


those two to this inaccessible forest as spies. Disguised in bark garments, 
they have come prowling about here.” 

[7-11] Then, when Sugriva’s companions had seen those two excellent 
bowmen, they went from that mountain slope to another very high peak. 
Those tawny monkeys, leaders of the troops, having quickly approached 
that bull among troop leaders encircled that foremost of monkeys and stood 
in attendance. Leaping from mountain to mountain and making the 
mountain peaks tremble with their force, they reached a meeting place. And 
then all those powerful, leaping monkeys shattered the flowering trees that 
stood there on the mountain pass. Those great tawny monkeys went leaping 
everywhere on that big mountain, terrifying the deer, wildcats, and tigers. 

[12-17] Assembling on that lord of mountains with their monkey chief, 
the companions of Sugriva stood before him with their palms cupped in 
reverence. Then Hanuman, skilled in speech, spoke to Sugriva, who was 
trembling with alarm, fearing some harm from his brother Valin: “Bull 
among tawny monkeys, I do not see here fierce Valin, whose cruel looks 
you fled with an anxious heart. My friend, I see no danger to you. Evil- 
minded Valin, your wicked elder brother whom you fear, is not here. Ah, 
monkey, it is all too clear that you are a leaping monkey: you are too 
capricious to reach any firm decision. You have both intelligence and 
knowledge, so judge people’s true intentions before you do anything. For a 
king who lapses into folly cannot govern others.” 

[18-21] When Sugriva heard this entire fine speech of Hanuman’s, he 
addressed to him one finer still: “Who would not be afraid upon seeing 
those two who are like sons of the gods, long armed and large eyed, bearing 
bows, arrows, and swords? I suspect that those two excellent men have 
been sent as spies by Valin; for kings have many friends, and one cannot 
trust them. And a man must recognize enemies who go around disguised; 
for untrustworthy people strike at the weak points of those who are trusting. 

[22-26] “Valin is shrewd about his objectives. Kings have many 
stratagems to destroy their enemies, and their schemes must be uncovered 
by ordinary-looking men. ?You must go as an ordinary person, leaping 
monkey, and find out about those two from their various gestures, their 
appearance, and their manner of speaking. Observe their state of mind. If 
they seem well meaning, reassure them again and again by flattery and 
suitable gestures, making them well disposed to me. Then ask those two 


bowmen their purpose in entering this forest, bull among tawny monkeys. 
Find out, leaping monkey, if those two are pure in heart. Their innocence 
can be discovered by their speech or by their appearance.” 

[27-28] Ordered in this way by the monkey king, the wind god’s son 
resolved to go where Rama and Laksmana were. Saying, “So be it!” 
powerful Hanuman honored the words of the unassailable monkey who was 
so frightened. Then he went where mighty Rama and Laksmana were. 


Sarga 3 
[1-3] Understanding great Sugriva’s words, Hanuman then leapt from the 
mountain RSsyamika to where the Raghavas were. When he arrived there, 
powerful Hanuman, that truly valiant best of monkeys, approached those 
two with gentle words. Giving up his own form for that of a mendicant, the 
monkey addressed them and duly praised them: 

[4-8] “With your fair complexions, you ascetics strict in your vows 
resemble gods or royal sages. Why have you come to this place, frightening 
the herds of deer and other forest dwellers, and examining on all sides the 
trees growing on the banks of the Pampa? Who are you in these bark 
garments, best of men, strong, steadfast, bright as gold, enhancing the 
beauty of this river of auspicious waters, you splendid warriors with the 
gaze of lions, courageous and strong as lions, majestic, handsome, with the 
gait of fine bulls, with arms like elephants’ trunks, great arms holding bows 
like Sakra’s? 

[9-12] “Your radiance makes this majestic mountain shine. You look like 
gods and are worthy of royal sovereignty. With eyes like lotus leaves, you 
seem to be warriors; yet you wear coils of matted locks. Resembling each 
other, you are like warriors come from the world of the gods, or like the 
moon and the sun come to earth by chance. You are broad-chested warriors, 
men with the look of gods, lion shouldered and powerful, like furious bulls. 
Why have you come to this place? Your arms are like iron clubs, long and 
well rounded, worthy of every adornment. Why are they unadorned? 

[13-16] “I believe you are both capable of protecting this whole earth, 
complete with its oceans and forests and adorned with the Vindhya and 
Meru mountains. These two bright-colored bows, polished and brightly 
painted, adorned with gold, gleam like Indra’s vajras. Your beautiful 
quivers are full of sharp, glittering arrows like terrible, death-dealing 


snakes. Your two broad swords are very long and adorned with refined 
gold. They shine like snakes that have just shed their skins. 

[17-21] “Why do you not speak to me when I address you this way? 
There is a righteous leader of the monkey troops named Sugriva. Mistreated 
by his brother, this hero wanders the world in distress. Sent by that 
illustrious Sugriva, king of monkey chiefs, I have come to you. I am a 
monkey named Hanuman. Righteous Sugriva desires friendship with you. 
Know that I am his companion, the monkey son of the wind god. Wishing 
to help Sugriva, I have come here from Rsyamika disguised as a 
mendicant. I can go wherever I wish in whatever form I choose.” 

[22—25] After Hanuman, that skillful speaker, had spoken this way to 
Rama and Laksmana, warriors skilled in speech, he said nothing further. 
Now, when he heard those words of his, majestic Rama, his face showing 
delight, spoke to his brother Laksmana, who stood by his side: “This is the 
companion of mighty Sugriva, lord of monkeys. Just when I was wishing 
for him, he has come to me. Saumitri, subduer of foes, speak with kind 
words to Sugriva’s companion, this friendly monkey skilled in speech.” 


Sarga 4 

[1-4] When Hanuman heard this agreeably worded speech, he was 
delighted that Rama had some purpose, and he thought about Sugriva: 
“Since this man has come with some purpose, great Sugriva will acquire 
kingship. And this purpose is nearly accomplished.” Thoroughly delighted, 
that bull among leaping monkeys, Hanuman, skilled in speech, then replied 
to Rama: “Why have you come with your younger brother to this terrible 
and inaccessible forest, adorned with Pampa’s groves and full of all kinds of 
savage beasts?” 

[S—10] At these words, Laksmana, urged by Rama, presented great 
Rama, son of DaSaratha, saying: “There was a glorious king named 
Dasaratha, devoted to righteousness. This is his eldest son named Rama, 
famous among people. A refuge for all beings, this warrior, who has 
fulfilled his father’s command, is the most excellent of Dasaratha’s sons. 
Deprived of kingship, he came to live here in the forest with me. Self- 
controlled and splendid, he was followed by his wife, Sita, just as at day’s 
end the splendid sun, maker of day, is followed by its own radiance. I am 
his younger brother, Laksmana by name. I have become his devoted servant 


because of his good qualities; for he is grateful, learned, worthy of 
happiness, very deserving and kindly disposed toward all beings. Deprived 
of sovereignty, he has taken refuge in forest life. 

[11-16] “While we were absent, his wife was carried off by a raksasa 
who can change form at will, but we do not know the raksasa who stole his 
wife. There was a son of Sti named Danu who through a curse became a 
raksasa. It was he who informed us about powerful Sugriva. He said: ‘The 
heroic king of the monkeys will know your wife’s abductor.’ Then radiant 
Danu went happily to heaven. I have stated all of this truthfully to you, 
since you ask; for Rama and I have both come to Sugriva for help. Rama, 
who gave away his riches and achieved the highest glory, was formerly a 
protector of the people, but now he needs Sugriva as his protector. And 
since Rama, overcome and tormented by grief, has come for refuge, 
Sugriva and his troop leaders should be gracious to him.” 

[17-20] Saumitri’s tears flowed as he spoke in this piteous way; and 
Hanuman, skilled in speech, made this reply: “The lord of monkeys must 
receive men such as you, for you are intelligent and have subdued both your 
anger and your passions. How fortunate that you have appeared! For his 
brother Valin has become hostile toward him and stripped him of royal 
sovereignty as well. Greatly mistreated and robbed of his wife, he lives 
frightened in the forest. Sugriva, the son of the Surya, bringer of light, along 
with us will help you in your search for Sita.” 

[21-26] After speaking in this way, Hanuman with his sweet voice 
gently said to Raghava: “Let us go to Sugriva.” In keeping with custom, 
righteous Laksmana respectfully saluted Hanuman, who had spoken in that 
way, and said this to Raghava: “This cheerful monkey, son of the wind god, 
is telling the truth. Sugriva too has a purpose, so you have achieved your 
purpose, Raghava. Hanuman is cheerful, his countenance is clear, and he 
speaks candidly. The warrior son of the wind god would not tell a lie.” Then 
Hanuman, the wise son of the wind god, went with the two Raghava 
warriors to the king of the monkeys. And now the son of Pavana, the wind 
god, that most heroic monkey whose fame was widespread, whose valor 
was great, and whose mind was pure, set out for that best of mountains with 
Rama and Laksmana, rejoicing as if he had already accomplished his 


purpose. 


Sarga 5 

[1-7] Hanuman went from Rsyamika to Mount Malaya and then 
announced the two Raghava warriors to the king of the monkeys, saying: 
“This is wise Rama whose valor is unfailing. This truly valiant Rama has 
arrived with his brother Laksmana. Rama, son of Dasaratha, was born in the 
House of Iksvaku. Known for his righteousness, he is carrying out his 
father’s command. While this great, self-controlled man was living in the 
forest, his wife was carried off by a raksasa. And so he has come to you for 
help. His father gratified the god of fire with the rdjastiya and asvamedha 
sacrifices, giving hundreds of thousands of cows as sacrificial fees. He also 
protected the earth through his asceticism and truthfulness. On account of a 
woman, this son of his, Rama, has come to you for help. These brothers, 
Rama and Laksmana, desire friendship with you. Receive them and show 
honor to them, for they are both most worthy of respect.” 

[8—12] When he heard Hanuman’s words, Sugriva was delighted at heart. 
Freed from anxiety, he gave up his terrible fear of Raghava. Then Sugriva, 
lord of leaping monkeys, took on a very handsome human form and spoke 
in a friendly way to Raghava: “You are valiant, instructed in righteousness, 
and kind to all. Your good qualities have been accurately described to me 
by the wind god’s son. For me it is indeed an honor and also a great 
advantage, lord, that you desire friendship with me, a monkey. And if such 
an alliance is agreeable to you, here is my outstretched arm. Take my hand 
in yours and let us make a firm pact.” 

[13-18] Now, when Rama heard Sugriva’s eloquent speech, he was 
delighted at heart and grasped his hand with his own. Accepting cordial 
friendship, he embraced him tightly. Then Hanuman, subduer of foes, gave 
up his mendicant form and in his own form kindled a purifying fire with 
two pieces of wood. He honored the blazing fire, worshiping it with 
flowers. Pleased and composed, he placed it between those two. Then 
Sugriva and Raghava entered into an alliance by reverently circling the 
blazing fire. Delighted at heart, the tawny monkey and Raghava could not 
get their fill of looking at each other. Afterward powerful Sugriva intently 
spoke these words to DaSsaratha’s son Rama, who understood all things. 


Sarga 6 


[1-5] Sugriva spoke: “My companion, the excellent counselor Hanuman, 
has told me why you have come to this uninhabited forest, Rama. While 
you and your brother were living in the forest, both you and wise Laksmana 
left your wife, Maithilt, daughter of Janaka, by herself. A raksasa who was 
longing for such an opportunity carried her off weeping, after he had first 
killed the vulture Jatayus. You shall soon be released from the sorrow born 
of this separation from your wife. For I shall bring her back like the lost 
vedas. Whether she is down in the underworld known as Rasatala or up in 
the heavens, I shall bring back your wife and give her to you, subduer of 
your foes. 

[6—10] “Know that these words of mine are true, Raghava. Give up your 
grief, great-armed man: I shall bring back your beloved. I now realize that it 
was Maithili I saw being carried off by a rdksasa of cruel deeds. There is no 
doubt about it. Struggling in Ravana’s embrace like the bride of a serpent 
king, she was hoarsely crying, ‘Rama, Rama! Laksmana!’ When she saw 
me and my four companions standing on the mountainside, she dropped her 
shawl and her bright ornaments. These we took and put away, Raghava. I 
shall bring them. You should be able to recognize them.” 

[11-16] Then Rama said to Sugriva, the bearer of good news: “Bring 
them quickly, my friend. Why do you delay?” At these words, Sugriva, who 
wished to help Raghava, quickly entered a deep cave in the mountain. The 
monkey took the shawl and the bright ornaments and showed them to 
Rama, saying, “Look at this.” Then, as Rama took that garment and the 
bright ornaments, tears covered his face as mist covers the moon. His face 
was stained with the tears he shed for love of Sita. Crying, “Ah, beloved!” 
he lost his composure and fell to the ground. Repeatedly he pressed those 
fine ornaments to his heart and sighed deeply like an angry snake in its 
burrow. 

[17—23] Through an unbroken stream of tears, Rama saw Saumitri by his 
side and began to lament piteously: “Look, Laksmana, here are the shawl 
and ornaments that Vaidehi let fall from her body to the ground as she was 
being carried away. As she was being carried off, Sita must surely have 
dropped these ornaments onto grassy ground, and that is why they look like 
this. Tell me, Sugriva, when you saw my beloved, who is dear as life to me, 
where was the fierce-looking radksasa taking her? And where does he live, 
that raksasa who has brought me such calamity? Because of him, I shall 


destroy all raksasas. By carrying off Maithill and angering me so deeply, he 
has opened the door of death and brought his own life to an end. Lord of 
monkeys, tell me about my enemy, the night-roaming raksasa who by 
deceit carried my dearly beloved wife away from the forest. I shall send 
him this very day into the presence of Yama, the god of death.” 


Sarga 7 

[1-5] When sorrowful Rama had addressed him in this fashion, the monkey 
Sugriva cupped his palms in supplication. His voice choked with sobs, he 
tearfully said these words: “I know nothing whatever about this low-born, 
evil raksasa’s dwelling, his power, his valor, or his family. But I solemnly 
promise I will make an effort such that you shall regain Maithili. Give up 
your grief, subduer of your foes. Satisfying you by killing Ravana and his 
followers, I shall soon exert my strength so that you will be pleased. 
Enough of this yielding to despair. Remember your own natural composure. 
Such faintheartedness is unworthy of a man like you. 

[6-13] “I too have met with great misfortune through the abduction of 
my wife, yet I do not grieve in this fashion, nor do I abandon my 
composure. Nor do I grieve over her, though I am just an ordinary monkey. 
How much less should you, who are great, disciplined, and resolute? You 
should firmly hold back the tears that come. You should not abandon the 
fortitude demanded of the strong. In misfortune or loss of wealth or in 
mortal danger, the resolute man deliberates with his own judgment and does 
not despair. But the foolish man who always gives way to despair sinks 
helplessly in grief, like an overloaded boat in water. Here, I cup my palms 
in supplication. I beseech you out of affection: Rely upon your manliness. 
You must not let grief take hold of you. For those who give way to grief, 
there is no happiness, and their strength dwindles away. You must not 
grieve. It is out of friendship that I offer this counsel. I am not telling you 
what to do. But if you honor my friendship, you should not grieve.” 

[14-17] Gently comforted by Sugriva, Raghava wiped his tear-drenched 
face with the edge of his garment. And now lord Kakutstha, restored to his 
normal state by Sugriva’s words, embraced him and said this: “You have 
done what is right and proper for a loving and helpful friend to do, Sugriva. 
Here I am, my friend, comforted by you and restored to my normal state. 
Such a friend is indeed hard to find, particularly at a time like this. 


[18—23] “But now you must make an effort to search for Maithili and the 
fierce, evil rdksasa Ravana. And you must tell me without reservation what 
I am to do for you. Everything will succeed for you, like crops in a good 
field during the rains. And you must regard as the truth those words that I 
proudly spoke, tiger among tawny monkeys. I have never spoken a 
falsehood before, nor shall I ever speak one. I promise you this; I swear it to 
you by truth itself.” Sugriva and his monkey companions were delighted to 
hear Raghava’s words, particularly his promise. When the wise tawny 
monkey Sugriva, foremost of monkey warriors, heard the words of that 
mighty bull among men, he felt in his heart that his purpose was already 
accomplished. 


Sarga 8 

[1-5] Delighted by this speech, the monkey Sugriva said these words to 
Laksmana’s older brother, Rama: “Undoubtedly I am favored by the gods in 
every way, because you who are endowed with every virtue have become 
my friend. Blameless Rama, with you as my ally, I could surely win even 
the kingdom of the gods, not to mention my own, lord. Raghava, I deserve 
the honor of my friends and relatives since I have obtained with fire as my 
witness an ally born in the House of Raghava. You will gradually learn that 
I too am a friend worthy of you. But I myself cannot speak of my own good 
qualities. 

[6-10] “The affection of great, magnanimous men like you is altogether 
unswerving, like the composure of the self-possessed. Good friends regard 
their own silver, gold, clothes, and ornaments as belonging to their good 
friends as well. Rich or poor, happy or unhappy, guiltless or guilty, a friend 
is the ultimate refuge. For the sake of a friend, one would sacrifice wealth, 
happiness, or even life itself once one has seen such affection.” “That is so,” 
said Rama to Sugriva, whose welcome words were spoken before wise 
Laksmana, splendid as Indra Vasava. 

[11-14] Then, seeing that Rama and mighty Laksmana were standing, 
Sugriva eagerly cast his eyes all about the forest. The lord of tawny 
monkeys saw a sdla tree nearby with lovely blossoms, full of leafy shoots 
and graced with bees. From that sda/a tree Sugriva broke off a beautifully 
blossoming branch with many leaves. He spread it out and sat down on it 


with Rama. Then, seeing those two seated, Hanuman as well tore off a sala 
branch and made modest Laksmana sit down. 

[15-18] Then, with a sweet voice, his words agitated with excitement, 
the delighted Sugriva spoke gently and affectionately to Rama: “Mistreated 
by my brother, robbed of my wife, here I am, unhappy and tormented by 
fear, roaming this great mountain RSyamtka. Wronged and shown hostility 
by my brother Valin, I live terrified, sunk in fear, my mind distracted, 
Raghava. You who give freedom from fear to everyone, please be gracious 
to me too, for I am oppressed with fear of Valin and have no one to protect 
me.” 

[19-23] Addressed in this fashion, powerful Kakutstha, who was 
devoted to righteousness and knew what was right, smiled slightly and 
replied to Sugriva: “A friend is helpful, an enemy hurtful. This very day, I 
shall kill your wife’s abductor. For here are my sharp-edged, winged arrows 
of great speed, born in Kartikeya’s bed of reeds, decorated with gold, heron 
fletched, well jointed, and with very sharp points, like great Indra’s 
thunderbolts or angry serpents. You shall see your enemy Valin, who calls 
himself a brother but has wronged you so, brought down by my arrows, like 
a mountain torn apart.” 

[24-28] When he heard Raghava’s words, the army leader Sugriva felt 
unequaled joy and cried: “Excellent! Excellent! Rama, I have been 
overwhelmed by grief, and you are the refuge of the grief-stricken. It 1s 
because I regard you as my friend that I lament before you. For by offering 
me your hand with fire as witness, you have become my friend. I swear by 
truth itself that I value you more than my own life. It is because I regard 
you as my friend that I confidently express the inner sorrow that constantly 
torments my mind.” But when with tear-filled eyes and tear-choked voice 
he had said that much, he could speak no further. 

[29-32] Still, since Rama was there, Sugriva resolutely checked the rush 
of his tears, which had come as suddenly as the rushing of a river. Holding 
back his tears, wiping his bright eyes and sighing deeply, the powerful 
monkey addressed Raghava once again: “Some time ago, Rama, Valin 
deprived me of kingship. Since he was the stronger, he drove me out with 
harsh words. He took my wife, who is dearer to me than life itself, and 
imprisoned my friends. 


[33-36] “And that evil-minded creature is still trying to destroy me, 
Raghava. I have often had to kill monkeys he has sent out. So when I saw 
you, Raghava, I was suspicious and too frightened to approach. For when 
danger threatens, everyone is fearful. My only companions are these led by 
Hanuman. Nonetheless, I manage to survive even in these difficult 
circumstances. For these affectionate monkeys protect me on all sides. 
When I must go, they go along, and when I stay, they always stay with me. 

[37-39] “What use is it to tell you the details, Rama? This is the story in 
brief: my older brother Valin, famed for his great strength, has become my 
enemy. With his destruction, my suffering would vanish at once. My 
happiness and even my life itself are bound up with his destruction. Grief- 
stricken, I have explained how my grief can be ended, Rama. Happy or 
unhappy, a friend is always the refuge of his friend.” 

[40-45] When he had heard this speech, Rama said to Sugriva: “I should 
like to hear the true cause of this hostility. For when I have heard the reason 
for your hostility and determined your strength or weakness, monkey, | 
shall willingly do whatever must be done next. For when I hear how you 
were insulted, the strong indignation that stirs my heart swells, like the 
rushing water during the rains. Speak freely and in happiness while I string 
my bow. For the moment I loose my arrow, your enemy will be destroyed.” 
When great Kakutstha addressed them in this way, Sugriva and the other 
four monkeys felt incomparable joy. Then, with joy showing on his face, 
Sugriva began to explain to Laksmana’s older brother the true cause of the 
hostility. 


Sarga 9 

[1-4] “My older brother Valin, slayer of his enemies, was always highly 
regarded by our father and by me as well, in former times. Because he was 
the elder, the counselors placed him on the throne as the greatly respected 
lord of monkeys when our father died. And while he governed our great 
ancestral kingdom, I stood by humbly at all times, like a servant. Now it is 
well known that because of a woman there was great hostility in former 
times between Valin and the first-born son of Dundubhi, powerful 
Mayavin. 

[S—8] “One night when people were asleep, he came to the gates of 
Kiskindha. Roaring angrily, he challenged Va4lin to battle. Now my brother 


Valin, who was asleep, could not bear it when he heard that frightful- 
sounding roar, and he quickly rushed out. As he left in a rage to kill that 
great asura, the women and I respectfully tried to restrain him. But the 
powerful monkey brushed all of us aside and went out. So out of affection I 
followed Valin. 

[9-11] “Now, when the asura saw from afar my brother and me taking a 
stand, he grew frightened and quickly ran away. And though he ran in 
terror, the two of us ran faster still, for the road was well lit by the rising 
moon. But the asura plunged into a great cavern in the ground that was hard 
to reach and covered with grass. The two of us reached the entrance and 
stopped. 

[12—14] “When he saw his enemy enter that cavern, Valin gave way to 
anger. With passions churning, he said these words to me: ‘Wait here 
attentively at the entrance to this cavern, Sugriva, while I go in there and 
kill my enemy in battle.’ When I heard his words, scorcher of foes, I begged 
him not to go; but he made me swear by his feet and then entered the 
cavern. 

[15-19] “An entire year passed while he was inside the cavern, and I 
remained at the entrance as that time went by. In my affection for him, I 
became anxious and believed my brother was dead, for I did not see him, 
and my mind feared the worst. Then, after a long time, I saw red foaming 
blood gush from the cavern, and I was in anguish. And to my ears came the 
echo of asuras roaring and the sound of my elder brother crying out. Now 
judging by these signs that my brother was slain, I blocked the entrance to 
the cavern with a rock the size of a mountain. Grief-stricken, I offered 
funeral libations for him and returned to Kiskindha, my friend. 

[20—24] “With effort his counselors got the truth from me, though I tried 
to conceal it. Then they assembled and together had me consecrated. But 
while I was lawfully governing his kingdom, Raghava, back came Valin, 
having in fact killed his enemy the great asura. Now, when he saw I had 
been consecrated, his eyes turned red with anger. He imprisoned my 
counselors and spoke abusively to me. Though I could have had him 
punished, Raghava, my heart was restrained by respect for a brother, and I 
could not act against that evil creature. Honoring that great monkey, I 
greeted him respectfully as was proper; but he was not satisfied and would 
not pronounce blessings on me.” 


Sarga 10 

[1-6] “Hoping to please him, I tried to appease my enraged brother, who 
had arrived so filled with anger, saying: ‘Fortunately, you have killed your 
enemy and arrived safely! For you, joy of the unprotected, are the only 
protector for me, who has no one to protect me. Accept this many-ribbed 
umbrella like a full moon on high and these yak-tail fly whisks, which I 
offer you. You alone are king and worthy of honor. I am just as I always 
was before. I restore to you this kingdom, which I merely held in trust. Do 
not be angry with me, gentle king, slaughterer of your enemies. I beg you 
with bowed head and with palms cupped in supplication. I was forcibly 
appointed to the rank of king by the assembled counselors and people of the 
city, lest the kingless country tempt someone.’ 

[7-8] “But though I spoke affectionately, that monkey abused me and 
said to me, ‘Damn you!’ and many other things of that sort. He brought 
together citizens and respected counselors, and in the midst of my close 
friends, he said the vilest things about me: 

[9-13] “ ‘You all know how cruel, wicked-minded Mayavin, the great 
asura, wishing to do battle, challenged me that night. When I heard his roar, 
I came out of my palace, and this fearsome brother of mine quickly 
followed me. But as soon as the mighty asura saw me in the night with a 
companion, he ran off terrified. When he saw the two of us running after 
him, he rushed, pursued by us, into a great cavern. When I realized that he 
had entered that great and terrible cavern, I spoke to this brother of mine 
who was plotting a cruel deed: “I cannot return to the city without 
destroying the asura. Wait at the entrance to the cavern while I kill him.” 

[14-17] “ ‘Thinking that Sugriva was standing by, I went into that 
formidable cavern. And while I was searching for Mayavin, a year went by. 
But because I did not despair, I found and killed that fearsome asura enemy 
together with his kinsmen. Then the cavern became impassable, filled with 
a stream of blood flowing from his mouth as he roared underground. As I 
made my way out after killing my enemy, Dundubhi’s valiant son, I could 
not see the mouth of the cavern at all, for it had been blocked. 

[18-20] “ ‘I cried out, “Sugriva!” again and again. When there was no 
response, I was deeply distressed. But with repeated kicks I managed to 
break through. Then I came out that way and returned here. I was shut in 


there by this malicious Sugriva who, unmindful of brotherly affection, 
sought the kingdom for himself.’ 

[21—25] “And with those words the monkey Valin, unperturbed, then 
banished me with nothing but a single garment. He drove me away and took 
my wife, Raghava; and in fear of him, I have traversed this entire earth with 
its forests and oceans. Sorrowing on account of the abduction of my wife, I 
came to RSyamiika, best of mountains, which for an unrelated reason Valin 
cannot approach. Now I have told you the whole long story of our quarrel. 
Just see, Raghava, the calamity that has befallen me though I am blameless. 
Hero, you grant freedom from fear to everyone. Please be gracious to me 
and punish Valin, for fear of him oppresses me.” 

[26-29] Addressed in this way, the powerful knower of righteousness 
smiled slightly and began to speak to Sugriva words consistent with 
righteousness: “These unfailing arrows of mine, sharp, angry, bright as the 
sun, shall fall on that evildoer Valin. Sinful Valin has violated all decency 
by taking your wife. He shall remain alive only as long as I do not see him. 
I realize from my own experience that you are plunged in an ocean of grief. 
But I will rescue you from it, and you shall attain all that you desire.” 


Sarga Il 

[1-6] When he had heard Rama’s words, which increased both his joy and 
his courage, Sugriva honored Raghava and praised him: “With your 
blazing, sharp arrows, which can pierce vital organs, you could no doubt, 
when angry, burn up the three worlds, like the sun, bringer of light, at the 
end of the cosmic cycle. Listen attentively as I describe Valin’s manliness, 
heroism, and fortitude. Then afterward do what must be done. Before the 
sun rises, Valin strides from the western to the eastern ocean and from the 
southern to the northern ocean without tiring. Mighty Valin climbs to the 
tops of mountains, swiftly tosses even their huge peaks upward, and then 
catches them again. And in forests, Valin displays his strength by swiftly 
shattering all sorts of mighty trees. 

[7-9] “Now there was once a mighty buffalo demon named Dundubhi, 
big as the peak of Mount Kailasa, who possessed the strength of a thousand 
elephants. Corrupted by pride in his might and deluded by a boon granted to 
him, that gigantic creature went to the ocean, the lord of rivers. Confronting 


the billowing sea with its hoard of gems, he said to that great ocean, ‘Come, 
fight with me!’ 

[10-13] “Then, king, the righteous mighty ocean rose up and said these 
words to that asura who was driven by fate: ‘I cannot do battle with you, 
who are skillful in battle. But listen; I shall name one who will give you 
battle. In a great forest stands the king of mountains, the father-in-law of 
Safikara, the supreme refuge of ascetics known as Himalaya. With his 
caverns and cascades, with his many caves and waterfalls, he is capable of 
giving you unrivaled satisfaction in battle.’ 

[14-19] “Considering the ocean to be frightened, that best of asuras 
went like an arrow loosed from a bow to the forest of the mountain 
Himalaya. With a roar Dundubhi hurled from that mountain to the earth 
many white boulders, as big as the king of elephants. Then gentle 
Himalaya, in the form of a friendly-looking white cloud resting on his own 
summit, spoke these words: ‘Dundubhi, you are devoted to righteousness. 
You should not trouble me, the refuge of ascetics, for I am unskilled in 
warfare.’ Hearing this speech of the wise king of mountains, Dundubhi, 
red-eyed with anger, spoke these words: ‘If you are incapable of battle or 
paralyzed through fear of me, name someone who can give battle to me 
today, for I am eager to fight.’ 

[20-23] “When righteous Himalaya, skilled in speech, heard that 
unprecedented speech, he replied in anger to that best of asuras: ‘In 
Kiskindha, unequaled in splendor, there dwells a wise and majestic monkey 
named Valin, whose prowess is equal to Sakra’s. Wise and skilled in battle, 
he is capable of offering you great single combat, just as Indra Vasava did 
to Namuci. Go to him quickly if you desire battle now, for he is invincible 
and always heroic in warfare.’ 

[24—30] “When he heard Himalaya’s words, Dundubhi went in a fury to 
Valin’s city Kiskindha. Taking the form of a terrifying, sharp-horned 
buffalo, he looked like a huge cloud laden with rain in the monsoon sky. 
Then mighty Dundubhi reached Kiskindha’s gate and roared like a great 
kettledrum, making the earth tremble; and he broke the trees growing 
nearby, tearing up the ground with his hooves, and boldly slashing the gate 
with his horns, like a two-tusked elephant. Valin, who was in the women’s 
quarters, could not bear hearing the noise, so out he rushed with his women, 
like the moon appearing with the stars. Valin, lord of all the tawny forest- 


roaming monkeys, addressed Dundubhi in measured and clearly articulated 
words: ‘Why do you roar and besiege this city gate? I know you, mighty 
Dundubhi. Protect your own life!’ 

[31-36] “When he heard the speech of the wise monkey king, Dundubhi, 
red-eyed with anger, said these words: ‘Warrior, you should not make 
speeches in front of women. Give me battle. Then I shall know your 
strength. Or perhaps I should restrain my anger for tonight? Let us agree on 
sunrise as the limit to your free enjoyment of love, monkey. For whoever 
kills anyone who is drunk or heedless or asleep or without weapons or, like 
you, completely stupefied by passion is regarded in this world as the 
murderer of an unborn child.’ Laughing quietly, Valin then dismissed Tara 
and all the other women and angrily said to that best of asuras: ‘Unless you 
are afraid of battle, don’t think that Iam drunk. Consider my intoxication as 
a watrior’s customary drinking before our encounter.’ 

[37-40] “With these words, angry Valin put on a gold necklace he had 
received from great Indra, his father, and stood ready for battle. Valin 
seized that mountainous Dundubhi by his two horns, threw him to the 
ground, and roared loudly. In that mortal conflict, Dundubhi was then 
crushed. As he was flung to the ground, blood flowed from his ears, and the 
gigantic asura fell to earth, dead. With both arms, impetuous Valin lifted 
that asura, now without life or consciousness, and with one quick toss 
hurled him a league away. 

[41-44] “As he was violently flung away, drops of blood from his mouth 
were scattered by the wind and fell on Matanga’s hermitage. Seeing the 
drops of blood fall there, the sage pronounced a terrible curse on Valin for 
throwing the body: ‘He must not enter here. It will be death for him to 
enter.’ With palms cupped in reverence, Valin approached the great seer and 
begged forgiveness. Frightened by the threat of that curse, lord of men, that 
tawny monkey therefore refuses to enter here, or even to look at the great 
mountain Rsyamika. 

[45-49] “Knowing that he cannot enter here, Rama, I roam this great 
forest with my ministers, free from care. Here, one can see the skeleton of 
that Dundubhi, high as a mountain, hurled away by Valin in the exuberance 
of his strength. And here are seven thick sala trees with branches hanging 
down, any one of which Valin with his strength could pierce through with 
an arrow. I have made clear to you his unequaled strength, Rama. How then 


will you be able to kill Valin in battle, king? If, however, you could split 
these sala trees with a single arrow, then, great-armed man, I would know 
you were capable of killing Valin.” 

[50-52] When great-armed Raghava heard those words of great Sugriva, 
he easily lifted Dundubhi’s body with his big toe and hurled it ten leagues. 
And when Sugriva saw the body flung away, he spoke these reasonable 
words to Rama in Laksmana’s presence: “When the body was thrown 
before, my friend, it was fresh and had flesh and blood. But now it has 
become like straw, light and without flesh, Raghava. So in this case, it is 
impossible to know whether your strength or Valin’s is superior.” 


Sarga 12 

[1-6] When he heard those words so well spoken by Sugriva, mighty Rama 
took up his bow to inspire confidence. The bestower of honor seized his 
terrible bow and a single arrow, took aim at the sd/a trees, and shot, filling 
every quarter with the sound of his bowstring. Released by powerful Rama, 
the gold-adorned arrow split the seven sdla trees, passed through the 
mountaintop, and entered the earth. In an instant, the swift arrow split the 
earth, entered it, flew out again, and quickly returned to its quiver. When 
that bull among monkeys saw those seven sd/a trees pierced by the force of 
Rama’s arrow, he was greatly amazed. Highly pleased, Sugriva cupped his 
palms in reverence before Raghava and then threw himself down with his 
head to the ground, so that his ornaments hung down. 

[7-11] In his delight at that feat, Sugriva spoke to the heroic knower of 
righteousness, foremost of those skilled in every weapon, who was standing 
there: “My lord, bull among men, with your arrows you are capable of 
killing in battle all the gods, including Indra, to say nothing of Valin. Who 
can stand in the forefront of battle before you, Kakutstha, you, who—with a 
single arrow—split open seven great sala trees, the mountain, and the 
earth? Now my sorrow is gone, now my joy is supreme, for I have gained 
you, the equal of great Indra and Varuna, as my close friend. As a favor to 
me, Kakutstha, you must this very day kill Valin, my enemy in the form of 
a brother. See, I cup my hands in reverence.” 

[12-16] Then wise Rama embraced handsome Sugriva and with 
Laksmana’s approval responded in these words: “Let us go from here to 
Kiskindha. You, Sugriva, go swiftly before us. And when you get there, 


challenge Valin, that brother in name only.” Proceeding quickly to Valin’s 
city Kiskindha, they all stopped in the dense forest, concealing themselves 
behind trees. Girding his loins, Sugriva, as a challenge to Valin, bellowed 
horribly, seeming to split the sky with his furious roaring. Angered at 
hearing his brother’s roars, mighty Valin, enraged, rushed out, like the sun, 
bringer of light, from behind the slope of the western mountain. 

[17—20] Then a tumultuous battle took place between V4lin and Sugriva, 
like a dreadful clash in the sky between the planets Mercury and Mars. In 
the conflict, the two brothers, beside themselves with rage, struck each 
other with fists like thunderbolts and with palms like lightning. Then, bow 
in hand, Rama looked carefully at those two warriors who were as similar 
to each other as the twin gods, the Asvins. And since he could not 
distinguish Sugriva from Valin, Raghava could not make up his mind to 
loose his deadly arrow. 

[21-24] Meanwhile, routed by Valin, Sugriva did not see his protector, 
Raghava, so he fled to RSyamika. Exhausted, his body spattered with 
blood, battered by blows, he fled into the great forest, angrily pursued by 
Valin. But when mighty Valin saw him enter that forest, he turned back in 
fear of the curse, saying: “You have escaped, then!” Raghava too, with his 
brother and Hanuman as well, came back to that same forest where the 
monkey Sugriva was. 

[25—27] When he saw Rama arriving with Laksmana, Sugriva was 
ashamed. With his eyes fixed on the ground, he spoke dejectedly: “First you 
showed me your prowess and said I should challenge my enemy. Then you 
let him beat me. Why do you act like this now? Right then, Raghava, you 
should have said honestly: ‘I will not kill Valin.” Then I would never have 
budged from here.” 

[28-35] But when great Sugriva spoke so pitifully in a dejected voice, 
Raghava replied: “Poor Sugriva, listen to the reason why I did not shoot this 
arrow, and let your anger be dispelled. In ornaments, in your dress, your 
size, and your movements, you and Valin are very similar to each other, 
Sugriva. Monkey, I cannot tell the difference between the two of you in 
voice, splendor, glance, valor, or speech. And so, best of monkeys, 
bewildered by this similarity of appearance, I did not loose my swift, foe- 
destroying arrow. But soon you will see Valin writhing on the ground, 
struck down by me in battle with a single arrow. Lord of monkeys, you 


must place on yourself some distinguishing mark by which I may recognize 
you when you are engaged in single combat. Laksmana, pluck that 
auspicious flowering gajapuspi creeper and place it around great Sugriva’s 
neck.” 

[36-38] Then Laksmana plucked a blossoming gajapuspi that was 
growing on the mountainside and draped it around Sugriva’s neck. With the 
creeper fastened about his neck, majestic Sugriva resembled a rain cloud at 
twilight with a garland of balaka cranes. Radiant in body, intent on Rama’s 
words, he went with Rama to Kiskindha, which Valin protected. 


Sarga 13 

[1-4] And so, taking up his great gold-adorned bow and with it his arrows, 
bright as the sun and potent in battle, Rama, the righteous elder brother of 
Laksmana, went with Sugriva from Rsyamtika to Kiskindha, which was 
protected by Valin’s prowess. Before great Raghava went strong-necked 
Sugriva and mighty Laksmana. Behind came heroic Hanuman, Nala, the 
monkey Nila, and also glorious Tara, all leaders among the leaders of the 
troops of tawny monkeys. 

[S—10] They saw trees bending down under the burden of their blossoms, 
and rivers flowing to the sea bearing their clear waters, and gorges and 
mountains and waterfalls and caves and high peaks and caverns lovely to 
behold. And on their way, they beheld ponds whose waters were splendid 
with lotuses, whose leaves were bright as emeralds and whose buds were 
fully opened—ponds resounding with karanda ducks, sdrasa cranes, 
hamsas, vanjulas, jalakukkutas, cakravakas, and other birds. They saw deer 
ranging in the forest eating tender shoots of grass, fearlessly wandering 
everywhere or standing on dry ground; and also, fearsome, solitary wild 
elephants adorned with white tusks, enemies of the ponds whose banks they 
shattered. 

[11-14] And thus observing the other wild animals in the forest and the 
sky-going birds, they hurried along, obedient to Sugriva’s will. Now as they 
went swiftly on, Rama, delight of the Raghus, noticed a dense grove of 
trees, and he said to Sugriva: “There, dark as a rain cloud and massive as a 
cloud bank in the sky, stands a grove entirely surrounded by plantain trees. I 
want to know what it is, my friend. I am curious, and I would like you to 
satisfy my curiosity.” 


[15-20] When he heard great Raghava’s words, Sugriva told him about 
that large grove as he walked along, saying: “That is an immense ashram 
where all weariness is removed, Raghava. For it has gardens and parks, 
with sweet-tasting roots, fruits, and water. There the seven sages called the 
Saptajanas once lived. They were strict in their vows and always slept 
upside down in the water. After seven hundred years of living in the forest, 
existing solely on the air they took in once every seven days, they went to 
heaven in their own bodies. By virtue of this power of theirs, their ashram, 
surrounded by a wall of trees, is unapproachable even for the gods or 
asuras, including Indra. Birds and other forest creatures avoid it. Those 
who enter it even by mistake do not come out again. 

[21-24] “But from within one hears the jingling of ornaments and the 
sweet sounds of instruments and singing, and there is also a divine 
fragrance, Raghava. The three sacred fires are also burning there. You can 
see the dense smoke, gray as a dove’s body, shrouding the treetops. 
Restrained and with palms cupped in reverence, you and your brother 
Laksmana must bow humbly to the sages, righteous Raghava. For no ill can 
befall people who bow humbly to these contemplative seers, Rama.” 

[25-27] So, with their palms cupped in reverence, Rama and his brother 
Laksmana respectfully saluted those great seers. When they had saluted 
respectfully, righteous Rama, his brother Laksmana, and Sugriva and the 
other monkeys went on, delighted at heart. Then, when they had traveled a 
long way from the ashram of the Saptajanas, they saw unassailable 
Kiskindha, which Valin protected. 


Sarga 14 
[1-6] When they had all gone quickly to Kiskindha, which Valin protected, 
they stopped in the dense forest, concealing themselves behind trees. 
Broad-necked Sugriva, who loved the forest, glanced about the forest and 
summoned up his great anger. Then, surrounded by his attendants, he 
challenged Valin to battle with a dreadful roar, nearly splitting the skies 
with his roaring. Now, like the newly risen sun, Sugriva, who moved like a 
proud lion, looked at Rama, skillful in action, and spoke these words: “We 
have reached Valin’s city Kiskindha, with its gateway of pure gold, 
surrounded by a monkey snare and bristling with banners and engines of 


war. Just as the proper season arrives to make the vine bear fruit, so should 
you, warrior, make good at once your earlier promise to kill Valin.” 

[7-12] Addressed in this way by Sugriva, righteous Raghava, destroyer 
of his enemies, then said these words to Sugriva: “Wearing those flowers 
called gajapuspi, you are now easy to recognize: you look like some 
extraordinary sun up in the heavens within a garland of stars. By loosing a 
single arrow in battle, monkey, I shall today deliver you from fear and from 
Valin’s enmity. Just show me that enemy in the guise of a brother, Sugriva. 
Then Valin, struck down here in the forest, will writhe in the dust. If he 
comes within range of my sight and leaves again alive, then you may come 
to me at once and reproach me with my guilt. Before your very eyes I split 
the seven sala trees. Know therefore that by my might I shall kill Valin 
today. 

[13-17] “Filled with a desire for right, I have never before spoken a 
falsehood even when I was in danger, warrior, and I shall by no means 
speak one now. Don’t worry! For I shall make my promise fruitful, just as 
Indra of a hundred sacrifices with his rain makes fruitful the rice sprouting 
in a field. Therefore, Sugriva, in order to summon gold-garlanded Valin, 
you must make such a noise that that monkey will rush out. Challenged by 
you, Valin, with his air of a conqueror, boastful of his victories, and fond of 
battle, will rush out from the city without delay. Heroes who know their 
own prowess do not tolerate their enemies’ insults in battle, particularly 
when their women are present.” 

[18—21] Upon hearing Rama’s speech, tawny-gold Sugriva roared a 
savage roar, nearly splitting the skies. Terrified by the noise, cattle ran off, 
like dazed noblewomen who through some failure of their king are ravished 
and lose their bright beauty. And deer ran swiftly away like horses breaking 
in battle, and birds fell to earth like planets whose merit is exhausted. And 
then, his power enhanced by valor, his roar like that of a host of clouds, the 
sun’s renowned son suddenly let loose a roar like the ocean when its waves 
are lashed by the wind. 


Sarga 15 
[1-5] Now, when Valin, who was in the women’s quarters, heard the 
roaring of his brother, great Sugriva, he could not bear it. But when he 
heard that roaring that made all beings tremble, his desire vanished at once 


and great rage arose in him. At one moment radiant as the sun at twilight, 
now, suddenly, Valin darkened like an eclipsed sun, as his body filled with 
fury. Like a blazing fire because of his anger, Valin looked like a pool 
radiant with red lotuses, his terrifying fangs white as lotus fibers. As he 
heard the intolerable sound, the tawny monkey rushed out, nearly shattering 
the earth with the force of his footsteps. 

[6-8] But his wife Tara, agitated and frightened, showed her affection by 
lovingly embracing him and speaking words meant for his own good: 
“Come, warrior, give up this anger, which has arisen like the flood of a 
river, just as one gives up a used garland upon rising from bed at daybreak. 
I really do not like your rushing out this way. Listen, and I shall tell you 
why I am holding you back. 

[9-13] “The last time, Sugriva suddenly appeared and angrily challenged 
you to battle. When you hurried out, injured, and defeated him, he ran 
away. After you defeated him and above all injured him, his coming back 
here to challenge you again really arouses my suspicion. There is some 
significant reason for such insolence and determination, and for the 
arrogance of his shouting as he roars. I do not believe that Sugriva has come 
here without an ally. He is bellowing now because he has obtained an ally 
on whom he can rely. The monkey Sugriva is by nature clever and 
intelligent. He would not have come with someone whose prowess was 
untested. 

[14—17] “Let me tell you the useful information I heard Prince Angada 
reporting earlier, warrior. Your brother’s ally is the celebrated Rama, harsh 
in battle, crushing his enemy’s forces, like the fire sprung up at the end of 
the world. But he is also a sheltering tree for the virtuous, the final refuge 
for the unfortunate, and a resting place for the afflicted. Sole repository of 
fame, endowed with knowledge and learning, and devoted to his father’s 
command, he is a great mine of virtues, just as the lord of mountains is a 
mine of minerals. 

[18-23] “Therefore, it is not fitting for you to be in conflict with 
immeasurably great Rama, who is unconquerable in battle. I shall tell you 
something, hero, and I do not want you to be angry. You must listen to the 
good advice I shall give you and act upon it. You must consecrate Sugriva 
immediately as crown prince in the proper fashion. You should not make 
war with your mighty brother, valiant king. I believe it would be proper for 


you to put your hostility aside and have friendship with Rama and affection 
for Sugriva. This monkey is your younger brother, deserving your fond 
indulgence. Whether here or there, he is after all your kinsman. If you 
regard me as well disposed to you and if you wish to do what pleases me, I 
beg of you: please carry out my good advice.” 


Sarga 16 

[1-8] But even as Tara, her face bright as the moon, the lord of stars, spoke 
in this fashion, Valin reproached her and said these words: “Why, fair-faced 
woman, must I suffer the arrogance of my roaring brother, especially since 
he is my enemy? For invincible heroes who never turn back in battle, to 
endure insolence is worse than death, timid woman. Thus, I cannot tolerate 
the arrogance of weak-necked, roaring Sugriva, who wants to fight a battle. 
Nor should you despair on my account because of Raghava. He knows what 
is right and his conduct is correct, so how could he do wrong? You have 
shown your affection, Tara, and displayed your devotion to me. Now go 
back with the other women. Why do you still follow me? I shall go and 
fight Sugriva. Do not be anxious: I shall take away his pride, but I shall not 
deprive him of his life. I implore you by my life: go back, with a prayer for 
my victory. When I have sufficiently humbled my brother in battle, I shall 
return.” 

[9-11] Then sweet-speaking, compliant Tara embraced Valin and circled 
him reverently, weeping softly. Desiring his victory, she offered a blessing 
accompanied with mantras and then entered the women’s quarters with the 
other women, dazed with grief. Once Tara had entered her own dwelling 
with the other women, Valin went out from the city in a rage, hissing like a 
great angry snake. 

[12-16] Breathing hard in his towering rage, impetuous Valin cast his 
glance all about, eagerly seeking his enemy. Then majestic Valin saw 
tawny-gold Sugriva, who was standing his ground with his loins girded, 
blazing like fire. Seeing mighty Sugriva stationed there, in a towering rage 
Valin girded his loins. Mighty Valin, his loins tightly girded, advanced 
toward Sugriva with his fist raised, eager to fight. Sugriva too raised his 
clenched fist and ran furiously toward gold-garlanded Valin. 

[17-20] His eyes copper-red with rage, Valin spoke these words to 
Sugriva, skilled in battle, who came rushing at him with tremendous speed: 


“This tightly clenched fist of mine, with fingers well positioned, will take 
your life with it when I let it fly with full force!” Addressed in that way, 
Sugriva angrily replied to Valin: “It is on your head that my fist shall fall, 
robbing you of life!” And struck by Valin, who attacked with such force, 
angry Sugriva vomited blood, resembling a mountain with a waterfall. 

[21-24] But Sugriva violently uprooted an entire sd/a tree and struck 
Valin on the limbs, as lightning strikes a great mountain. And now Valin, 
staggered by the blows of the sdla tree, lurched like a boat at sea 
overwhelmed by a heavy load. With their terrible strength and valor, with 
their frightening appearance, those two, swift as Suparna, seemed as huge 
as the sun and the moon in the sky. Though his pride had been broken by 
Valin and his strength was failing, Sugriva, enraged at Valin, demonstrated 
his agility. 

[25—27] Then Raghava placed on his bow a shaft like a poisonous snake 
and loosed the great arrow at Valin’s chest. Violently struck, Valin fell to 
the ground. Now spattered by the flowing blood, like a crimson-flowered 
asoka tree uprooted by the wind, the son of Vasava fell in battle 
unconscious to the ground, like Indra’s flagstaff overthrown. 


Sarga 17 
[1-3] Then, struck by Rama’s arrow, Valin, harsh in battle, fell suddenly 
like a tree cut down. Adorned with pure gold, his whole body toppled to the 
ground, like the flagstaff of Indra, the king of gods, when its ropes are 
released. As that lord of the hosts of monkeys and apes fell to the ground, 
the earth grew dim, like the sky when the moon vanishes. 

[4-8] And yet, though he had fallen to the ground, the great monkey’s 
majesty, life, power, and valor did not leave his body. For the wonderful 
jewel-studded gold necklace that Sakra had given him sustained the life, 
power, and majesty of the foremost of the tawny monkeys. With his gold 
necklace, the heroic leader of the troops of tawny monkeys looked like a 
rain cloud edged by the glowing light of evening. Though he had fallen, it 
was as if his lingering splendor had been broken into three shining parts: his 
necklace, his body, and the arrow piercing his vital organs. For that missile, 
shot from Rama’s bow, had opened the path to heaven for that warrior and 
gained for him the highest state. 


[9-11] Like unassailable great Indra, like irresistible great Indra, great 
Indra’s fallen son, gold-garlanded Valin, lion chested, long armed, blazing 
faced, tawny eyed, lay fallen thus in battle, resembling a fire whose flame 
has gone out, like Yayati fallen from the world of the gods through 
exhaustion of his merit, or the sun cast down to earth by Kala at the end of 
the world. Followed closely by Laksmana, Rama approached and looked at 
him. 

[12-16] Now, when Valin saw Raghava and mighty Laksmana, he spoke 
these words, which, though harsh, were civil and consistent with 
righteousness: “Because of you, I have met my death while in the heat of 
battle with someone else. What possible merit have you gained by killing 
me when I wasn’t looking? Everyone spreads your good reputation 
throughout the world, saying: ‘Rama is well born, virtuous, powerful, 
compassionate, and energetic. He has observed vows, knows pity, is 
devoted to the welfare of the people, knows when to act, and is firm in his 
vows.” Considering those good qualities of yours and your exalted lineage 
as well, I engaged in battle with Sugriva though Tara tried to stop me. 

[17-21] “Since I didn’t see you, I had no idea you would strike me when 
I was in the heat of battle with another, heedless of you. I did not know that 
your judgment was destroyed and that you were a vicious evildoer hiding 
under a banner of righteousness, like a well overgrown with grass. I did not 
know that you were a wicked person wearing the trappings of virtue, 
concealed by a disguise of righteousness like a smoldering fire. I did no 
harm either in your kingdom or in your city, nor did I insult you; so why did 
you kill me, an innocent forest-ranging monkey, living only on fruits and 
roots, when I had joined battle here with someone else and was not fighting 
against you? 

[22—25] “You are the handsome, renowned son of a ruler of men. You 
also have the visible signs associated with righteousness, king. What man, 
born in a kshatriya family, learned, free of doubts, and bearing signs of 
righteousness, would perform such a cruel deed? Born in a royal family, 
reputed to be virtuous, why do you go about with the appearance of 
decency when you are in fact not decent, Rama? Conciliation, generosity, 
forbearance, righteousness, truthfulness, steadiness, and courage, as well as 
punishment of wrongdoers are the virtues of kings, your majesty. 


[26-28] “We are but forest-dwelling beasts, Rama, living on roots and 
fruits. That is our nature, while you are a man and a lord of men. Land, 
gold, and silver are reasons for conquest. But what possible profit could 
there be for you in the fruit belonging to me in this forest? Both 
statesmanship and restraint as well as punishing and rewarding are royal 
functions that must not be confused. Kings must not act capriciously. 

[29-32] “But you, instead, care only for your own desire. You are 
wrathful, unsteady, confused about your royal functions, and interested only 
in shooting your arrows. You have no reverence for what is right, no settled 
judgment concerning statecraft; and because you are addicted to pleasures, 
you are driven by your passions, lord of men. Now that you have done this 
despicable deed and killed me, an innocent creature, with your arrow, what 
will you say in the presence of virtuous men, Kakutstha? A king-killer, a 
brahman-killer, a cow-killer, a thief, a man who delights in killing, an 
atheist, a man who marries before his elder brother—all of them go to hell. 

[33-35] “Virtuous people cannot wear my skin, my fur and bones are 
forbidden, and my flesh cannot be eaten by people like you who observe the 
law. Only five among the five-clawed creatures can be eaten by brahmans 
and kshatriyas, Raghava: the hedgehog, the porcupine, the lizard, the rabbit, 
and fifth, the turtle. Wise men do not touch my skin or bones, king, and my 
flesh must not be eaten; yet I, a five-clawed creature, have been killed. 

[36—38] “With you as her protector, Kakutstha, the earth has no protector 
and is like a virtuous young wife with a deceitful husband. Treacherous, 
dishonest, mean, with false humility, how could a wretch like you be born 
of the great DaSaratha? I have been killed by this mad elephant Rama, who 
has broken the fetters of good conduct, overstepped the laws of virtuous 
men, and disregarded the goad of lawfulness. 

[39-42] “If you had fought openly in battle, prince, I would have killed 
you, and you would now be gazing on Vaivasvata, god of death. But I, who 
am unassailable in battle, have been struck down by you when you could 
not be seen, as a man sleeping under the influence of drink may be killed by 
a snake. I could have given you Ravana, not killed in battle but bound 
around the neck; yet for that same outcome you killed me, wishing to please 
Sugriva. Had Maithilt been hidden in the ocean waters or even in the 
underworld known as Patala, at your command I would have brought her 
back like the white she-mule. 


[43-45] “It is fitting that when I have gone to heaven, Sugriva should 
obtain the kingdom. But for you to have killed me unjustly in battle is not 
fitting. Granted, all people, being what they are, are destined for death. But 
if what you have accomplished is proper, think of a good defense.” When 
he had spoken in this way, the great son of the king of the gods, pained by 
the arrow that had wounded him, his mouth dry, looked at Rama, radiant as 
the sun, and fell silent. 


Sarga 18 

[1-5] Stricken and losing consciousness, Valin had addressed to Rama 
those words that were civil, beneficial, consistent with righteousness and 
statecraft, yet harsh. As he finished speaking, that best of tawny monkeys 
was like a darkened sun, like a rain cloud that has given up its water, or like 
an extinguished fire. Rama, having been censured, at last addressed Valin, 
lord of tawny monkeys, with unsurpassed words distinguished by 
righteousness and statecraft: “How can you, who do not understand 
righteousness, statecraft, pleasure, or even worldly conduct, in your 
foolishness reproach me here today? My friend, in your monkey 
frivolousness, you wish to revile me here without consulting elders 
endowed with judgment and respected as teachers. 

[6—11] “This earth with its mountains, woods, and forests belongs to the 
Iksvakus, as does the right of punishing and rewarding its beasts, birds, and 
men. It is protected by righteous Bharata, who is truthful and upright, who 
knows the true nature of righteousness, pleasure, and statecraft, and who 
devotes himself to punishing and rewarding. He is a king who knows the 
proper place and time for action. In him are well established both 
statesmanship and humility, as well as truth and valor, as prescribed in 
sacred texts. With his command given for the sake of righteousness, we and 
the other princes go about the entire world seeking the continuance of 
righteousness. While that tiger among kings, Bharata, devoted to 
righteousness, protects the whole earth, who could suppress righteousness? 
Firm in our own high duty, honoring Bharata’s command, we duly chastise 
whoever strays from the path of righteousness. 

[12-14] “But you violate righteousness and are condemned by your 
actions. You are engrossed in the pursuit of pleasures, and you have not 
kept to the path of kings. An older brother, a father, and a bestower of 


learning—these three are to be regarded as fathers by one who walks the 
path of righteousness. A younger brother, one’s own son, and also a pupil 
with good qualities—these three are to be thought of as one’s sons, if 
righteousness 1s the standard here. 

[15-17] “Righteousness is subtle, leaping monkey, and extremely 
difficult to understand even for good people. The Self in the heart of all 
beings knows good and evil. You are frivolous and consult with frivolous, 
weak-minded monkeys, like someone blind from birth who consults with 
others blind from birth. What then can you possibly see? But I shall tell you 
clearly the meaning of my statement, for you should not condemn me 
simply because you are angry. 

[18—22] “Learn therefore the reason why I have killed you: you have 
forsaken everlasting morality and live in sin with your brother’s wife. Out 
of lust you committed a sinful deed: while great Sugriva is alive, you lived 
in sin with your daughter-in-law Ruma. You acted according to your 
desires, monkey, and in violating your brother’s wife, you departed from 
righteousness. That is why this punishment was administered to you. 
Leader of troops of tawny monkeys, I see no way other than punishment to 
chastise someone who is opposed to righteousness and deviates from 
universal custom. Death is the punishment prescribed for a man who out of 
lust approaches his daughter, sister, or younger brother’s wife. 

[23—25] “Now Bharata is the ruler of the earth, and we merely carry out 
his commands. How then can we overlook your violation of righteousness? 
Wise Bharata is intent on chastising those addicted to sensual pleasures, 
righteously disciplining whoever transgresses major laws. And we have 
made Bharata’s command our sacred law, lord of tawny monkeys, and are 
intent on punishing those who, like you, transgress the proper limits. 

[26-32] “My friendship with Sugriva is just like my friendship with 
Laksmana. And for the sake of his wife and kingdom, he is devoted to my 
highest good. Moreover, I made a promise at that time in the presence of the 
other monkeys. And how can someone like me disregard a promise? 
Therefore, for all those important reasons that are consistent with 
righteousness, you must agree that your punishment is appropriate. Your 
chastisement must be viewed as righteous in every way. A person who 
keeps righteousness clearly in view must assist his friend. Then, too, men 
who have done evil but have been punished by kings become pure and go to 


heaven just as do virtuous men. My noble ancestor Mandhatr inflicted a 
terrible punishment on a mendicant who committed a sin like the sin you 
committed. Sins have been committed as well by other heedless rulers of 
the earth. But when they made atonement, that taint was removed. 

[33-36] “So enough of this sorrow! Your death was decided upon justly, 
tiger among monkeys: we were not being arbitrary. By snares, nooses, and 
various traps, men in hiding or out in the open catch all kinds of beasts who 
run away terrified or confidently stand still. Men seeking meat shoot 
animals that are attentive or inattentive or even facing the other way, and 
there is nothing wrong with this. Even royal seers who fully understand 
righteousness go hunting here. And so, monkey, I struck you down with an 
arrow in battle regardless of whether you fought back or not. After all, you 
are only a monkey. 

[37-39] “There is no doubt, best of monkeys, that it is kings who give 
life and prosperity and otherwise unattainable religious merit. One should 
not harm them, nor censure them, nor insult them, nor say displeasing 
things to them: they are gods in human form going about on earth. Yet you, 
who know nothing of righteousness and simply follow your passions, 
rebuke me for abiding by my sacred ancestral laws.” 

[40-44] Addressed by Rama in that way, Valin, lord of monkeys, was 
deeply disturbed. Joining his palms in supplication, he replied to Rama: 
“Best of men, there is no doubt that what you have said is true. Indeed, a 
lowly person should not talk back to an exalted one. Please do not find fault 
with me even for the unseemly, displeasing words I spoke before by 
mistake, Raghava. For you understand worldly interests and know the truth, 
and you are devoted to the well-being of the people. Your immutable 
judgment about determining crime and punishment is correct. You know 
righteousness. Therefore, with righteous words, comfort even me, known to 
be a flagrant violator of righteousness.” 

[45-51] Like an elephant mired in mud, Valin cried out in distress, his 
voice choked with tears. Then, looking at Rama, he said softly: “I do not 
grieve as much for myself, or Tara, or even my kinsmen as I do for my 
eminently virtuous son Angada of the golden armbands. Cherished since his 
childhood, he will be so wretched at not seeing me that he will dry up like a 
pond whose waters have been drunk. Show the same high regard to Angada 
as to Sugriva, for you are their teacher and protector, abiding by the rules of 


what must be done and what must not be done. And, king and lord of men, 
you should think of Sugriva and Angada with the same affection as you 
have for Bharata and Laksmana. And please arrange it so that Sugriva will 
not think ill of poor Tara, who is guilty only through my guilt. For the 
kingdom can be served only by someone you favor, who is under your 
control and obedient to your wishes.” 

[52-55] Rama then consoled Valin, who now saw things clearly: “You 
must not worry about us, or even about yourself, best of monkeys, for we 
made our determination with regard to you according to the law. Neither he 
who inflicts punishment on one who deserves punishment nor he who is 
punished when he deserves punishment perishes: each serves the due 
process of justice. Therefore, freed from sin by meeting with this 
punishment, you have returned to your own righteous nature by the path 
determined by righteousness.” 

[56-57] When he heard the sweet, calm speech of great Rama, who 
followed the path of righteousness and crushed his enemies in battle, the 
monkey said these very fitting words: “If when I was half unconscious with 
the pain of the arrow, lord, I unwittingly censured you, whose fearful 
prowess 1s equal to great Indra’s, please be gracious and forgive me, ruler of 
the earth.” 


Sarga 19 

[1-4] Answered with well-reasoned words, that great king of monkeys 
made no reply as he lay deeply wounded by the arrow. He had been beaten 
with trees, and his limbs were completely shattered by stones. Pierced by 
Rama’s arrow, he lost consciousness as his life neared its end. His wife Tara 
heard that Valin, tiger among leaping monkeys, had been struck down in 
battle by an arrow shot by Rama. When she heard the painful news of her 
husband’s severe mortal wound, she was greatly frightened and rushed out 
with her son from the many-chambered mountain cave. 

[S—9] Now at the sight of Rama with his bow, those mighty monkeys 
who were Angada’s attendants ran off terrified. Tara saw those mighty 
tawny monkeys running away swiftly, like deer bolting from their herd 
when their herd leader is struck down. All of them were anguished and as 
fearful of Rama as if they were being pursued by his arrows. Anguished 
herself, she approached them and said: “Monkeys, attendants of the lion 


among kings, why have you abandoned him and run off in distress and 
terror? Is it because, for the sake of the kingdom, a fierce brother has had 
Rama strike down his brother with arrows shot from afar, striking from 
afar?” 

[10-16] When the monkeys, who could change form at will, heard the 
speech of that lovely woman, the monkey’s wife, they spoke timely words 
with one voice: “You have a living son Angada, so turn back and protect 
him. For Yama, the ender of all things, in the form of Rama has killed Valin 
and is leading him away. As if by a thunderbolt, Valin has been felled by 
thunderbolt-like arrows, which shattered the trees and large rocks he hurled. 
Now that that tiger among leaping monkeys, splendid as Sakra, has been 
killed, this entire army, which had advanced, has scattered and fled. Let the 
warriors protect the city, and let Valin’s son Angada be consecrated as king. 
Once he has assumed his rank, the leaping monkeys will serve him. Or 
perhaps you wish to remain here, fair-faced woman, since this very day 
hostile monkeys will quickly take over our citadels? There are forest- 
dwelling monkeys out there, both with and without wives. We are in great 
danger from our destitute and covetous kinsmen.” 

[17-19] But when the sweet-smiling woman heard the words of those 
who were close by, she spoke in a way befitting her: “What use have I for a 
son, or a kingdom, or myself, now that my illustrious husband, that lion 
among monkeys, has perished? I shall go to the feet of that great monkey 
who was felled by the arrow Rama shot.” 

[20-24] With these words she ran, weeping and haggard with grief, 
sorrowfully beating her breast and her head with both hands. As she 
approached, she saw on the ground her fallen husband, that slayer of 
ddnava lords who never turned their backs in battle, him who hurled the 
highest mountains as Vasava hurls his vajras, impetuous as a storm-wind, 
thundering like a mass of great clouds, roaring fearfully among other 
roarers, valiant as Sakra. Now he was like a cloud stilled once it has rained, 
a hero felled by a hero as a great stag is slain by a tiger for its flesh, or like a 
sacred tree with banners and railing, worshiped by all the people, uprooted 
by Suparna in his search for snakes. 

[25-28] The lovely woman saw Rama standing there, leaning on his 
strong bow, and also the younger brothers of both Rama and her husband. 
She passed them by, but as she drew near and saw her husband who had 


been struck down in battle, she fell to the ground, suffering and bewildered. 
Then she rose up again as if asleep, crying out, “My husband!” and wept as 
she saw her lord caught in the bonds of Mrtyu, god of death. Now as 
Sugriva watched her crying like an osprey and saw Angada who had also 
come, he became deeply despondent. 


Sarga 20 
[1-3] When passionate Tara, her face like the lord of stars, saw her husband 
on the ground, struck down by a death-dealing shaft loosed from Rama’s 
bow, like an elephant struck by an arrow, she went to him and embraced 
him. Seeing the monkey lord Valin, splendid as great Indra, brought down 
like an uprooted tree, Tara was anguished. With her heart tortured by grief, 
she lamented: 

[4-7] “Warrior with your fierce prowess in battle, best of leaping 
monkeys, why do you now not speak to me, a wretched woman who has 
done no wrong? Rise up, tiger among tawny monkeys! Go to your own fine 
bed. Great kings like you do not sleep on the ground. How deep your love 
for the earth must be, lord of earth, that even in death you abandon me and 
embrace her with your limbs. By living righteously, warrior, you must have 
created on the path to heaven some other city as charming as Kiskindha. 

[8—11] “Now you have brought to an end those pleasures we enjoyed 
with you in the honey-scented woodlands. Without joy, without hope, I am 
sunk in a sea of grief since you, great troop leader among troop leaders, 
have gone to your death. My grief-tortured heart must be hard indeed that it 
does not break into a thousand pieces though I see you on the ground, 
destroyed. This is the fruit you harvest, king of leaping monkeys, for having 
exiled Sugriva and taken his wife. 

[12—16] “Lord of monkeys, you foolishly rebuked me when I, intent on 
your happiness and wishing you well, offered you good advice. It is surely 
inexorable Kala, the ender of all things, that forced you down, powerless 
under Sugriva’s power, and put an end to your life. Once I was filled with 
happiness, but now, in my wretchedness, I must helplessly lead the life of a 
wretched, grief-anguished widow. And the delicate young warrior Angada, 
used to pleasure, indulged by me—what kind of life will he lead, when his 
father’s brother is beside himself with anger? Son, look carefully at your 
father so fond of righteousness, for you will never see him again, dear child. 


[17-20] “And you, console your son, kiss him on his head, and give him 
your instructions, for you are starting on your final journey. By killing you, 
Rama has done a great deed and has acquitted himself of his promise to 
Sugriva. Be content, Sugriva. You shall have Ruma back again. Enjoy the 
kingship without anxiety. Your brother, who was your enemy, has been cut 
down. Why do you not reply lovingly to me as I lament this way? Lord of 
monkeys, behold these many excellent wives of yours.” 

[21-25] Hearing her lament, those monkey women, afflicted with 
sorrow, surrounded wretched Angada on all sides and wailed: “With your 
braceleted arms worthy of a hero, why do you now abandon Angada and go 
on this long journey? You have a beloved son with qualities like your own. 
It is not right to abandon your son like this and go away. Beloved lord, what 
displeasing thing has been done by me or your son that you so 
discourteously abandon me, your companion, and go to Yama’s abode, fine- 
robed warrior? Forgive me, long-armed lord of the dynasty of the tawny 
monkeys, if I have unknowingly done something to displease you. Warrior, 
I prostrate myself at your feet.” Accompanied by the other monkey women, 
fair Tara, weeping piteously in this way beside her husband, determined to 
sit fasting to death at the place where Valin lay. 


Sarga 21 

[1-6] Then Hanuman, leader of the troops of tawny monkeys, gently 
consoled Tara, who had dropped like a star falling from the sky, saying: 
“When he dies, a living being unfailingly reaches the good or evil end 
produced as the fruit of his actions and brought about by his virtues or 
faults. What person deserving lamentation do you lament, when you 
yourself deserve our lamentation? When you yourself are pitiable, for what 
pitiable person do you grieve? And who should mourn for whom, since the 
body is no more than a bubble? You must instead look after the boy 
Angada, since you have this living son. You must think about the proper 
things to do for him in the future. You know that the coming and going of 
beings is uncertain. Therefore, wise woman, do what is auspicious, not what 
is worldly. He upon whom thousands, millions, and hundreds of millions of 
tawny monkeys once subsisted, each obtaining a share, has now reached the 
end of his allotted time. 


[7-11] “This monkey saw things rightly and was devoted to conciliation, 
giving, and forbearance. Since he has gone to the world of those who 
conquer through righteousness, you should not grieve for him. But now, 
blameless woman, your son Angada, the other tigers among tawny 
monkeys, and the kingdom of the lord of apes and tawny monkeys all have 
you as their protector. Gently direct these two who are tormented by grief, 
lovely woman. Let Angada here, supported by you, rule the earth. And 
since there is a male offspring, you must do everything that must now be 
done for the king. That is the proper decision for this time. The king of the 
tawny monkeys must be purified by cremation, and Angada must be 
consecrated. You will find peace of mind once you see your son upon the 
throne.” 

[12-16] When she heard his words, Tara, crushed by her husband’s 
disastrous end, made this reply to Hanuman, who stood near: “Even if I had 
a hundred sons like Angada, I would rather embrace the body of this 
warrior, though he is dead. I have no power over the king of the tawny 
monkeys or Angada. His father’s brother Sugriva is at hand for all that must 
be done. Nor can your idea concerning Angada be carried out, Hanuman: a 
son’s true kinsman is his father, not his mother, best of tawny monkeys. 
There is surely nothing more fitting for me in this world or in the next than 
to join the king of tawny monkeys. It is fitting for me to rest on this bed 
where rests my warrior, killed while facing his enemy.” 


Sarga 22 

[1-4] Barely breathing, his life ebbing, Valin looked all about and saw first 
Sugriva, who stood in front of his son. In a clear voice he addressed 
Sugriva, the victorious lord of leaping monkeys, and said affectionately: 
“Sugriva, please do not think me guilty because of my sin: I was forcibly 
carried away by some predestined confusion of mind. I think that happiness 
was not ordained for both of us at the same time, dear child. Thus, the 
friendship proper for brothers turned out quite otherwise. 

[S—7] “Receive this very day sovereignty over these forest-dwelling 
monkeys. As for me, know that this very day I am going to the abode of 
Vaivasvata, lord of the dead. For I am rapidly giving up my life, my 
sovereignty, this vast majesty, and my great reputation, which was beyond 


reproach. Since I am in this condition, you must carry out the instructions I 
am about to give you, heroic king, though they will not be easy to follow. 

[8—12] “Here is Angada who, although a child, is not childish. Worthy of 
happiness, raised in happiness, he has fallen to the ground, his face covered 
with tears. Look upon my son, who is dearer to me than life itself, as if he 
were your own flesh-and-blood son. Protect him in every way so that 
although he is deprived of me, he will not be otherwise deprived. You must 
also be his provider and defender in every way and his protector from all 
dangers, lord of monkeys, just as I was. Your equal in prowess, this majestic 
son of Tara will stand before you in the slaughter of the raksasas. 
Advancing valorously in battle, this powerful young son of Tara, mighty 
Angada, will perform worthy deeds. 

[13-16] “And Tara, this daughter of Susena, is thoroughly 
knowledgeable about deciding subtle matters and about various portents. 
Whatever she says is right should be done without doubt, for nothing Tara 
believes turns out to be otherwise. And you must accomplish Raghava’s 
purpose without hesitation; for it would be unrighteous not to do it, and if 
he were slighted he would harm you. Now take this divine golden garland, 
Sugriva, for the exalted Sri abiding in it will leave it once I am dead.” 

[17-23] But Valin addressed him with such brotherly affection that 
Sugriva put aside his delight and became wretched again, like the moon 
swallowed up by Rahu, the planet that eclipses it. Sobered by Valin’s 
words, carefully doing what was proper, he took with permission that 
golden garland. When Valin had given him that golden garland and was 
prepared for death, he turned his gaze to his son Angada standing nearby 
and said affectionately to him: “Be attentive to time and place now, 
enduring the agreeable and the disagreeable. Bearing happiness and sorrow 
in their turn, be submissive to Sugriva’s will. Sugriva will not think well of 
you, great-armed son, if you act as you did when constantly indulged by 
me. Don’t associate with his enemies or with associates of his adversaries, 
subduer of foes. Restrained and devoted to your master’s interests, be 
submissive to Sugriva’s will. You must not show either excessive affection 
or lack of affection: both are serious faults, so observe moderation.” 

[24-26] Then, with these words, in intense pain from the arrow, rolling 
his eyes and baring his dreadful fangs, he departed this life. Now when that 
heroic lord of the leaping monkeys was dead, the monkeys there could find 


no happiness, like forest-dwelling cattle in a great forest full of lions, when 
their bull has been struck down. Then Tara, plunged in a sea of misfortune, 
looked at her dead husband’s face and sank to the ground, embracing Valin 
like a vine clinging to a mighty tree that has been cut down. 


Sarga 23 

[1-5] Then Tara kissed the monkey king’s face and said these words to her 
dead husband, who had gone from this world: “You would not do as I said, 
warrior, and so you lie painfully on the rough, rocky ground. The earth must 
surely be dearer to you than I, lord of monkeys, since you lie embracing her 
and do not answer me. Sugriva is attacking, my beloved, reckless warrior, 
and the leaders of the apes and monkeys seek protection from you, mighty 
one. Hearing their painful lament, that of grieving Angada, and these words 
of mine, why do you not awaken? 

[6-8] “Slain in battle, you lie on this hero’s bed where once you made 
your slain enemies lie. My battle-loving, proud beloved, born in a family of 
impeccable courage, you have gone away, leaving me alone and without a 
protector. A wise man should surely never give his daughter to a warrior. 
Look at me, a warrior’s wife, suddenly destroyed and made a widow. 

[9-12] “My pride is broken, my everlasting happiness is shattered, and I 
am plunged into a vast, bottomless ocean of grief. Surely this hard heart of 
mine is made of stone, since it does not break into a hundred pieces now as 
I behold my slain husband. For he was my friend and my husband and, by 
his very nature, my beloved. Conquered in battle, my warrior has gone to 
his death. When a woman has lost her husband, wise men call her a widow, 
even though she may have sons and abundant wealth and grain. 

[13-16] “Warrior, you are lying in a pool of blood spreading from your 
body, as if on a bed with a crimson cover. I cannot clasp in my arms your 
body covered all over with dust and blood, bull among leaping monkeys. 
Today Sugriva has achieved his purpose in this dreadful feud, for a single 
arrow shot by Rama has dispelled his fear. Now that you have gone to your 
death, I gaze at you, but the arrow fixed in your heart keeps me from 
touching your body.” 

[17-20] Then Nila drew out the arrow lodged in Valin’s body as one 
might draw out a gleaming poisonous snake lurking in a mountain cave. 
And the radiance of that arrow as it was drawn out was as bright as a ray of 


the sun, maker of day, caught on the summit of the western mountain. And 
from his wounds streams of blood poured down on all sides, like 
floodwaters mingled with dark red earth rushing down a mountain. As she 
caressed her warrior husband, who had been struck down by the missile and 
was covered with the dust of battle, she bathed him with tears flowing from 
her eyes. 

[21-25] Then the lovely woman Tara, still gazing at her slain lord, his 
limbs all spattered with blood, spoke to her tawny-eyed son Angada: “My 
son, behold your father’s dreadful final state. The end has come to an 
enmity caused by an evil deed. My son, salute the proud king, your father, 
whose body was like the newly risen sun, for he has set out for Yama’s 
abode.” Addressed in this fashion, he rose and embraced his father’s feet 
with his well-rounded arms, saying, “It is I, Angada.” Tara continued: 
“Angada salutes you. Why do you not say to him as before, ‘Long life to 
you, my son!’? 

[26-30] “Though you are without consciousness, I shall stay by you with 
my son, just as a cow with her calf stays by her bull when he is suddenly 
struck down by a lion. How is it that without me, your wife, you first 
offered the sacrifice of battle and then, using many blows as water, took the 
concluding bath? Why do I not see here that golden garland of yours, which 
was given to you by the king of gods when you pleased him in battle? 
Though your life is gone, proud monkey, royal Sti does not abandon you, 
just as the radiance of the setting sun does not leave the king of mountains. 
You did not follow my good advice, nor was I able to hold you back. 
Destroyed in battle, you have destroyed me and my son. Along with you, 
Sri now abandons me.” 


Sarga 24 
[1-4] As soon as he saw that Valin had expired, Raghava, tormentor of his 
enemies, spoke these courteous words to Sugriva: “A dead person derives 
no benefit from grief and lamentation: you should all attend to what must be 
done next for him. Worldly practice must be followed. But enough of your 
tears: no religious rite can be undertaken after its proper time. Fate 1s the 
prime mover in this world. Fate brings about action. Fate is the prime 
mover controlling all beings here on earth. 


[S5—8] “No one is truly in control of any action; nor is anyone capable of 
compelling anyone else. People are ruled by their inherent nature, and fate 
is their final resort. Fate does not violate fate. Fate is inevitable. Nor can 
anyone resist his inherent nature and pass beyond it. Fate has no kinship, no 
connection with friends or relations. There is no means to combat it or 
prevail over it. It is the prime mover, and no one can master it. But he who 
sees clearly should recognize in everything the unfolding of fate. Religious 
merit, wealth, and pleasure are all determined by the workings of fate. 

[9-11] “Valin has gone from this world and attained his own true nature. 
He has obtained the fruit of his actions purified by timely attention to 
gaining religious merit, wealth, and pleasure, lord of leaping monkeys. By 
losing his life in battle, that great monkey has now reached the heaven that 
he won through attention to his own duty. It is surely to the highest destiny 
that the leader of troops of tawny monkeys has gone. So enough of this 
lamenting! Attend to the duties at hand.” 

[12-18] At the end of R&ma’s speech, Laksmana, slayer of enemy 
warriors, spoke these courteous words to Sugriva, who was distraught: 
“You must perform Valin’s funerary rites without delay, Sugriva. Together 
with Tara and Angada, arrange for his cremation. Order many dry logs and 
fine sandalwood for performing Va4lin’s funerary rites. And comfort 
Angada, who is despondent. You must not be foolish: the city is depending 
on you. Angada must bring garlands, various garments, clarified butter, oil, 
perfumes, and whatever else is immediately required. And you, Tara, make 
haste. Bring a bier quickly, for speed is always advantageous and is 
especially appropriate at a time like this. Let leaping monkeys fit to carry 
the bier be made ready. Capable and strong, they shall bear Valin away.” 

[19-25] After speaking thus to Sugriva, Laksmana, delight of Sumitra, 
killer of enemy warriors, remained standing near his brother. Tara was 
thrown into a flurry at hearing Laksmana’s words, and he quickly entered 
the cave, intent on getting a bier. Then Tara rushed back bringing with him 
a bier borne by monkey warriors fit to bear it. Crying aloud, Sugriva and 
Angada then lifted Valin up and placed him on the bier. Then, when the 
lord of the leaping monkeys, King Sugriva, had placed on the bier the 
lifeless Valin, adorned with various ornaments, garlands, and garments, he 
commanded: “Let the funeral rites of this noble monkey be carried out in a 


suitable fashion. Let leaping monkeys scattering many jewels of every kind 
precede the bier.” 

[26-29] Then, without delay, they performed Valin’s funeral rites with 
the same extraordinary pomp that is shown on earth for human kings. Tara 
and all the other monkeys who had lost their kinsman surrounded Angada 
and quickly set out, crying aloud. And Tara and all the other monkey 
women who had lost their lord followed after their husband crying aloud, 
making a pitiful sound. Echoing the sound of those monkey women 
weeping in the forest, all the woods and mountains seemed to cry out on 
every side. 

[30-31] On a solitary sandbank of the mountain stream, entirely 
surrounded by water, a large number of forest-dwelling monkeys built a 
pyre. Then those serving as bearers lowered the bier from their shoulders 
and stood to one side, all of them filled with grief. 

[32-38] Now, when Tara saw her husband lying on the bier, she placed 
his head on her lap and lamented sorrowfully: “Why do you not look at me, 
when I am so grief-stricken? Though you are dead, proud monkey, your 
face seems joyful and radiant as the setting sun, just as it looked when you 
were alive. It is Kala, the god of death, in the form of Rama who is 
dragging you away, monkey: with a single arrow in battle, he has made 
widows of us all. Here are your monkey women, always dear to you. They 
have traveled this long path on foot, lord of kings. Why do you not awake? 
Why do you not gaze now upon these wives whom you surely love, with 
their faces bright as the moon, or at Sugriva, the lord of leaping monkeys? 
Here surrounding you are your ministers, Tara and the others, and the 
people who dwell in your city, blameless king. Dismiss these monkeys as 
you always do, tamer of your foes, so that all of us women, drunk with 
wine, can make love with you in the woods.” 

[39-44] Plunged in grief for her husband, Tara lamented in this way 
until the other monkey women, haggard with grief, raised her up. Then 
Angada, distraught with grief, wept for his father as he placed him on the 
pyre with Sugriva’s help. Beside himself with sorrow, he then lit the fire 
according to the ritual prescriptions, and reverently circled his father, who 
had set out on his long journey. When the leaping monkeys had cremated 
Valin in keeping with the ritual prescriptions, they went to make water- 
offerings in that auspicious river with its cool waters. Then, gathered 


together there, they placed Angada in front and, along with Sugriva and 
Tara, sprinkled water for Valin. And thus did mighty Kakutstha and 
Sugriva, dejected and sharing the same grief, have funerary rites. 


Sarga 25 

[1-7] Then the chief ministers of the monkeys surrounded grief-stricken 
Sugriva, whose garments were still wet, and waited in attendance upon him. 
Approaching great-armed Rama, tireless in action, they all stood with palms 
cupped in reverence, like the seers before Grandfather Brahma. Then, his 
palms cupped in reverence, the wind god’s son Hanuman, bright as the 
golden Mount Meru, his face like the newly risen sun, spoke these words: 
“Through your grace, lord, Sugriva has obtained this great ancestral 
monkey kingdom, so difficult to obtain. With your permission, he will enter 
his fair city with his friends and attend to all his duties. When he is anointed 
with various perfumes and herbs in accordance with the ritual prescriptions, 
he will specially honor you with jewels and garlands. Please proceed from 
here to the delightful mountain cave Kiskindha. Make the monkeys rejoice 
by uniting them with their king.” 

[8—10] Thus addressed by Hanuman, wise and eloquent Rama, slayer of 
enemy wartriors, replied to Hanuman: “Observing my father’s command, 
gentle Hanuman, | shall not enter a village or a city for fourteen years. But 
let the heroic bull among monkeys Sugriva enter his wonderful, luxurious 
cave at once and be consecrated king according to the ritual prescriptions.” 

[11-15] Then, when Rama had spoken in this fashion to Hanuman, he 
said to Sugriva: “Warrior, have Angada too consecrated as crown prince. It 
is now Sravana, the first of the rainy months, bringing the onset of the 
monsoon. Now begin the four months called the rainy season, my friend. 
This is not the time for undertakings. So enter your fair city, my friend; I 
shall dwell on this mountain with Laksmana. Here is a pleasant mountain 
cave, my friend, spacious and airy, with abundant water and many lotuses 
and lilies nearby. When the month of Kartika has arrived, you must try to 
kill Ravana, for this was our agreement. But for now, my friend, enter your 
dwelling, be consecrated as king, and make your friends rejoice.” 

[16—19] Dismissed in this way by Rama, Sugriva, bull among monkeys, 
entered the charming city Kiskindha once protected by Valin. Thousands of 
monkeys respectfully greeted the lord of monkeys as he entered and 


joyfully surrounded him. Then, when they saw the lord of the troops of 
tawny monkeys, all his assembled subjects bowed their heads and then 
prostrated themselves on the ground. After addressing all his subjects and 
making them rise, Sugriva, vigorous and mighty, entered the lovely 
women’s quarters, which had been his brother’s. 

[20-25] When he had gone in there and come out again, his friends 
consecrated Sugriva, bull among monkeys, as the immortals consecrated 
thousand-eyed Indra. They brought him the gold-adorned, white umbrella 
and the two gold-handled white yak-tail fly whisks, which confer glory, as 
well as all kinds of jewels and every kind of seed and herb, shoots and 
blossoms of succulent trees, white garments, white unguent, and very 
fragrant garlands of flowers that grow on dry ground and in water. And they 
also brought the finest sandalwood and many kinds of fragrant things, and 
gold-colored unhusked grain, priyangu honey and clarified butter, curds, a 
tiger skin, and boar-skin sandals. And sixteen beautiful, joyous maidens 
came there bringing yellow and red unguents. 

[26-33] According to prescribed rule, those bulls among the twice-born 
brahmans were gratified with gifts of jewels and garments and things to eat. 
After that, priests who knew the vedic mantras made an offering with an 
oblation purified by those mantras into the lighted fire encircled by kusa 
grass. Then, with various mantras, they installed that best of monkeys, who 
was facing east, on a gold-footed throne that was covered with fine 
cushions and standing on a lovely turret of the palace adorned with colorful 
garlands. From rivers and streams, from sacred bathing places all around, 
and from all the oceans, those bulls among monkeys had brought pure, 
auspicious waters, which they mixed together and placed in gold pitchers. 
Then, at the proper moment, by the rule prescribed in the sdastras and 
ordained by the great sages, using auspicious bulls’ horns and golden jars, 
Gaja, Gavaksa, Gavaya, Sarabha, Gandhamadana, Mainda, Dvivida, 
Hanuman, Jambavan, and Nala consecrated Sugriva with clear, fragrant 
water, just as the Vasus consecrated thousand-eyed Vasava. 

[34-38] Once Sugriva was consecrated, all those thousands of great bulls 
among monkeys shouted for joy. And following Rama’s advice, Sugriva, 
bull among tawny monkeys, embraced Angada and had him consecrated as 
crown prince. Now, when Angada was consecrated, the great leaping 
monkeys, full of compassion, showed their approval of Sugriva, crying, 


“Excellent! Excellent!”’ Within the mountain cave, the city of Kiskindha 
was delightful, filled with happy, thriving people and resplendent with flags 
and banners. Then, once the vigorous leader of the monkey army had 
informed great Rama of his solemn consecration, he recovered his wife 
Ruma and took possession of his kingdom as did Indra, the lord of the thirty 
gods. 


Sarga 26 
[1-3] Now, when the monkey Sugriva had been consecrated and had 
entered his cave, Rama went with his brother to Mount Prasravana, which 
resounded with the cries of tigers and wild beasts and was full of lions 
roaring frightfully. Covered with all kinds of bushes and vines, thick with 
trees, it was inhabited by apes, monkeys, langurs, and forest-cats. Always 
abounding in pure water, the mountain towered like a mass of clouds. 

[4-7] Rama and Saumitri chose as their dwelling a large, deep cave on 
the peak of that mountain. And there righteous Raghava dwelt with 
Laksmana on Mount Prasravana, with its many lovely caves and bowers. 
But though that mountain was very pleasant and full of valuable things, 
Rama did not feel the least delight living there, for he was thinking of his 
abducted wife, who was more precious to him than his life’s breath. Nor 
would sleep come to him when he had gone to bed at night, especially when 
he saw the moon rising in the east. 

[8—14] Grieving for Sita, his mind weakened by all his tears, sorrowful 
Kakutstha was constantly absorbed in his grief. Equally unhappy, his 
brother Laksmana said these words, entreating him: “Enough of this 
yielding to anguish, warrior. You should not grieve. Surely you know that 
when a person grieves, all his endeavors fail. You are attentive to your 
duties in this world, you are devoted to the gods, and you are a believer, 
Raghava. You are also virtuous and resolute. Without resolve you cannot by 
acts of valor kill your enemy in battle, particularly that devious raksasa. 
You must first put aside your grief and make a firm resolve. Then you can 
crush that raksasa and his followers. For you could overturn the very earth, 
together with her oceans, forests, and mountains, Kakutstha, let alone 
Ravana. With fiery words I shall surely arouse your slumbering courage, as 
one would rekindle with timely oblations a fire smoldering beneath its 
ashes.” 


[15-18] Commending Laksmana’s useful and suitable speech, Raghava 
spoke these warm, affectionate words: “You have said what should be said 
by someone devoted, affectionate, helpful, and truly valiant, Laksmana. 
Here, I have forsaken my grief, which makes all undertakings fail. I shall 
call forth my irresistible fierceness in deeds of valor. But the rainy season is 
now at hand, and I must wait for autumn. Then I shall destroy that raksasa 
together with his kingdom and his troops.” 

[19-23] Laksmana Saumitri, delight of his friends, was overjoyed to hear 
Rama’s words, and he spoke once again: “The words you have just spoken 
are worthy of you, slaughterer of your enemies. Now, Kakutstha, you have 
returned to your own nature. Recognizing your own heroism, you must be 
true to it. This speech is worthy of you and of your renowned family. 
Therefore, Raghava, tiger among men, pass the rainy season at hand 
thinking about the defeat of your enemy. Hold back your anger and await 
the autumn. Endure these four months with me. Live on this mountain, 
haunt of the king of beasts, passing the time and preparing to destroy your 
enemy.” 


Sarga 27 

[1—6] And so, after he had killed Valin and had Sugriva consecrated, Rama, 
who was living on top of Mount Malyavan, said to Laksmana: “Now the 
time has come, the season when the rains arrive. See, the sky is covered 
with clouds as big as mountains. The heavens, which drank the oceans’ 
water through the rays of the sun, bringer of light, are giving birth to the 
elixir of life, their embryo carried for nine months. On a stairway of clouds, 
one could climb the sky to ornament the sun, maker of day, with garlands of 
kutaja and arjuna blossoms. The sky seems to have wounds bound up with 
dressings of soft clouds, red with the color of sunset but very pale at the 
edges. Sighing with gentle winds, the sky, pale with clouds yet tinged by 
the sunset, resembles a lovesick man anointed with red sandalwood paste. 

[7-10] “And like Sita burning with grief, this heat-stricken earth, newly 
flooded with water, sheds tears. Soft and cool as a white lotus, fragrant with 
ketaki blossoms, these breezes loosed from the heart of the clouds might be 
sipped from the hollow of one’s hand. And this mountain, perfumed by 
ketaka flowers and with its arjuna trees in full bloom, is anointed by 
showers just as Sugriva was, once his enemy was subdued. Wearing clouds 


as their black antelope skins and streams as their sacred threads, the 
mountains, with wind murmuring in their caves, are like brahmans reciting. 

[11-15] “The sky, lashed by lightning as if by golden whips, makes 
thundering sounds within, as if in pain. Flickering against dark clouds, the 
lightning looks to me like poor Vaidehi trembling in Ravana’s grasp. Spread 
with clouds so that the moon, maker of night, and planets have vanished, 
the sky is darkened in all directions, favoring lovers. And look at the 
flowering kufaja trees standing on the mountainsides, veiled in places by 
mist, delighted by the coming of the rain. They inflame my love, Saumitri, 
though I am overcome by grief. Now the dust has settled, the breeze is cool, 
the spread of summer’s ills has ceased, the expeditions of kings have halted, 
and men absent from home return to their own countries. 

[16—20] “The hamsas, who yearn to live on Lake Manasa, have started 
off. The cakravaka birds are now united with their beloved mates. On roads 
damaged by constant rains, carts can no longer move about. Here visible, 
there invisible, the sky scattered with clouds looks like a calm sea obscured 
here and there by mountains. To the accompaniment of peacocks’ cries, the 
hill-streams swiftly bear along the fresh rainwater, red with ore from the 
mountains, and mingled with sarja and kadamba blossoms. Black as bees, 
the succulent fruit of the jambiu tree can be eaten to one’s heart’s content, 
while the many-colored mango fruits shaken by the wind fall to the ground, 
fully ripe. With lightning for banners and rows of balaka cranes for 
garlands, the clouds, resembling majestic mountain peaks, emit deep 
rumblings like maddened elephants trumpeting excitedly in battle. 

[21-25] “Longing for clouds, a row of joyous balaka cranes flying along 
together looks like a hanging garland of the finest white lotuses strung 
across the sky, swaying in the breeze. Gently sleep approaches KeSsava, 
swiftly the river approaches the sea, joyfully the female balaka crane 
approaches the cloud, eagerly the woman in love approaches her beloved. 
The forests are now filled with peacocks dancing, the boughs of the 
kadamba tree are now filled with blossoms, bulls and their cows alike are 
now filled with desire, and the earth is now filled with the beauty of its 
crops and forests. Rivers flow, clouds rain, rutting elephants trumpet, 
forests glisten, parted lovers pine, peacocks dance, and monkeys rejoice. 
Overjoyed at smelling the fragrance of ketaka flowers, stirred by the sound 


of cascading water in forest waterfalls, rutting elephants cry excitedly along 
with the peacocks. 

[26-30] “Battered by the downpour of rain, bees clinging to kadamba 
branches gradually lose the deep intoxication so quickly gained from flower 
nectar. The boughs of the jamba tree, with their full-grown fruits brimming 
with juice and dark as mounds of charcoal, look as if swarms of black bees 
had alighted on them. Making loud, deep roars, the storm clouds decked 
with lightning-banners are like elephants ready for battle. Wandering in 
mountain forests, the majestic elephant in rut who has set out on his way 
eager for battle turns back upon hearing the roar of the clouds, thinking he 
hears a rival elephant. Falling like pearls bestowed by the lord of gods, 
bright raindrops cling in leaf-cups, where thirsty birds with faded wings 
drink with delight. 

[31-35] “Massed against other dark clouds, dark clouds full of fresh 
water look like firmly rooted mountains burned by forest fires seen against 
other mountains burned by forest fires. Lords of elephants are in rut, lords 
of cattle are overjoyed, lords of forest beasts are tranquil, lords of 
mountains are charming, lords of men are at rest, and the lord of gods is at 
play with the water-bearing clouds. The expeditions of kings have ceased, 
their armies turn back. Hostilities and roads are equally blocked by water. 
In the month of Prausthapada, the time for study has now come for Samaga 
brahmans wishing to learn the veda. With work completed on his dwellings 
and with his stores assembled, Bharata, lord of Kosala, has surely 
undertaken some vow on the full-moon day of Asadha. 

[36-40] “As the Saray River now becomes full, its current swells, as 
will the cheers of Ayodhya’s people when they see me return. During these 
bountiful rains, Sugriva, established in his great kingdom, his enemy 
conquered, is enjoying pleasure with his wives. But deprived of my great 
kingdom and robbed of my wife, I have been broken like a sodden 
riverbank, Laksmana. Thus, my vast grief and these rains, which are slow to 
pass, and my mighty enemy Ravana all seem without end to me. When I 
saw that roads were impassable and an expedition impossible, I asked for 
nothing, even though Sugriva bowed in submission. 

[41-44] “Moreover, given the magnitude of my undertaking, I did not 
wish to ask anything of the exhausted monkey who was at long last reunited 
with his wives. No doubt when he has rested, Sugriva himself will realize 


that the time has come and will recognize his obligation. Therefore, you 
who bear auspicious marks, I keep awaiting the proper time, watching for 
both Sugriva and the rivers to become favorable. For a service rendered 
obliges a warrior to repay the service. The ungrateful man who does not do 
so wounds the heart of virtuous people.” 

[45-46] Thus addressed, Laksmana reflected and approved that speech 
and then, with palms cupped, spoke to handsome Rama, showing his own 
correct view: “Lord of men, before long the king of tawny monkeys will do 
all that you desire, just as you have said. You must endure the falling rain, 
waiting for autumn, intent upon the destruction of your enemy.” 


Sarga 28 

[1-8] Hanuman observed the clear sky free of clouds and lightning, spread 
with lovely light, and resounding with the cries of sdrasa cranes. He also 
observed Sugriva with his abundant wealth, doing little to accumulate 
wealth or religious merit, his mind entirely given over to wicked ways; his 
objective complete, his goals accomplished; always taking pleasure in 
women, obtaining all his cherished wishes and his own cherished wife, and 
also Tara whom he had coveted. Diverting himself night and day, his object 
achieved, his suffering ended, he was enjoying himself like the lord of gods 
in the Nandana garden with the hosts of apsarases. Addicted to sensual 
behavior, relegating his duties to his ministers, and not overseeing his 
ministers, his command over the kingdom was destroyed. So the son of 
Maruta, who knew the real nature of things and had decided what needed to 
be done, who knew what was right for particular occasions, and who knew 
correct speech, propitiated with sweet, pleasing, and well-reasoned words 
the lord of the tawny monkeys who knew true speech. He approached the 
lord of the tawny monkeys who was full of love and affection for him and 
was convinced of his trustworthiness, and then spoke these words, which 
were beneficial, true, and salutary and were conciliatory, righteous, 
meaningful, and politic: 

[9-12] “You have obtained kingship and fame and increased the royal 
majesty of your family. It only remains for you to support your allies, and 
this you must do. For if one always deals with allies correctly and at the 
proper time, then one’s kingdom and glory and splendor increase. He who 
has treasury, scepter, allies, and self united in proper balance enjoys great 


sovereignty, lord of the earth. Your conduct is virtuous and you keep to a 
path free of danger. Therefore, you should duly accomplish your ally’s 
purpose for the sake of what is proper. 

[13-16] “But he who attends to his ally’s purpose when the right time 
has passed does not serve his ally’s purpose even if he accomplishes great 
things. Therefore, you must conduct a search for Vaidehi. You must do this 
for Raghava, heroic foe-tamer, for time is passing. Even though he is in a 
hurry and knows that time is of the essence, that wise man does not remind 
you that time is passing, for he is obedient to your will, king. Raghava is the 
head of his flourishing family and is an enduring friend. His might is 
immeasurable and he himself is incomparable in his virtues. 

[17—20] “Attend to his interests, then; he has already attended to yours. 
Lord of tawny monkeys, you should give orders to the most excellent of the 
tawny monkeys. For the proper time has not yet run out if only you act 
without further urging. But if the undertaking must still be urged upon you, 
then the right time will have passed. You should attend to the interests even 
of someone who does nothing for you, lord of tawny monkeys, not to 
mention someone who has obligated you by giving you kingship and 
wealth. Lord of the hosts of apes and monkeys, you are powerful and 
valiant. Why then do you hesitate about ordering this favor to be done for 
Dasarathi? 

[21-26] “Granted, with his own arrows DasSarathi can subdue gods, 
asuras, and great serpents. Still, he is waiting for your promise to be kept. 
Risking his life without hesitation, he did a favor for you. So for him, we 
must search this earth or the very heavens for Vaidehi. Neither gods nor 
gandharvas nor asuras nor yaksas nor the host of Maruts could frighten 
him, much less rdksasas. You had a favor done for you first by powerful 
Rama; therefore, lord of tawny monkeys, you should with all your heart do 
a favor for him. If you so command, lord of monkeys, none of us will 
slacken his pace, whether on earth or on water, in the underworld or even 
up in the sky. Therefore, command who is to stay where to do what for you. 
For you have more than ten million unassailable tawny monkeys, blameless 
king.” 

[27-32] Upon hearing this correct speech communicated at the proper 
time, mighty Sugriva made an excellent decision. He ordered respected 
Nila, always diligent, to gather all his armies from every quarter, 


commanding: “See to it that my entire army with its vanguards and all the 
troop leaders assemble without delay. And let the swift and resolute leaping 
monkeys who guard the outposts quickly assemble the troops at my 
command. And afterward you yourself must review the troops. Any 
monkey who has not reached here in fifteen days will be punished by death. 
Let there be no doubt about this. You and Angada are to go to the monkey 
elders concerning the orders upon which I have decided.” Then, when the 
vigorous lord of those bulls among tawny monkeys had made these 
arrangements, he entered his dwelling. 


Sarga 29 

[1-5] After Sugriva had entered his cave, and when the sky was free of 
clouds, Rama, who had waited through the rainy season, was oppressed by 
grief and desire. He gazed at the clear sky, the white circle of the moon, and 
the autumnal night washed with moonlight. Realizing that Sugriva was 
given over to lust, that Janaka’s daughter was lost, and that the proper time 
had passed by, he was so deeply tormented that he fainted. Then, after a 
moment, wise Raghava regained consciousness and thought about Vaideht, 
who was always in his heart. Seated on the mountaintop bright with gold 
and minerals, he gazed at the autumnal sky, and his thoughts were fixed on 
his beloved. 

[6-13] And as he gazed at that clear sky free of clouds and lightning, 
resounding with the calls of the sdrasa cranes, he lamented in a pained 
voice: “My young wife, whose voice is like the call of the sdrasa cranes, 
used to enjoy the calls of the sarasa cranes in our hermitage; how can she 
find enjoyment now? And how can my young wife enjoy the sight of 
flowering asana trees bright as gold, when she looks about and doesn’t see 
me? Soft-voiced, lovely in every limb, she used to awaken at the sound of 
the kalahamsas. What wakes her now? When she hears the call of the 
cakravaka birds and their mates, how can my lotus-eyed wife survive? 
Without that fawn-eyed woman, I find no happiness now in wandering 
through woods and forests, near lakes, rivers, and ponds. I hope that lovely 
woman, so young and far from me, is not deeply tormented by love 
endlessly renewed by autumn’s charms.” The king’s son, best of men, kept 
lamenting in this way, like a saranga bird asking for water from Indra, lord 
of the thirty gods. 


[14-18] Then fortunate Laksmana, who had been ranging over the 
beautiful mountainsides in search of fruit, returned and saw his elder 
brother. When he saw him alone in that solitary place, distraught and filled 
with unbearable cares, wise Saumitri was wretched with anguish because of 
his brother’s dejection, and he said to Rama: “Elder brother, what is the use 
of submitting to love? What is the good of defeating your own manliness? 
Composure can always be achieved. What is the good of turning away from 
endeavor now? Undaunted warrior, exert yourself in your task, make your 
mind serene, use your time for concentration and exertion, and make these 
things and your ally’s strength a cause of success, achieved by your own 
actions. Nor can another easily possess Janaki when you are her lord, lord 
of the dynasty of Manu. No one approaches the blazing flame of a fire 
without being burned, most worthy of warriors.” 

[19-20] Rama then addressed unassailable Laksmana, who bore 
auspicious marks, with these characteristic words that were beneficial, 
salutary, consistent with statesmanship, conciliatory, righteous, and full of 
meaning: “Undoubtedly we must look after our undertaking. We must carry 
out specific actions. We must certainly give thought to the outcome of the 
difficult undertaking we have begun, prince.” 

[21—26] Then Rama spoke to Laksmana, his mouth becoming dry with 
grief as he thought again of lotus-eyed Maithilt: “Thousand-eyed Indra has 
satisfied the earth with water and ripened the crops. Now he has settled 
down, his work accomplished. Passing before mountains and trees with a 
deep, pleasing sound, the clouds released their water and are now 
exhausted, prince. Water-bearing clouds dark as blue-lotus petals had 
darkened the ten directions. Now, like elephants no longer in rut, their 
violence is calmed. High up, the violent water-bearing storm-winds fragrant 
with kutaja and arjuna blossoms have passed by and now are still, gentle 
brother. Clouds, elephants, peacocks, and waterfalls have all at once ceased 
their sounds, blameless Laksmana. 

[27-31] “The mountains have been washed spotless by great clouds and 
their glittering peaks now shine as if bathed in moonbeams. Little by little 
the autumnal rivers reveal their sandbanks, just as young women, bashful in 
their first sexual encounter, reveal their loins. With their waters now clear, 
resounding with the cries of ospreys and crowded with hosts of cakravaka 
birds, the lakes look lovely, gentle brother. For kings eager to conquer and 


bitterly hostile toward one another, the time for exertion has arrived, gentle 
prince. Now is the time when kings make their first military expeditions, 
prince, yet I see neither Sugriva nor any such preparation by him. 

[32-35] “I am tormented with grief at not seeing Sita, so for me the four 
rainy months have passed as if they were a hundred years, gentle brother. 
Although I am tortured by sorrow, deprived of my beloved, robbed of my 
kingdom, and in exile, King Sugriva shows me no compassion, Laksmana, 
thinking: ‘Without a protector, deprived of his kingdom, far from home, 
assailed by Ravana, miserable and lovesick, Rama has come to me for 
help.’ Such are the reasons why the wicked-minded king of monkeys, 
Sugriva, slights me, gentle brother, scorcher of your foes. 

[36-40] “Now that he has achieved his own object, this evil-minded 
monkey, who himself specified the time for Sita’s search, disregards the 
agreement he made. Enter Kiskindha and speak in my name to that bull 
among monkeys, Sugriva, that fool intent on vulgar pleasures. He who 
promises and then destroys the hopes of worthy suppliants who have 
moreover previously rendered services is the vilest man in the world. But he 
who accepts as an oath his own spoken word, whether for good or for evil, 
is a hero and the best of men. Even carrion eaters will not consume the dead 
bodies of those ingrates who, once their own object is achieved, will not 
assist their friends whose objects are still unachieved. 

[41-45] “He must want to see my golden-backed bow flash like a streak 
of lightning when I bend it in combat. He must want to hear again the 
terrible clash of the bowstring against my armguard, which booms like a 
thunderbolt when I am angry in battle. Granted that his valor is known to be 
so great; still, with you as my companion, heroic prince, I should have no 
worry. Now that his object is achieved, the lord of leaping monkeys does 
not acknowledge the agreement on account of which I made this effort, 
conqueror of enemy cities. Though he promised the end of the rains as the 
agreed-upon time, the lord of tawny monkeys is enjoying himself and does 
not notice that the four months have passed. 

[46-52] “Amusing himself with his ministers and his council, Sugriva 
spends all his time drinking. He has no pity on us, though we are wretched 
with grief. Go, dear boy, and tell Sugriva the nature of my anger. And, 
mighty one, you should say these words to him: ‘The path Valin traveled 
when he died is not closed. Stand by your agreement, Sugriva, lest you 


follow in Valin’s path. I slew Valin alone with my arrow in battle. But if 
you neglect your oath, I shall kill your entire family along with you.’ So, 
bull among men, say to him whatever is helpful given the state of affairs. 
Make haste, best of men: time is running out. Tell him: ‘Keep the promise 
you made me, lord of monkeys, heeding the immemorial code of righteous 
conduct, lest I shoot you dead with my arrows and send you today to 
Yama’s abode to see Valin.’ ” When this lord of the race of men, whose 
might was terrible, saw that his dejected older brother was addressing him 
repeatedly with sharply increasing anger, he made a harsh decision about 
the lord of the tawny monkeys. 


Sarga 30 

[1-4] Rama’s high-spirited younger brother, son of the lord of men, replied 
to his dejected, lovesick elder brother, son of a king of men, who was 
overcome with grief and whose anger had greatly increased: “The monkey 
will not keep to virtuous conduct. He will not keep in mind the connection 
between your efforts and his rewards. And so it is that he does not get 
started. He will not long enjoy the royal power of the monkey kingdom. 
Attached to vulgar pleasures because his mind is corrupted, he has no 
inclination to repay your favor, warrior. Let him die and behold his older 
brother Valin. A kingdom should not be given to someone so devoid of 
virtues. I cannot contain my violent anger. I shall kill faithless Sugriva 
today. Let Valin’s son and the heroic tawny monkeys conduct the search for 
the king’s wife.” 

[S—8] After announcing his intention, he seized his bow and was rushing 
off in a terrible rage for battle. But Rama, slayer of enemy warriors, 
addressed him with these circumspect and courteous words: “Surely 
someone like you should not do such evil in this world. He who destroys 
evil by virtue is a hero and the best of men. As a man of honorable conduct, 
Laksmana, you must not choose this evil now. Pursue toward Sugriva that 
affection and friendship we previously followed. With conciliatory words, 
avoiding harshness, you must tell Sugriva that time has run out.” 

[9-15] Duly instructed in this matter by his elder brother, Laksmana, that 
bull among men, slayer of enemy warriors, entered the city. Then 
Laksmana, wise, honest minded, devoted to his brother’s pleasure and well- 
being, went to the monkey’s dwelling in a fury, resembling Kala, the ender 


of all things. Like Mount Mandara with its high peak, he bore a bow like a 
mountain peak, bright as a rainbow. Equal to Brhaspati in intelligence, 
Rama’s younger brother Laksmana, doing as he was told, reflected on the 
speech he would make, the reply to it, and his reply to that. Then, 
enveloped by the fire of his own wrath aroused by his brother’s desire and 
anger, he advanced like a raging tempest. Violently toppling many sda, 
tala, and asvakarna trees, impetuously overturning other trees and 
mountain peaks, and crushing rocks with his feet like a swift-moving 
elephant, he raced on, making long strides in keeping with his mission. 

[16-19] There, in a gap in the mountains, that tiger of the Iksvakus saw 
Kiskindha, the great and inaccessible citadel of the king of the tawny 
monkeys, crowded with troops. His lip trembling with anger at Sugriva, 
Laksmana saw dreadful monkeys moving about outside Kiskindha. In the 
space between the mountains, monkeys as big as elephants clutched 
mountain peaks and full-grown trees by the hundreds. Now, when he saw 
that the tawny monkeys had seized weapons, Laksmana’s anger redoubled, 
like a fire with ample fuel. 

[20-25] When those leaping monkeys saw that he was furious and that 
he resembled Kala, Mrtyu, or the end of a cosmic era, they ran off by the 
hundreds in every direction, their limbs gripped by fear. Then those bulls 
among tawny monkeys entered Sugriva’s dwelling and _ reported 
Laksmana’s arrival and his wrath. But the lustful, infatuated bull among 
monkeys was secluded with Tara and did not hear the words of those 
monkey warriors. Instructed by the ministers, terrifying tawny monkeys as 
big as mountains, elephants, or clouds then went forth from the city. With 
claws and fangs for weapons, all were terrible, all were hideous with 
deformed faces, and all were as bold as tigers. Some had the strength of ten 
elephants, some ten times that, and some had the valor of a thousand 
elephants. 

[26-30] In his anger, Laksmana gazed upon unassailable Kiskindha, 
entirely surrounded by mighty monkeys with trees in their hands. Then all 
those immensely powerful tawny monkeys came out beyond the moat 
surrounding the ramparts and stood there in full view. That self-possessed 
warrior, recalling Sugriva’s dereliction and the suffering of his own elder 
brother, once again gave way to anger. Red-eyed with anger and sighing 
long, hot sighs, that tiger among men resembled fire, the purifier, shrouded 


in smoke. With his arrowheads like darting tongues, his bow like coils, and 
his inner strength like a store of venom, he resembled a five-headed serpent. 

[31-33] As he approached this man who was enflamed like the fire of 
universal destruction and who was like some angry serpent lord, Angada 
was terrified and greatly dismayed. His eyes reddened with anger, 
Laksmana, whose fame was great, instructed Angada: “Dear child, 
announce my arrival to Sugriva with these words: ‘Rama’s younger brother 
Laksmana, subduer of his foes, is here to see you. Tormented by his 
brother’s misfortune, he is standing at the gate.’ ” 

[34-38] When he heard Laksmana’s speech, Angada, overcome with 
grief, approached his father and said, “Saumitri is here.” But when the 
monkey warriors saw Laksmana, all at once, right before him they roared a 
roar like that of a lion or of a mighty stream, or like the sound of the vajra 
or a thunderbolt. At that loud noise the monkey awoke, red-eyed and 
unsteady with drunkenness, his garlands and ornaments in disarray. Now, 
when they heard Angada’s words, two of the monkey king’s counselors, 
who were respected and noble looking, accompanied him. Those two 
counselors, Plaksa and Prabhava, announced that Laksmana had arrived to 
speak of various matters concerning righteousness and statecraft. 

[39-43] Soothing him with speeches certain to be conciliatory, they 
respectfully attended the seated Sugriva as if he were Sakra, lord of the 
Maruts, saying: “The illustrious brothers Rama and Laksmana, true to their 
promise, worthy of kingship and conferring kingship, have become your 
friends. One of them, Laksmana, is standing at the gate, bow in hand. 
Trembling in fear of him, the monkeys are screeching. Raghava’s brother 
Laksmana is here. He has arrived at Rama’s command, with Rama’s words 
as his charioteer and with his own determination as his chariot. You and 
your son and your kinsmen must bow your heads to him. You must stand by 
your agreement, king. You must be faithful to your promise.” 


Sarga 31 
[1-4] When self-possessed Sugriva, along with his ministers, heard 
Angada’s words and heard that Laksmana was angry, he rose from his seat. 
Experienced and thoroughly versed in counsel, weighing his alternatives, he 
spoke these words to his ministers who understood counsel: “I have said 
nothing wrong, nor have I done anything wrong. I wonder, then, why 


Raghava’s brother Laksmana is so angry? Evil-hearted enemies, always 
looking for my weak spots, must have reported nonexistent misdeeds of 
mine to Raghava’s younger brother. 

[S5—8] “So to start with, all of you must reach some conclusion about this, 
using your own judgment, gradually, cleverly, and in keeping with the rules 
of proper conduct. I am by no means afraid of Laksmana or of Raghava, but 
a friend angry without grounds does give rise to alarm. It is always easy to 
make a friend but hard to keep one. Since feelings do not endure, affection 
breaks down over small things. It is for this reason that I am frightened, for 
I really cannot repay the service rendered to me by great Rama.” 

[9-12] Thus addressed by Sugriva, Hanuman, bull among tawny 
monkeys, stated his own conjecture in the midst of the monkey counselors: 
“It is no wonder at all that you cannot forget the affectionate good deed 
done as a service to you, lord of the hosts of tawny monkeys. For in order to 
please you, heroic Raghava cast fear far away and killed Valin, who was 
equal in prowess to Sakra. There is no doubt that it is entirely due to his 
affection that Raghava is angry and has sent his brother Laksmana, 
bestower of good fortune. 

[13-17] “Best of those who understand time, you have been inattentive 
and did not realize the time. Propitious autumn has begun, lush with 
flowering saptacchada trees. There are bright planets and stars in the 
heavens now that the clouds have disappeared. The sky is clear in all 
directions, and so are the rivers and lakes. But still you do not realize that 
the time for your endeavor has arrived, bull among tawny monkeys. Since 
you are clearly negligent, Laksmana has come. So now you must tolerate 
from the mouth of another man the harsh words of great Raghava, who is 
suffering because his wife has been taken. And since you have committed 
an offense, I see no alternative for you but to propitiate Laksmana with 
cupped palms. 

[18-22] “A king needs to be told what is beneficial by his appointed 
counselors. For that reason, I have put aside fear to speak these well- 
considered words. For when Raghava is angered, he can, by raising his 
bow, bring under his power the whole world with its gods, asuras, and 
gandharvas. "It is not proper, particularly for someone who is grateful, who 
remembers a past favor, to anger a person who must be propitiated again. 
You, your son, and your close friends must bow your heads to him. Then 


you must honor your agreement, king, as submissive to him as a wife to her 
husband. King of monkeys, it is not right for you to reject the instruction of 
Rama and his younger brother, even in your mind. For your mind surely 
knows the human strength of Raghava and Laksmana, powerful as the lord 
of the gods.” 


Sarga 32 
[1-3] Then, when he was summoned, Laksmana, slayer of enemy warriors, 
entered the terrible cave Kiskindha as Rama had commanded. At the sight 
of Laksmana, the huge and powerful tawny monkey stationed at the gates 
all stood with their hands cupped in reverence. Perceiving that Dasaratha’s 
son was breathing heavily in anger, the tawny monkeys were frightened and 
did not close in around him. 

[4-8] Majestic Laksmana saw that delightful, heavenly, great cave made 
of jewels, filled with jewels, crowded with mansions and _ palaces, 
resplendent with all sorts of wares. The cave with its blossoming groves 
was resplendent with blossoming trees, whose fruits satisfied every desire. 
It was splendid with beautiful monkeys wearing heavenly garlands and 
clothing, for these were the sons of gods and gandharvas and could change 
form at will. The principal streets were fragrant with the scents of sweet- 
smelling sandal, aloes, and padma, and of maireya and madhu wines; and 
there were many-storied palaces as solid as Mount Meru or the Vindhya 
mountains. And Raghava saw there unsullied mountain streams. 

[9-13] On the royal highway Laksmana saw Angada’s lovely house and 
the fine, substantial houses of those great and eminent monkeys Mainda, 
Dvivida, Gavaya, Gavaksa, Gaja, and Sarabha; Vidyunmala, Sampati, 
Suryaksa, Hanuman, Virabahu, and great Nala; Kumuda, Susena, Tara, and 
Jambavan too; Dadhivaktra, Nila, Supatala, and Sunetra. Their houses were 
as bright as white clouds and strung with heavenly garlands. They were full 
of wealth and grain and splendid with the most beautiful women. 

[14-17] Enclosed by a white stone rampart was the lovely but 
unapproachable house of the lord of monkeys, which was like great Indra’s 
abode, with white palace turrets like Kailasa’s peaks, resplendent with 
blossoming trees whose fruits satisfied every desire, with majestic trees 
given by great Indra. It had trees with heavenly blossoms and fruits, which 
were delightful, like dark clouds, giving cool shade. Its doorways were 


flanked by powerful tawny monkeys with weapons in hand. It was bright, 
covered with heavenly garlands, and had an arched gateway of pure gold. 

[18-21] Unhindered, mighty Saumitri entered Sugriva’s lovely house as 
the bright sun enters a great cloud. Passing seven enclosures filled with 
chariots and seats, righteous Laksmana saw the large, well-guarded 
women’s quarters, resplendent everywhere with beds of gold and silver and 
with many fine seats furnished with expensive cushions. As he entered, he 
heard continuous sweet music, accompanied by the sound of stringed 
instruments, in which words and syllables were matched to the singing. 

[22-24] And within Sugriva’s palace, mighty Laksmana saw many 
women of every description, proud of their beauty and youth. Noble in 
birth, they were ornamented with the finest ornaments. Their garlands were 
made of bright-colored flowers, and they were absorbed in making 
exquisite garlands. Laksmana saw them and noticed also Sugriva’s satisfied, 
attentive servants wearing elegant clothing. 

[25-27] Then he saw glorious Sugriva seated on a splendid golden 
throne furnished with expensive cushions. He was as bright as the sun, his 
appearance was heavenly, and his body glittered with heavenly ornaments. 
Surrounded by beautiful women who were decked in heavenly ornaments 
and garlands, and wearing heavenly garlands and clothing himself, he was 
as invincible as great Indra. Tightly embracing Ruma, seated on his throne, 
his color that of finest gold, the large-eyed hero Sugriva gazed at large- 
eyed, dauntless Saumitri. 


Sarga 33 

[1-5] When Sugriva saw Laksmana, that bull among men, enter unchecked 
and angry, his mind was troubled. He saw that DaSaratha’s son, aggrieved at 
his brother’s misfortune, was burning as it were with his blazing energy and 
breathing hard in his rage. The foremost of tawny monkeys, great Sugriva, 
left his golden throne, rising up like great Indra’s beautifully adorned 
flagstaff. As Sugriva arose, the women led by Ruma rose with him, like the 
host of stars following the full moon into the heavens. Majestic, his eyes 
reddened, he swayed. Then, with palms cupped, he stood firm, like the great 
wish-fulfilling tree. 

[6-10] Laksmana spoke angrily to Sugriva, who stood with Ruma in the 
midst of the women, like the moon among the stars: “A well-born, powerful 


king whose passions are controlled, who is grateful, compassionate, and 
truthful, is much esteemed in this world. But who is more malicious than 
that king bent on unrighteousness who makes a false promise to friends 
who have helped him? By lying about a horse, a man in effect kills a 
hundred. By lying about a cow, he kills a thousand. But it is himself and his 
kinsmen he kills when he lies about another man. He who does not repay 
his friends when his own object is already achieved is an ingrate, fit to be 
killed by all beings, lord of leaping monkeys. 

[11-15] “This sloka revered by all people was sung by Brahma, angry at 
seeing an ingrate. Listen to it, leaping monkey: ‘Virtuous men have 
prescribed atonements for the brahman-killer, the drinker of wine, the thief, 
and the breaker of vows; but for the ingrate there is no atonement.’ You are 
ignoble, monkey, an ingrate and a liar; for you do not repay Rama though 
your own object is already achieved. Surely, monkey, since your own object 
is achieved, you must make an effort to look for Sita if you wish to repay 
Rama’s service. You are addicted to vulgar pleasures and false to your 
promise. Rama did not realize you were a snake croaking like a frog. 

[16—19] “It was through great, illustrious, compassionate Rama that you, 
who are evil and wicked, obtained the kingship of the tawny monkeys. If 
you do not acknowledge the service rendered by Rama, who is tireless in 
action, you will at once, shot dead with sharp arrows, see Valin. The path 
Valin traveled when he died is not closed. Stand by your agreement, 
Sugriva, lest you follow in Valin’s path. It must be that since you cannot see 
the arrows that fall like thunderbolts from the bow of that best of Iksvakus, 
you are content to pursue pleasure and do not give even a thought to what 
needs to be done for Rama.” 


Sarga 34 

[1-4] As Sumitra’s son Laksmana spoke in that fashion, he seemed ablaze 
with power. Then Tara, her face bright as the lord of stars, said to him: 
“One should not address the lord of the tawny monkeys in this manner, 
Laksmana. He does not deserve to hear harsh words, especially from your 
mouth. Sugriva is not at all ungrateful or deceitful or pitiless. The lord of 
monkeys does not tell lies, hero, nor is he dishonest. Nor has this heroic 
monkey Sugriva forgotten that Rama rendered a service impossible for any 
other to accomplish in battle, hero. 


[S—8] “It is through Rama’s favor that Sugriva has now obtained renown, 
the everlasting kingship of the monkeys, as well as Ruma and me, scorcher 
of your foes. He rested most unhappily before; so now that he has achieved 
this extreme happiness, like the sage Visvamitra he does not realize what 
the time is. For they say that the great sage, righteous Visvamitra, was so 
attached to the apsaras Ghrtaci that he thought ten years to be but a single 
day, Laksmana. If even powerful Visvamitra, who best understands time, 
did not notice the passage of time, what can you expect from an ordinary 
being? 

[9-14] “Rama should pardon Sugriva, who is only following his bodily 
nature, and who, although exhausted, is not yet sated with sensual 
pleasures, Laksmana. And you, my dear Laksmana, should not rashly 
succumb to anger like a common man, without knowing the true state of 
affairs. For men of strong character like you, bull among men, do not rashly 
succumb to the power of anger without reflection. I beseech you earnestly 
for Sugriva’s sake. You know what is right. Please give up your great 
agitation born of anger. I believe that to please Rama, Sugriva would give 
up Ruma, me, the monkey kingdom, and his wealth, grain, and riches. 
Sugriva will kill Ravana in battle and reunite Raghava and Sita, like the 
hare-marked moon and his consort, the constellation Rohini. 

[15—18] “They say that in Lanka there are one thousand times one billion 
and thirty-six times one hundred, thirty-six times one thousand, and thirty- 
six times ten thousand raksasas. And without killing those unassailable 
raksasas, who can change form at will, one cannot kill Ravana, who has 
carried off Maithilt. For those rdksasas and cruel Ravana cannot be slain in 
battle without an ally, Laksmana, particularly Sugriva. That is what Valin, 
the lord of the tawny monkeys, indicated, and he was well informed. But 
my knowledge is not direct: I am telling you only what I heard from him. 

[19-23] “In order to provide you with allies in battle, bulls among 
monkeys have been dispatched to bring many monkeys, the leaders of the 
troops of tawny monkey. And since he js still awaiting those mighty, valiant 
monkeys, the lord of monkeys cannot set out to accomplish Raghava’s 
purpose. Sugriva already issued a decree according to which all those 
mighty monkeys should be arriving today, Saumitri. Ten billion apes, a 
billion langurs, and many millions of monkeys with blazing power will 
come to you today, Kakutstha. So give up your anger, subduer of your foes. 


For when they see this face of yours and your eyes blood-red with rage, all 
the wives of the lords of the tawny monkeys fear their previous danger and 
can find no peace of mind.” 


Sarga 35 

[1-3] After Tara had addressed him in those polite words consistent with 
righteousness, Saumitri, who was tender by nature, accepted her words. 
And once those words had been accepted, the lord of the hosts of tawny 
monkey put aside his great terror of Laksmana as one might put aside a wet 
garment. Then Sugriva, lord of monkeys, tore off the great, wonderful 
garland of many properties that was around his neck, and he was free of his 
intoxication. 

[4-6] Sugriva, best of all monkeys, spoke conciliatory words, delighting 
Laksmana whose power was terrifying: “My lost majesty and glory and the 
everlasting kingship of the monkeys—all this I have regained through 
Rama’s favor, Saumitri. Heroic tamer of foes, who could ever repay such 
valor as that of this king renowned for his deeds? 

[7-11] “Righteous Raghava will regain Sita and will kill Ravana by his 
own power. I shall be merely his ally. What need has he of an ally when 
with a single arrow he pierced seven great trees, a mountain, and even the 
earth itself? When the mere sound of his twanging bow makes the earth and 
its mountains tremble, Laksmana, what need has he of allies? When the lord 
of men goes forth to kill his enemy Ravana, along with his attendants, bull 
among men, I shall merely follow in his train. If I, who am his servant, have 
committed any transgression, let it be forgiven out of trust or affection. All 
servants make mistakes.” 

[12-15] As great Sugriva spoke in this way, Laksmana was pleased and 
said affectionately: “With you above all as his courteous protector, lord of 
monkeys, my brother has a true protector in every way, Sugriva. By virtue 
of your dignity and your extreme purity, Sugriva, you are worthy of 
enjoying the unsurpassed majesty of the kingship over the monkeys. With 
you as his ally, valorous Rama will soon kill his enemies in battle, Sugriva. 
There is no doubt about that. 

[16—20] “You are grateful and righteous and never turn back in battle, 
Sugriva. What you say is fitting and proper. Apart from you and my elder 
brother, what other powerful person who recognizes his own faults is able 


to speak of them, best of monkeys? You are Rama’s equal in valor and 
strength, and the gods have given you to be his ally for a long time to come, 
bull among tawny monkeys. Nevertheless, hero, you must leave this place 
at once with me and console your friend, who is suffering because of his 
wife’s abduction. Please forgive me if, after hearing what Rama said when 
he was overcome with grief, I spoke harsh words to you.” 


Sarga 36 

[1-10] When great Laksmana had addressed him in this fashion, Sugriva 
said these words to his minister Hanuman, who stood beside him: “You 
must immediately summon all the monkeys on earth: those who live on the 
peaks of the five mountains Mahendra, Himalaya, Vindhya, Kailasa, and 
white-peaked Mandara; and those who dwell in the west near the seashore 
on mountains glittering all over with the color of the newly risen sun; and 
those bulls among tawny monkeys who shelter in the dreadful forests of 
padma and tala trees on the mountain that is the sun’s dwelling and that 
resembles a rain cloud at twilight; and those leaping monkeys strong as 
elephants, black as collyrium or storm clouds, who live on the Afyana 
mountain; and those monkeys bright as gold dwelling in caves of red 
arsenic ore on the flanks of Mount Meru, and those inhabiting the Dhtmra 
mountain; and those leaping monkeys of terrifying power who are the color 
of the newly risen sun and drink honey-wine on the great Aruna mountain; 
and those who inhabit the great, fragrant, delightful forests and everywhere 
haunt the ascetics’ charming forest groves. Using such devices as bribery 
and conciliation, send forth your monkeys at once. And send forth other 
tawny monkeys as well to hasten those very swift messengers I dispatched 
previously. 

[11-15] “Then quickly bring at my command all those monkeys who, 
absorbed in pleasures, are too long in coming. Any wicked ones who do not 
come at my command within ten days are to be executed as transgressors of 
their king’s orders. Now let the hundreds and thousands and tens of millions 
of lions among monkeys who abide by my wishes depart in all directions at 
my command. Let those excellent and frightful-looking monkeys go forth 
from here at my command, as if blocking out the sky like clouds or 
mountains. Let all monkeys who know their haunts swiftly go and bring at 
my command all the tawny monkeys on earth.” 


[16-18] Upon hearing the monkey king’s words, the wind god’s son 
dispatched valiant monkeys in every direction. Dispatched by the king, 
those monkeys set out at that very moment into the sky, where Visnu 
stepped, traveling along the path of birds and heavenly bodies. For Rama’s 
sake those monkeys urged on all the monkeys who dwelt by the oceans, on 
the mountains, 1n the forests, and near the rivers. 

[19-26] When these monkeys heard the orders of Sugriva, their king of 
kings, who was like Mrtyu or Kala, they came, fearful of Sugriva. So down 
from their mountain three times ten million very swift leaping monkeys, 
black as collyrium, came to the spot where Raghava was. And ten times ten 
million, bright as pure gold, who delighted in that best of mountains where 
the sun sets, came down from it. And then from the peaks of Mount Kailasa 
there came a thousand times ten million monkeys lustrous as a lion’s mane. 
Then came a thousand thousands of ten millions, who dwelt in the 
Himalayas, living on fruits and roots. And down from the Vindhya 
mountains rushed thousands of ten millions of terrifying monkeys, as red as 
Mars, whose deeds were frightful. And there was an untold number of those 
who lived on the shore of the ocean of milk, dwelling in forests of tamdla 
trees and eating coconuts. From the forests, caves, and rivers came a swift 
monkey army, seeming to swallow up the sun, maker of day. 

[27-31] Now those heroic monkeys who had gone to hasten all the other 
monkeys saw the mountain Himalaya with its great trees. On that charming 
best of mountains there was long ago a lovely, wonderful sacrifice for 
Mahesvara that gratified the hearts of all the gods. There the monkeys saw 
roots and fruits, sweet as the nectar of the gods, which were produced from 
the overflowing of the food offered at that sacrifice. Whoever eats even 
once those delightful, divine roots and fruits produced from that sacrificial 
food remains satisfied for a month. The leaders of the troops of monkeys, 
who lived on fruit, took those divine roots and fruits and divine herbs. 

[32-37] And the monkeys who had gone there also brought from that 
place of sacrifice fragrant flowers in order to please Sugriva. Then, having 
exhorted all the other monkeys on earth, all those excellent monkeys went 
off swiftly ahead of their troops. In a moment those swift-moving troop 
leaders speedily reached Kiskindha, where the monkey Sugriva was. Those 
monkeys took all the herbs, fruits, and roots and presented them to him with 
these words: “We have gone around to all the mountains, oceans, and 


forests. All the monkeys on earth are coming at your command.” When he 
heard this, Sugriva, ruler of leaping monkeys, was delighted, and he 
accepted all their gifts with pleasure. 


Sarga 37 

[1-4] Sugriva accepted all the gifts that were offered, and then, speaking 
kindly to those monkeys, he dismissed them all. When he had dismissed 
those heroic tawny monkeys, who had accomplished their mission, he felt 
as though he and mighty Raghava had already achieved their object. Now 
Laksmana spoke conciliatory words to Sugriva, whose strength was terrible, 
delighting that best of all monkeys: “If it pleases you, gentle friend, depart 
from Kiskindha.” Upon hearing Laksmana’s well-spoken words, Sugriva 
was highly pleased and said this: “So be it. We shall go. I must abide by 
your command.” 

[5—10] When Sugriva had spoken in this way to Laksmana, who bore 
auspicious marks, he dismissed Tara and the other women. To those best of 
tawny monkeys Sugriva loudly cried, “Come!” When they heard his words, 
all those tawny monkeys who were fit to see the women came quickly, their 
palms cupped in reverence. Radiant as the sun, the king then said to those 
who had come, “Monkeys, bring my palanquin at once!” Hearing his 
words, the swift-striding tawny monkeys brought his beautiful palanquin. 
When he saw that his palanquin had been brought, the king of monkeys said 
to Saumitri, “Climb in quickly, Laksmana!” 

[11-14] Having spoken in this fashion, Sugriva together with Laksmana 
climbed into his golden palanquin bright as the sun, which was borne by 
huge tawny monkeys. With a white umbrella carried over his head, and with 
white yak-tail fly whisks waving on all sides, hailed by the sound of conchs 
and bheri drums, and lauded by panegyrists, Sugriva went forth, having 
attained unsurpassed royal majesty. Surrounded by many hundreds of fierce 
monkeys with weapons in hand, he proceeded to where Rama was waiting. 

[15-18] But once he reached that pleasant place where Rama dwelt, 
glorious Sugriva descended from his palanquin with Laksmana. He 
approached Rama with his palms cupped in reverence. And as he stood with 
palms cupped, the other monkeys did the same. When Rama saw that vast 
army of monkeys like a pond full of lotus buds, he was pleased with 
Sugriva. Raghava raised up the lord of the tawny monkeys, who had fallen 


at his feet with his head to the ground, and embraced him with great respect 
and affection. 

[19-23] When righteous Rama had embraced him, he said, “Be seated!” 
Then, when he saw him seated on the ground, he said these words: “He who 
distinguishes righteousness, wealth, and pleasure and always pursues each 
one at the proper time is indeed a king, heroic best of tawny monkeys. But 
he who neglects righteousness and wealth to pursue pleasure awakens only 
after he has fallen, like a man who sleeps on top of a tree. On the other 
hand, a king intent on killing his enemies and devoted to supporting his 
friends gains religious merit and enjoys the fruit of all three goals of life. 
The time has now come for effort, destroyer of enemies. Please consider 
this carefully with those tawny monkeys who are your counselors, lord of 
the tawny monkeys.” 

[24-29] Addressed in this way, Sugriva said these words to Rama: “My 
lost majesty and glory and the everlasting kingship of the monkeys—all this 
I have regained through your favor, great-armed man. King and best of 
conquerors, he who would not repay what was done through your favor and 
your brother’s would be infamous among men. Now the monkey chieftains 
have come by the hundreds, bringing all the powerful monkeys on earth, 
slayer of your enemies. Vigilant apes and heroic langurs of frightful 
appearance, well acquainted with wildernesses, forests, and inaccessible 
places, Raghava, and forest monkeys who are the sons of gods and 
gandharvas and can change their form at will—all are on the way, Raghava, 
surrounded by their respective armies. 

[30-34] “Scorcher of your foes, heroic leaping monkeys surrounded by 
hundreds and by ten thousands and by hundreds of thousands and by ten 
millions and by ten trillions; and forest monkeys surrounded by hundreds of 
millions and by hundreds of hundreds of millions, and by a thousand 
trillions and by ten thousand trillions; and tawny monkeys, leaders of troops 
of tawny monkeys, surrounded by one hundred trillions and by one hundred 
thousand trillions, who make their home on the Vindhya and Meru 
mountains, who themselves resemble Mount Meru and Mount Mandara, 
who possess the valor of great Indra—all these are coming, king. And those 
who come to you will surely kill the raksasa Ravana and his kinsmen in 
battle and will bring back Maithili.” Then, as he considered this effort on 
the part of the heroic tawny monkey who was obedient to his orders, the 


wise son of the ruler of the earth resembled in his joy a full-blown blue 
lotus. 


Sarga 38 

[1-7] As Sugriva was speaking in this way with his palms cupped in 
reverence, Rama, best of those who uphold righteousness, embraced him 
with both arms and replied: “It is not surprising, dear friend, that Indra 
showers rain upon the earth, that the thousand-rayed sun should drive the 
darkness from the sky, that the moon with its beams should illuminate the 
earth, or that someone like you, scorcher of your foes, should repay his 
friends. In the same way it is not surprising that what is best should be 
found in you, dear Sugriva. I know that you always say what is pleasing. 
With you, my friend, as my protector, I shall conquer all my enemies in 
battle. You alone are my friend and ally. Please help me. That evil raksasa 
has seized Vaidehi only to destroy himself, just as Anuhlada treacherously 
seized Puloman’s daughter Sact. Before long I shall kill Ravana with sharp 
arrows, just as Indra of a hundred sacrifices, a slayer of his enemies, killed 
Puloman, Saci’s proud father.” 

[8—13] As they were conversing, dust began rising into the sky, veiling 
the fierce, hot brilliance of the thousand-rayed sun. All directions were 
obscured and thick with that dust, and the whole earth with its mountains, 
woods, and forests trembled. Suddenly the entire land was covered with 
countless mighty, sharp-fanged leaping monkeys as great as mountains. In 
the mere twinkling of an eye, it was covered by the leaders of the troops of 
tawny monkeys with a hundred times ten million followers who could 
change form at will; by mighty tawny monkeys from the rivers, mountains, 
and oceans; and by others who were forest dwellers, roaring like rain 
clouds. Some were the color of the newly risen sun, while others were as 
pale as the moon. And there were monkeys as golden as lotus filaments, and 
white ones who made their home on Mount Meru. 

[14-18] Then the majestic monkey hero named Satabali appeared 
surrounded by ten thousand times ten million monkeys. Next Tara’s mighty 
father, bright as a mountain of gold, appeared with many tens of thousands 
times ten million. Golden as a lotus filament, his face bright as the newly 
risen sun, the intelligent, most excellent of all monkeys, majestic Kesarin, 
Hanuman’s father, best of monkeys, now appeared, with his army of many 


thousands of monkeys. The great king of the langurs, Gavaksa of terrifying 
valor, appeared surrounded by a thousand times ten million monkeys. 

[19-23] Next came Dhimra, destroyer of his enemies, surrounded by 
two thousand times ten million apes of terrifying speed. Then came the 
heroic troop leader named Panasa, surrounded by three times ten million 
terrible monkeys resembling great mountains. And the huge troop leader 
named Nila arrived, looking like a dark mound of collyrium and surrounded 
by ten times ten million. And then the powerful troop leader Darimukha, 
surrounded by a thousand times ten million, came and approached Sugriva. 
Then Mainda and Dvivida, the two mighty sons of the Asvins, appeared 
with a thousand times ten million times ten million monkeys. 

[24—28] Then came Gandhamadana with a hundred and a thousand times 
a thousand times ten million tawny monkeys following behind him. Next 
came the crown prince Angada, whose prowess equaled his father’s, 
surrounded by a thousand times one trillion and one hundred times ten 
trillion. Then the tawny monkey Tara, brilliant as a star, terrifying in his 
prowess, appeared in the distance with five times ten million tawny 
monkeys. The heroic troop leader, the monkey Indrajanu, lord of eleven 
times ten million, appeared along with them. And then came Rambha, 
bright as the newly risen sun, surrounded by a hundred and a thousand and 
ten thousand. 

[29-33] Then the mighty and heroic monkey lord of troops named 
Durmukha appeared, encircled by two times ten million. Surrounded by a 
thousand times ten million monkeys of terrifying valor and tall as the peaks 
of Kailasa, Hanuman appeared. Heroic Nala came too, surrounded by one 
hundred and a thousand and one hundred times ten million tree-dwellers. 
And Sarabha, Kumuda, Vahni, and also the monkey Rambha—these and 
many other leaping monkeys who could change form at will, monkeys 
leaping and jumping and roaring, advanced toward Sugriva, covering the 
whole earth and the mountains and woods, like a host of clouds advancing 
toward the sun. 

[34-37] Full of strength, making a great noise in their delight, they 
bowed their heads and reported to Sugriva, lord of monkeys. And other 
excellent monkeys, assembling as was proper, approached Sugriva and 
stood with their palms cupped in reverence. Standing with his own palms 
cupped reverently, righteous Sugriva immediately presented all those bulls 


among monkeys to Rama, and then he said: “Monkey princes! Each troop 
leader, when he has duly encamped his troops comfortably near the swift 
mountain streams and in all the forests, should be prepared to review his 
troops.” 


Sarga 39 

[1-8] Now the lord of leaping monkeys, King Sugriva, his purpose 
accomplished, spoke to Rama, that tiger among men and tormentor of 
enemy armies: “The mighty monkey lords who dwell in my domain, 
splendid as great Indra and able to change form at will, have come and are 
now encamped. These terrifying monkeys resembling daityas and danavas 
have come with many thousands of tawny monkeys of fearful valor. 
Celebrated for their deeds and feats, strong, indefatigable, celebrated for 
their prowess and foremost in resolve, traveling by land and on water, 
dwelling on various mountains, these monkeys who have arrived by the 
tens of millions are at your service, Rama. All obey orders, all are devoted 
to the welfare of their king. They will be able to accomplish your desire, 
subduer of your foes. You have only to say what you think 1s appropriate to 
the moment, tiger among men. This army is under your control. Please 
command it. It is true that I know exactly what they are to do, but even so 
you should command, as is proper.” 

[9-14] Then Rama, the son of Dasaratha, embraced Sugriva, who was 
speaking in this fashion, and said these words: “Wise and dear friend, you 
must find the place where Ravana dwells and learn whether or not Vaidehi 
is alive. When I find Vaidehi and the hiding place of Ravana, I shall at that 
time arrange with you what is appropriate. Neither Laksmana nor I is 
master in this undertaking, lord of monkeys. You are both master and the 
means of success for this undertaking, king of leaping monkeys. Knowing 
my decision about what is to be done, you alone must command. For 
without doubt you understand what has to be done for me, mighty hero. You 
are my friend and companion, valiant, intelligent, discriminating about 
time, intent on our welfare, wise about achieving objectives, with your own 
objective fully achieved.” 

[15-18] Thus addressed, Sugriva spoke in the presence of Rama and 
wise Laksmana to a powerful troop leader and lord of leaping monkeys 
named Vinata, who was as big as a mountain and who roared like a 


thundercloud: “Along with the monkeys who are sons of the moon and the 
sun, you possess the worldly wisdom about time and place necessary for 
deciding what to do and what not to do, best of monkeys. Accompanied by 
a hundred thousand swift monkeys, go to the eastern quarter with its 
mountains, woods, and forests. There you must search for Videha’s 
daughter Sita and for Ravana’s hiding place in the inaccessible mountain 
regions, in the forests, and along the rivers. 

[19—23ab] “The charming rivers Bhagirathi, Sarayi, Kausiki, and the 
charming Kalindi and Yamuna Rivers, and the great mountain Yamuna, and 
the rivers Sarasvati and Sindhu, and the Sona with jewel-bright waters, and 
the Mahi and the Kalamahi Rivers adorned with mountains and woods; the 
regions of Brahmamala, Videha, Malava, Kasi, and Kosala and the large 
villages of Magadha, and Pundra as well as Vanga, the city of silkworms 
and the land of silver mines—all of this you must search, hunting here, 
there, and everywhere for Rama’s beloved wife, Sita, the daughter-in-law of 
Dasaratha. 

[23cd—27] “Those who shelter on the broad summit of Mount Mandara 
and in cities and on mountains immersed in the ocean, both the 
Karnapravaranas and the Osthakarnakas, and the terrible Lohamukhas, and 
the swift one-legged men, and the strong, imperishable, man-eating men, 
and the handsome, golden-limbed Kiratas with ear ornaments, and the 
terrible Kiratas known as tiger-men who live on islands, eating raw fish and 
moving through the water—you must search all their dwelling places, 
monkeys! 

[28—32] “And you must go to those islands that can be reached from 
mountains, by swimming or by boat: to Yavadvipa rich in jewels, splendid 
with its seven kingdoms, and to Suvarnartipyaka ornamented with gold 
mines. Beyond Yavadvipa, there is a mountain named Sisira. Touching the 
sky with its peaks, it is frequented by gods and danavas. In the inaccessible 
places of the mountains, by the waterfalls and in the forests of these islands, 
you must search for Ravana and Vaidehi here, there, and everywhere. And 
then you must explore the dreadful islands in the sea. There huge asuras 
constantly seize shadows; they are permitted to do so by Brahma because 
they went hungry for a long time. 

[33-37] “By some means you must approach that sea, black as a storm 
cloud, loudly roaring, infested with great serpents; and then from there you 


must go to the dreadful ocean called Lohita because of its red waters. There 
you will see the giant kiutasdalmali tree, and a house built by Visvakarman 
for Vainateya, bright as Mount Kailasa and adorned with every kind of 
jewel. There the dreadful, dangerous rdksasas called Mandehas, big as 
mountains and with various forms, hang from the mountain peaks. Every 
day, toward sunrise, they fall into the water, only to hang scorching in the 
sun again and again. 

[38-41] “Then, moving on, unassailable monkeys, you will see the 
ocean of milk, white as a cloud and with waves like necklaces of pearls. In 
its midst are a great white mountain named Rsabha, surrounded by divinely 
fragrant silver trees in bloom, and a lake named Sudarsana, crowded with 
rdjahamsas and shining silver lotuses with gold filaments. With great 
delight, the gods, celestial singers, yaksas, and kinnaras, eager for sexual 
pleasure, approach that lotus bed with the hosts of apsarases. 

[4244] “Passing beyond the ocean of milk, monkeys, you will then see 
that excellent freshwater ocean, a source of dread to all beings. For in it is 
placed that great horse-faced fire born of anger, whose food they say is the 
rushing water with all its animals and plants. And there you can hear the 
sound of the helpless creatures who live in that ocean, crying out because 
they have seen that mare’s face. 

[45—48] “Thirteen leagues from the northern part of the freshwater ocean 
is a great golden mountain named Jatariipasila. On top of the mountain you 
will see sitting the thousand-headed god Ananta, clothed in blue and 
worshiped by all beings. And planted on top of the mountain is that great 
being’s shining emblem, a triple-crowned golden palmyra tree resting on a 
sacred mound. The thirty gods have made this the limit of the eastern 
quarter. Beyond it is the majestic sunrise mountain made of gold. 

[49-52] “Touching the heavens, its heavenly golden summit covered 
with sacred mounds shines, stretching one hundred leagues high. It looks 
splendid with its heavenly, blossoming sdla, tala, tamdla, and karnikara 
trees made of gold and bright as the sun. On it is the eternal peak named 
Saumanasa, one league wide, ten leagues high, made of gold. When he took 
his three strides long ago, Visnu, the Supreme Being, placed his first step 
there and his second on Mount Meru’s crest. 

[53-58] “The sun becomes most clearly visible when it travels around to 
the north of Jambtidvipa and reaches that very lofty peak. And there one 


sees those great seers, the ascetics called vaikhdnasas and vdlakhilyas, 
gleaming with the color of the sun. Here is the island Sudarsana, on which 
shines that light in whose presence alone the eyes of all living beings are 
able to see. In the bowers, caves, and forests of this mountain, you must 
hunt for Ravana and Vaidehi here, there, and everywhere. Suffused with the 
light of the golden mountain and of the great sun, the eastern twilight glows 
red. Beyond this, one cannot proceed toward the eastern quarter, for it is 
invisible, devoid of moon and sun, shrouded in darkness, and guarded by 
the thirty gods. 

[59-63] “You must search for Janaki in every mountain, cave, and forest 
and even in those places I have not mentioned. But only this far, bulls 
among monkeys, can monkeys go. For we know not what lies beyond, 
boundless and untouched by sun. You must reach the sunrise mountain, find 
Vaidehi and the hiding place of Ravana, and return within a month. But you 
must not stay beyond a month, for I shall kill anyone who does. You are to 
find Maithili and return with your mission accomplished. Go carefully over 
great Indra’s beloved quarter, graced with forests; and when you have found 
Sita, dear to him who was born in Raghu’s line, and returned, you shall live 
in comfort, monkeys.” 


Sarga 40 

[1-6] Then, when he had dispatched that great monkey army, Sugriva sent 
off distinguished monkeys to the south. The heroic and judicious lord of the 
monkey hosts gave orders to swift, valiant heroes headed by Angada—to 
Nila, son of Agni, and to the monkey Hanuman; and to Grandfather 
Brahma’s son, the great monkey Jambavan; and to Suhotra and Sarari and 
also Saragulma; and to Gaja, Gavaksa, Gavaya, Susena, and Rsabha; to 
Mainda and Dvivida, Vijaya and Gandhamadana; and to Ulkamukha and 
Asanga, both sons of Agni, the eater of oblations. And commanding a great 
army to go without delay ahead of those heroic tawny monkeys, he directed 
them toward the southern quarter. 

[7-10] That lord of monkeys mentioned to those chief monkeys all the 
inaccessible places in that region, saying: “The thousand-peaked Vindhyas 
covered with all sorts of trees and vines, and the inaccessible river Narmada 
infested with huge serpents; then the charming Godavari, the great river 
Krsnaveni, and the blessed Varada infested with huge serpents; and the 


Mekhala and Utkala regions as well as the cities of Dasarna, and Avanti and 
Abhravanti—search them all. 

[11-16] “After exploring Vidarbha, Rsika, and charming Mahisaka, 
Banga, Kalinga, and Kausika all around, as well as the Dandaka forest with 
its mountains, rivers, and caves, you must search the river Godavart and 
Andhra, Pundra, Cola, Pandya, and Kerala—all of them. And you must go 
as well to Mount Ayomukha, embellished with ore. You must search that 
majestic great mountain with its many-colored peaks, its brightly flowering 
woods, and forest tracts of sandalwood. There you will see that heavenly, 
auspicious river Kaveri with its clear waters in which groups of apsarases 
play. And you will see the best of seers, mighty Agastya, bright as the sun, 
seated on the summit of Mount Malaya. 

[17-19] “When that great seer graciously gives you permission to leave, 
you will cross the broad river Tamraparni, the haunt of crocodiles. Graced 
with islands and hidden by heavenly sandalwood forests, it plunges into the 
ocean as a beloved young woman would rush to her beloved. Proceeding 
from there, monkeys, you will see the heavenly gateway made of gold and 
ornamented with pearls and jewels, befitting the Pandyas. 

[20—23] “Then, when you come to the sea and consider what best to do, 
you will find on the shore majestic Mount Mahendra, the best of mountains, 
set there in that place by Agastya himself. Made of gold and with all sorts 
of bright trees, it plunges deep into the great ocean. Every time the moon 
enters a new phase, thousand-eyed Indra comes to this captivating 
mountain, adorned with all kinds of blossoming trees and vines, frequented 
by excellent gods, seers, and yaksas and by apsarases, and thronged with 
multitudes of perfected beings and celestial bards. 

[24—26] “On the far side of that ocean, there is a shining island that no 
man can reach. It is a hundred leagues wide, yet you must explore it all. It is 
there in particular that you should search for Sita with all your heart. For 
this country is the abode of evil Ravana, overlord of the raksasas, whose 
splendor equals thousand-eyed Indra’s, and who must be killed. But in the 
middle of the southern ocean there is a radksasa woman known as Angaraka 
who feeds by catching shadows. 

[27-30] “Beyond, in an ocean a hundred leagues across, is a splendid 
mountain named Puspitaka, frequented by perfected beings and celestial 
bards. Bright as the rays of the moon or the sun, surrounded by the waters 


of the sea, it shines and seems to scrape the sky with its huge peaks. It has 
one peak of gold, frequented by the sun, maker of day, and one of bright 
silver, frequented by the moon, maker of night. The ungrateful, the wicked, 
and the unbelieving cannot see it. You must bow your heads to that 
mountain, monkeys, and then search it thoroughly. 

[31-33] “Fourteen leagues beyond it by an impenetrable path is a 
mountain named Sitryavan, unassailable monkeys. Then beyond even that 
there is a mountain named Vaidyuta, its trees captivating in every season, 
their fruits satisfying every desire. When you have eaten the precious roots 
and fruits and tasted the excellent honey there, monkeys, you must proceed. 

[34-37] “There is the mountain named Kufyara, pleasing to the eye and 
to the mind, where Visvakarman built a palace for Agastya. There, a league 
wide and ten leagues high, is his heavenly golden residence, ornamented 
with every kind of jewel. And there, well protected on all sides, is the city 
of Bhogavati, the unassailable abode of the serpents. Its wide streets are 
guarded by fearsome serpents, sharp fanged and highly venomous. Vasuk1, 
the terrible king of the serpents, lives there. You must go and search that 
city of Bhogavatt. 

[38-43] “And beyond that place is the great, majestic mountain named 
Rsabha, shaped like a bull. It is full of every kind of jewel and on it grows 
heavenly gosirsa, padma, and harisyama sandalwood, bright as fire. But 
though you see that sandalwood, you must under no circumstances touch it; 
for fearsome gandharvas called the Rohitas guard that forest. In it dwell 
five gandharva lords, bright as the sun: Sailiisa, Gramani, Bhiksu, Subhra, 
and Babhru. There at the end of the earth live the unassailable people who 
have won heaven. Beyond that is the dreadful world of deceased ancestors, 
which you must not visit. For that is Yama’s royal capital, enveloped by 
awful darkness. That is as far as you can search or proceed, heroic bulls 
among monkeys: beyond it, there is no path for the living. 

[44-47] “Explore all this and whatever else you may see, and when you 
have learned Vaidehi’s location you must return. Whoever returns before 
the month’s end and says, ‘I have seen Sita!’ will become as wealthy as I 
am and amuse himself happily with pleasures. No one will be dearer to me 
than he. I will love him more than life itself. Even if he has committed 
many offenses, he will become my friend. You have boundless strength and 


prowess and were born in families of great virtue. Now you must begin this 
virtuous undertaking so that you may recover the daughter of the king.” 


Sarga 41 

[1-7] When the glorious king had dispatched to the southern quarter those 
wise and valiant tawny monkeys, who equaled the wind in speed, he 
summoned his father-in-law, Tara’s father, Susena by name, a troop leader 
of terrifying valor. Approaching him, he bowed, his palms cupped in 
reverence, and said: “Please assist Rama in the undertaking that is at hand. 
Accompanied by one hundred thousand swift monkeys, please go to 
Varuna’s western quarter, gentle lord. ‘You leaders of the troops of tawny 
monkey must search Surastra, Bahlika, Sidra, and Abhira, with their lovely 
and thriving countryside and large towns. You must also search the region 
Kuksi with its thick forests of pumndga trees, a region filled with bakula 
and udddlaka trees. And also, search the ketaka thickets, and the auspicious 
westward-flowing rivers with their cool waters, the forests of ascetics, and 
whatever woods and mountains there may be. 

[8-11] “Once you have searched the inaccessible western quarter, 
covered by a network of mountains, you will reach the imperturbable 
western ocean, monkeys, and see its waters full of whales and crocodiles. 
Then your monkeys will amuse themselves in ketaka thickets, in tamdla 
forests, and in coconut groves. You must search for Sita and for Ravana’s 
hiding place there and in the city of Marici, and in charming Jattpura; in 
Avanti, Angalopa, and in the Alaksita forest, and throughout those vast 
kingdoms and cities. 

[12—15] “There, where the Sindhu River meets the ocean, stands a great 
mountain named Hemagiri, with a hundred peaks and gigantic trees. On its 
charming slopes live the giant simha birds, who carry up to their nests 
whales, fish, and elephants. Trumpeting with the sound of storm clouds, the 
proud and satisfied elephants who live on the mountain peak graze all about 
near these simha birds’ nests in this broad and well-watered place. You 
monkeys, who change form at will, must quickly explore the whole of its 
golden peak that is covered with bright trees and touches the sky. 

[16—20] “When you get there, monkeys, you will see in that ocean 
Mount Pariyatra’s golden summit one hundred leagues high and rarely seen. 
Twenty-four times ten million swift and terrible gandharvas dwell there, 


bright as fire, changing their forms at will. They must not be approached 
too closely by you monkeys of fearsome valor, nor are you leaping 
monkeys to take any fruit whatever from that place. For those unassailable 
heroes of terrifying valor are courageous and very strong, and they guard 
the fruits and roots there. You must exert yourselves and hunt for Janaki 
there, for they will not present any danger at all if you just behave like 
ordinary monkeys. 

[21—23] “In one quarter of the ocean stands a mountain named Cakravan, 
where Visvakarman fashioned a discus with a thousand spokes. There 
Visnu, the Supreme Being, killed Paficajana and the danava Hayagriva and 
took that discus and a conch. On the mountain’s bright-colored slopes and 
in its large caves, you must search for Ravana and Vaidehi here, there, and 
everywhere. 

[24—29] “In Varuna’s bottomless abode, the sea, stands a most majestic 
golden-peaked mountain named Varaha, sixty-four leagues high. On it is a 
city of pure gold named Pragjyotisa, in which lives an evil-minded danava 
named Naraka. On the mountain’s bright-colored slopes and in its large 
caves, you must search for Ravana and Vaidehi, here, there, and 
everywhere. Beyond that king of mountains, there is a mountain with ten 
thousand streams and waterfalls. It is entirely of gold, and its caves are 
golden within. All over it elephants, boars, lions, and tigers roar incessantly, 
maddened by their own cries. On it the gods consecrated as their king the 
majestic chastiser of Paka, Indra of the bay steeds. The mountain’s name is 
Meghavan. 

[30-36] “Passing beyond that king of mountains protected by great 
Indra, you will come upon sixty thousand golden mountains the color of the 
newly risen sun, gleaming on every side, resplendent with beautifully 
flowering trees made of pure gold. In their midst stands Mount Meru, the 
king and greatest of mountains, to whom Aditya, the sun god, who had been 
propitiated, long ago granted a boon. And he spoke thus to the king of 
mountains: ‘All who seek refuge on you by day or by night will by my 
grace become golden. Moreover, those gods, gandharvas, and danavas who 
live on you will be colored by your radiance and thus take on the radiance 
of gold.’ The Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, Maruts, and denizens of heaven come 
to Mount Meru, greatest of mountains, at the time of the evening twilight 


and worship Aditya, the sun god. Reverenced by them, the sun goes to the 
western mountain and becomes invisible to all beings. 

[37-39] “Traversing ten thousand leagues in half an hour, the sun, maker 
of day, quickly reaches the western mountain. On its peak is a large and 
heavenly dwelling as bright as the sun, crowded with many palaces and 
resplendent with wonderful trees filled with birds of every kind. It was built 
by Visvakarman and is the abode of great Varuna, who holds a noose in his 
hand. 

[40-43] “Between Meru and the western mountain shines a great and 
majestic palmyra tree made of gold, with ten crowns and a splendid sacred 
mound. Among all the inaccessible lakes and rivers, you must search for 
Ravana and Vaidehi here, there, and everywhere. In the place where the 
great and righteous seer Merusavarni lives, sanctified by his own 
asceticism, the equal of Brahma, radiant as the sun, you must bow your 
heads to the ground and ask him for news about Maithilt. 

[44-47] “Only this much of the world of the living does the sun, bringer 
of light, illuminate when night is over, before moving again to the western 
mountain. And only so far, bulls among monkeys, can monkeys go. For we 
know not what lies beyond, boundless and untouched by the sun. You must 
reach the western mountain, find Vaidehi and the hiding place of Ravana, 
and return within a month. But you must not stay beyond a month, for I 
shall kill anyone who does. My heroic father-in-law will go with you. 

[48-52] “This is my revered elder, my great-armed, mighty father-in- 
law. You who follow my commands must listen to everything he says. 
Although you too are valiant and are authorities concerning every action, 
you must make him your authority and so explore the western quarter. Once 
you have found the wife of the immeasurably powerful king, we will have 
accomplished our purpose by repaying what was done for us. Also keep in 
mind anything else that might be helpful to this enterprise, and then do it in 
accordance with the place, time, and goal.” Then, when the leaping 
monkeys had heard Sugriva’s skillful speech, they all took leave of the lord 
of monkeys and, headed by Susena, set out toward the quarter guarded by 
Varuna. 


Sarga 42 


[1-8] Then, when King Sugriva, bull among monkeys, skilled in counsel, 
had directed his father-in-law to the western quarter, he addressed the 
heroic monkey named Satabali, who was respected by all the monkeys, in 
words that were to his own benefit as well as Rama’s: “Surrounded by a 
hundred thousand forest-dwelling monkeys like yourself, you are to depart 
with your counselors, the sons of Yama Vaivasvata. You are to search for 
Rama’s blameless wife everywhere in the mighty northern quarter whose 
crest ornament is the Himalayas. You are foremost among those who know 
their goals and achieve them. Once this task has been completed, once this 
favor has been done for DaSaratha’s son, we shall be free of our obligation. 
For great Raghava did us a favor. If the favor is returned, our own life will 
have been fruitful. You who desire what is pleasing and beneficial to us 
must accept this view and act in such a way that Janaki is found. For Rama, 
the best of men and a conqueror of enemy cities, is worthy of every being’s 
respect and has entered into friendship with us. 

[9-13] “Using your abundance of intelligence and valor, you must 
thoroughly search the inaccessible forests, rivers, and even inside the 
mountain caverns. When you have searched repeatedly through the 
countries of the Mlecchas, the Pulindas, and the Sirasenas; the Prasthalas, 
the Bharatas, the Kurus, and the Madrakas; the Kambojas, the Yavanas, the 
Sakas, the Arattakas, the Bahlikas, the Rsikas, the Pauravas, and the 
Tankanas; the Cinas, the Paramacinas, the Niharas, and the Daradas; you 
must scour the Himalayas. In thickets of lodhra and padmaka and through 
the forests of devadaru pine, you must search for Ravana and Vaidehi here, 
there, and everywhere. 

[14-17] “When you come to the ashram of Soma, frequented by gods 
and gandharvas, you will have reached the mountain named Kala, with its 
mighty peaks. On its great peaks, in its caverns and caves, you must hunt 
for Rama’s renowned, illustrious wife. Passing beyond that great mountain, 
you should then go to the mountain called Sudarsana, a king of mountains 
filled with gold. In its forest thickets, its caverns and caves, you must search 
for Ravana and Vaideht here, there, and everywhere. 

[18—23] “Beyond it lies an open space, a hundred leagues on every side, 
without mountains, rivers, or trees, devoid of any living thing. But if you 
quickly cross that horrifying wasteland, you will be delighted once you 
reach the white mountain Kailasa. There, bright as a white cloud and 


embellished with gold, stands Kubera’s heavenly dwelling, built by 
Visvakarman. Near it is a vast lotus pond filled with red and blue lotuses, 
crowded with hamsas and karandavas, and frequented by hosts of 
apsarases. And there the majestic giver of wealth, King Kubera Vaisravana, 
king of the yaksas, honored by all beings, enjoys himself along with the 
guhyakas. On Kailasa’s foothills bright as the moon, and in its caves, you 
must search for Ravana and Vaidehi here, there, and everywhere. 

[24—28] “When you reach the Kraufica mountain, you must cautiously 
enter its inaccessible opening, for it 1s said to be very difficult to enter. In it 
live great seers radiant as the sun; they look like gods and are worshiped by 
the gods themselves. After exploring Kraufica’s peak and the abode of 
birds, the wish-fulfilling mountain Manasa, devoid of trees, you must 
search Kraufica’s other caves, ridges, peaks, caverns, and slopes, here, 
there, and everywhere. Great beings such as gods, danavas, and raksasas do 
not go there; still, all of you are to search it, including its ridges, tablelands, 
and foothills. 

[29-30] “Beyond Mount Kraufica lies a mountain called Mainaka, where 
stands the danava Maya’s palace, which he fashioned himself. You must 
search Mainaka, including its ridges, tablelands, and caves, where stand the 
scattered dwellings of the horse-faced women. 

[31-34] “Beyond that region stands an ashram frequented by perfected 
beings. In it are perfected beings, vaikhanasa hermits, and vdlakhilya 
ascetics. You must reverentially greet those ascetics, who are free of sin and 
perfected by austerities, and politely ask them for news of Sita. The 
hermits’ lake is there, covered with golden lotuses and visited by lovely 
hamsas radiant as the newly risen sun. Kubera’s royal mount, the bull 
elephant Sarvabhauma, always roams about that region with his cows. 

[35-38] “Beyond that lake the sky is devoid of moon and sun, maker of 
day, with no hosts of stars, no clouds, and no beginning. And yet that region 
seems radiant with sunbeams, so self-luminous are the godlike beings 
perfected by austerities who repose there. And beyond that region is a river 
named Sailoda, on both of whose banks grow the bamboo canes known as 
kicaka. These carry the perfected beings to and from the opposite shore, 
where lies the country of Uttarakuru, the refuge of those who have 
performed meritorious deeds. 


[39-43] “There are rivers by the thousands there, their waters brimming 
with beds of golden lotuses, rich with leaves sapphire and emerald. The 
ponds there sparkle for they are adorned with clusters of red lotuses made 
of gold, bright as the newly risen sun. The whole region is covered with 
bright clusters of blue lotuses, with leaves like precious jewels, and 
filaments shining like gold. There splendid, glittering mountains, golden 
and bright as fire, full of all kinds of jewels, plunge down to rivers in which 
shoals of round pearls, precious gems, and gold have arisen. 

[44-48] “And there trees crowded with birds, always laden with fruits 
and flowers, whose fragrance, taste, and touch are heavenly, yield every 
desire. Other magnificent trees bring forth garments of every appearance, as 
well as ornaments glittering with pearls and emeralds, for both women and 
men. Still others bear fruits to enjoy in every season. Others yield 
wonderful precious golden beds with bright-colored coverings; while other 
trees produce garlands that delight the heart, and all sorts of costly drinks 
and foods. 

[49-52] “There are splendid women there distinguished by their beauty 
and youth. There gandharvas, kinnaras, perfected beings, great serpents, 
and vidyadharas, all shining like the sun, bringer of light, make love with 
these women. All have performed virtuous deeds, all are intent on sexual 
delight, all live with young women, enjoying pleasures and wealth. Sounds 
of singing and musical instruments and loud laughter are constantly heard 
there, delighting the hearts of all beings. No one is unhappy there, no one 
lacks a beloved. There virtues that delight the heart increase day by day. 

[53-56] “Beyond that country lies the northern ocean. There, in its 
midst, stands the great golden mountain named Somagiri. Those gods who 
have gone to the world of Indra and those who have gone to the 
Brahmaloka behold that king of mountains, for it reaches up to heaven. It is 
the radiance of the mountain that makes this sunless region seem to blaze 
with sunlight: you can recognize it by a splendor like that of the blazing sun 
god Vivasvant. And there dwells the blessed one, the soul of the universe, 
the benevolent elevenfold lord of the gods Brahma, surrounded by 
brahman-seers. 

[57-62] “By no means are you to go north of the Kurus. Even for other 
beings, no path lies beyond. For this mountain called Somagiri cannot be 
reached even by the gods. Once you have seen it, you must turn back at 


once. Only this far, bulls among monkeys, can monkeys go. For we know 
not what lies beyond, boundless and untouched by sun. You are to search 
every place that I have mentioned. But you must also resolve to search any 
others that I failed to mention. Then, by acting to find Videha’s daughter, 
you who are equal to wind or fire will have done a great favor for 
DaSsaratha’s son and an even greater favor for me. And so when you have 
accomplished your mission, leaping monkeys, I will honor you and your 
kinsmen with pleasing objects full of every virtue. With your enemies 
subdued, able to support other beings, you shall roam the earth with your 
beloveds.” 


Sarga 43 

[1-6] And now Sugriva stated his purpose to Hanuman in particular, for he 
was confident that he, the foremost of the tawny monkeys, would achieve it, 
saying: “Neither on earth, nor in the air, nor in the sky, nor in the region of 
the gods, nor in the waters do I foresee any obstacle to your passage, bull 
among tawny monkeys. For you know all worlds, together with their oceans 
and mountains, their asuras, gandharvas, great serpents, men, and gods. 
Great and heroic monkey, your motion, speed, power, and quickness are 
equal to those of your father, the mighty wind god Maruta. Nor is there any 
other being on earth to equal you in strength. Therefore, if Sita is to be 
recovered, you yourself must bring this about. In you alone, Hanuman, are 
strength, intelligence, prowess, regard for time and place, and 
statesmanship, wisest of statesmen.” 

[7-10] Understanding from this that the undertaking had been entrusted 
to Hanuman, and knowing Hanuman himself, Raghava thought: “The lord 
of the tawny monkeys has complete confidence in Hanuman, and Hanuman 
appears even more confident about accomplishing this undertaking. Known 
by his deeds and chosen by his master, even as he sets out his success in 
this undertaking is therefore assured.” And as mighty Rama beheld that 
supremely resolute tawny monkey, his senses and heart filled with joy like 
someone whose object was already achieved. 

[11-14] And so Rama, scorcher of his foes, was delighted and gave him 
a ring engraved with his name as a token of recognition for the princess, 
saying: “Janaka’s daughter will see by this sign that you have come from 
me and she will not be afraid, best of tawny monkeys. Your determination 


and your valor combined with strength, together with Sugriva’s command, 
hero, seem to me to foretell success.” Taking the ring, that best of tawny 
monkeys touched it to his head, his palms cupped in reverence; then bowing 
at Rama’s feet, he departed, that finest of leaping monkeys. 

[15-16] As that heroic monkey, son of Pavana, the wind god, led away 
his great army of tawny monkeys, he looked like the unblemished circle of 
the hare-marked moon adored by hosts of stars in a cloudless sky. Then 
Rama said: “Mighty Hanuman, valiant as a lion, I rely on your might, son 
of Pavana. You must perform feats of great valor so that Janaka’s daughter 
is regained!” 


Sarga 44 
[1-2] Those bulls among tawny monkeys understood their master’s stern 
command and set off, covering the earth like locusts. But Rama remained 
on Mount Prasravana with Laksmana, waiting out the month that had been 
allotted to recovering Sita. 

[3-8] Then the heroic tawny monkey Satabali set off at once for the 
lovely northern quarter guarded by the king of mountains. Vinata, leader of 
the troops of tawny monkeys, proceeded to the eastern quarter. The leaping 
monkey, Pavana’s son and leader of the troops of tawny monkeys, went 
with Tara, Angada, and others to the southern quarter, where Agastya 
journeyed. The lord of leaping monkeys, Susena, tiger among tawny 
monkeys, set out for the terrible western quarter, which Varuna staunchly 
defends. Then, when King Sugriva had duly dispatched his principal 
monkey generals to every quarter, delighted, he rejoiced happily. 
Dispatched in this way by the king, all the leaders of the monkey troops set 
off, each hastening toward his own assigned quarter. 

[9-15] Those leaping monkeys marched forth, running and leaping. 
Those foremost of leaping monkeys, roaring, shouting, and bellowing, cried 
out: “We shall kill Ravana and recover Sita!” And each one boasted: “When 
I find Ravana, I will kill him in battle all by myself.” “When I have crushed 
him, I will immediately bring back Janaka’s daughter, trembling in her 
exhaustion.” “I will bring back Janaki all by myself even if it is from the 
underworld known as Patala. The rest of you can wait here!” “I will scatter 
trees!” “I will split mountains!” “I will split the earth!” “I will roil the 
oceans!” “I will leap a distance of one hundred leagues, without any 


doubt!” “And I will leap more than one hundred leagues!” “On the earth’s 
surface, in the ocean, on mountains or in forests, or even in the depths of 
Patala, nothing can stop me!” Such were the declarations made by those 
monkeys, proud of their strength, as each spoke in turn in the presence of 
the king of the tawny monkeys. 


Sarga 45 

[1-4] When the monkey leaders had gone, Rama spoke to Sugriva, “How 
do you happen to know the whole compass of the earth so well?” Then self- 
possessed Sugriva bowed and said to Rama: “Listen, bull among men, and I 
shall tell you the whole story in detail. When Valin chased Dundubhi—a 
danava in the form of a buffalo—toward Mount Malaya, the buffalo entered 
a cave in Malaya. Valin too entered the mountain at that spot, with the 
intention of killing him. 

[S—8] “Then I was installed obediently at the opening to the cave. But 
Valin did not come out even after a year had passed. And then the hole was 
filled with a torrent of blood. Dismayed to see that, I suffered intense grief 
for my brother. I thought that my elder brother had surely been killed; so I 
placed a rock as big as a mountain over the opening of the hole, thinking 
that if the buffalo were unable to come out he would perish. Then, without 
hope for Valin’s life, I returned to Kiskindha. The great kingdom became 
mine, and so did Tara and Ruma. And there I lived with my friends, free of 
care. 

[9-12] “Then Valin came back after killing that bull among danavas. So 
I restored the kingdom to him, driven by fear because he was my elder. But 
wicked Valin had taken leave of his senses. He wanted to kill me, and in his 
rage he pursued me as I fled with my ministers. As Valin chased me and my 
companions, I saw all sorts of rivers, forests, and cities. Thus, it was that I 
saw the earth—like the surface of a mirror or like the circling of a torch—as 
if it were merely a cow’s hoofprint. 

[13-17] “After I had gone east, I took refuge in the south. Then I went 
on to the west because I was fearful of the danger. But then when I came to 
the north, Hanuman said to me: ‘I now remember, king, how the lord of the 
tawny monkeys, Valin, was earlier cursed by Matanga, who said, “If Valin 
should enter the confines of this ashram, his head will break into a hundred 
pieces.” Staying there will be pleasant and free of worry for us.’ Therefore, 


prince, when Valin reached Mount Rsyamika, he did not enter the ashram 
on account of fear of Matanga. So it was, king, that at that time I beheld 
with my own eyes the entire compass of the earth, before I came to the 
cave.” 


Sarga 46 

[1-5] At the command of the monkey king, the leaders of the monkey 
troops swiftly departed in every direction, as they had been instructed, in 
order to find Vaidehi. They thoroughly searched lakes, rivers, underbrush, 
open ground, cities, mountains, and inaccessible places near rivers. All the 
leaders of the monkey troops scoured the regions Sugriva had mentioned, 
including their mountains, forests, and woods. Intent on finding Sita, all the 
monkeys searched by day and at night gathered in one place. And every day 
in those countries, they made their beds for the night in trees bearing fruit in 
all seasons. 

[6—9] But when a month had passed since that first day, the leaders of the 
monkey troops gave up hope and returned to Mount Prasravana where they 
met with the monkey king. Mighty Vinata and his companions searched the 
east as instructed but returned without finding Sita. Then came the great 
monkey hero Satabali with his army, after searching all of the north. After 
searching the west, Susena and his monkeys reassembled and came to 
Sugriva when the month had passed. 

[10-14] They approached Sugriva, who was seated with Rama on top of 
Mount Prasravana, and, saluting respectfully, they said: “We have searched 
all the lands; all the mountains, forests, cities, and rivers flowing to the seas. 
And we have searched all the caves you mentioned, and all the vast thickets 
densely overspread with creepers. In impenetrable, inaccessible, and 
impassable places, we have stalked and killed immense beasts. And we 
have searched those impenetrable places repeatedly. It is great Hanuman, 
that lord of monkeys of exalted strength and illustrious lineage, who will 
find Maithili; for the son of the wind god has gone in the direction that Sita 
went.” 


Sarga 47 
[1—5] Indeed, the monkey Hanuman had set out with Tara and Angada and 
was advancing toward the region indicated by Sugriva. He journeyed far 
with all those great monkeys and explored the caves and impenetrable 


forests of the Vindhya mountains. Though all those heroic monkeys 
searched everywhere in that quarter—inaccessible places near rivers, 
mountaintops, lakes, large trees, different groves of trees, and foothills thick 
with trees—none of them found the princess of Mithila, Janaka’s daughter 
Sita. Eating various roots and fruits as they searched, the unassailable 
monkeys camped in different places; but that country was vast and was 
difficult to search with its caves and deep forests. 

[6-9] Then all those dauntless leaders of the troops of tawny monkeys 
left that region and entered another region difficult to approach, where the 
trees lacked fruits, flowers, and leaves, where the rivers were without water, 
where roots were very hard to find, where there were no buffalo, deer, 
elephants, tigers, birds, or other forest creatures, and where beautiful, 
fragrant lotus beds, with glossy leaves and full-blown lotuses, were without 
bees. 

[10-12] There was an illustrious great seer named Kandu, ascetic, 
truthful, highly irascible, and unassailable by virtue of his religious 
observances. His son, a ten-year-old boy, perished in that forest. The great 
sage was angered at his ending his life there. Cursed then by that righteous 
sage, the entire vast forest became inhospitable, unapproachable, and 
devoid of wild animals and birds. 

[13-15] Nonetheless, the monkeys carefully searched its forest regions, 
its mountain caves, and the sources of its rivers. But even though the great 
monkeys were eager to please Sugriva, they found neither Janaka’s 
daughter nor her abductor, Ravana. However, as they entered a frightful 
place covered over by vines and thickets, they saw an asura of cruel deeds 
who feared not even the gods. 

[16-19] When the monkeys saw him standing like some terrible 
mountain, when they saw him looking like a mountain, they all girded their 
loins tightly. Then the mighty asura said to all those monkeys, “You are 
lost!” and, raising his clenched fist, he charged them furiously. Thinking, 
“This must be Ravana,” Valin’s son Angada struck him with the palm of his 
hand as he rushed violently upon them. Struck by Valin’s son and vomiting 
blood from his mouth, the asura fell to the ground like a mountain 
overturned. 

[20—22] When he had breathed his last, those monkeys, with an air of 
victory, searched nearly every cave there in that mountain. Then, when they 


had all once more searched the forest, they entered another terrible 
mountain cave nearby. Exhausted after searching again, they came out and 
sat down all together in a lonely place at the foot of a tree, dejected at heart. 


Sarga 48 

[1-4] Now wise Angada, though exhausted, encouraged all the monkeys 
and softly spoke these words to them: “Together we have searched here, 
there, and everywhere throughout the forests, mountains, rivers, the deep 
and inaccessible woods, as well as the mountain caves and caverns; and yet 
we have not seen anywhere Janaka’s daughter Sita, who is like a daughter 
of the gods, nor have we seen the rdksasa who carried her off. Most of our 
time has gone by, and Sugriva is stern in his commands. Therefore, together 
you must search everywhere. 

[S—10] “You must shake off the exhaustion, grief, and sleepiness that has 
arisen and search so that we may find Janaka’s daughter Sita. They say that 
cheerfulness, perseverance, and mental fortitude produce success in an 
undertaking. That is why I am telling you this. This very day, forest 
dwellers, you must search this inaccessible forest. You must banish 
dejection and search this entire forest again. If one takes action, one 
inevitably sees its results. So enough of this yielding to despair! It is not 
right for us to close our eyes. Then, too, Sugriva is a wrathful king and 
inflicts harsh punishment, monkeys. He is always to be feared, as is great 
Rama. If it pleases you, do what I have said, which is to your advantage. 
Otherwise you say what is right for all of us, monkeys.” 

[11-14] When Gandhamadana heard these words of Angada, he 
responded in a voice rendered weary and indistinct through thirst and 
exhaustion: “What Angada says is surely appropriate, beneficial, and 
favorable to you. We should do as he says. We must explore these 
mountains, caves, caverns, desolate forests, and mountain waterfalls yet 
again. You must all search the forest and all the inaccessible parts of the 
mountain as specified by great Sugriva.” 

[15-19] So once more the mighty monkeys got up and roamed over the 
southern region, which was densely covered with the forests of the Vindhya 
range. Those foremost of tawny monkeys climbed a majestic silver 
mountain that had peaks and caverns and was bright as an autumnal cloud; 
and they searched a grove of /odhra trees and groves of saptaparna trees, 


hoping to find Sita. But when those very valiant monkeys reached the 
mountaintop exhausted, they still had not found Vaidehi, Rama’s beloved 
queen. And when those tawny monkeys had examined that mountain and its 
many caves, they descended, looking all about. 

[20-22] By the time they had descended from there to level ground, they 
were nearly unconscious with exhaustion, so they stopped there for a while 
leaning against the roots of a tree. After a while they recovered, and when 
their exhaustion was somewhat dispelled, they were ready once more to 
search the entire southern region. Setting off with Hanuman at their head, 
those bulls among leaping monkeys began ranging over the Vindhyas on all 
sides all over again. 


Sarga 49 
[1-4] Now the monkey Hanuman along with Tara and Angada searched the 
caves and deep forests of the Vindhya ranges, and also the caverns 
inhabited by lions and tigers all around on precipices and by the great 
waterfalls of that king of mountains. While they stayed there, the appointed 
time passed by. For that vast region with its caves and deep forests was hard 
to search. There the wind god’s son searched the whole mountain. 

[5—10] Separated from one another, but not too far, Gaja, Gavaksa, 
Gavaya, Sarabha, Gandhamadana, Mainda, Dvivida, Hanuman, Jambavan, 
Angada the crown prince, and Tara the forest dweller searched the lands of 
the south, which are overspread with mountain chains. At length, overcome 
by hunger and thirst, exhausted, and desperate for water, they saw an 
enormous cavern overgrown with vines and trees. Out of it flew Arauncas, 
hamsas, sarasa cranes, and cakravakas, dripping with water, their bodies 
red with lotus pollen. Reaching that fragrant but impenetrable cavern, those 
bulls among monkeys were amazed and bewildered. Their expectations 
aroused, those splendid, mighty, excellent leaping monkeys approached that 
cavern with delight. 

[11-14] Then Hanuman, son of the wind god Maruta, huge as a 
mountain peak, who was familiar with forests and jungles, addressed all the 
monkeys: “We are all exhausted from searching the lands of the south, 
which are overspread with mountain chains; yet we still have not found 
Maithili. Moreover, hamsas, kraunca birds, sdrasa cranes, and cakravaka 
birds are flying out of this cavern on every side, dripping with water. Then, 


too, lush trees stand at the entrance to the cavern. Surely there must be a 
well with water or else a pool in there.” 

[15-18] Addressed in this fashion, the tawny monkeys all entered the 
cavern, which was shrouded in darkness. Unlit by moon or sun, it looked 
terrifying to them. So, clinging to each other, they walked for a league 
inside that impenetrable cavern all crowded with various trees. Nearly 
unconscious, thirsty, bewildered, and desperate for water, they wandered 
tirelessly through that cavern for some time. At last, despairing of their 
lives, those heroic leaping monkeys, thin, sad faced, and exhausted, saw a 
light. 

[19-24] Soon they reached a pleasant spot, a brightly illuminated forest; 
they saw golden trees bright as a blazing fire: salas and talas, pumndgas, 
kakubhas, vanjulas, dhavas, campakas, nagavrksas, and blossoming 
karnikaras, radiant as the newly risen sun. Around them were sacrificial 
platforms made of emerald, and there were lotus beds the color of sapphires 
and emeralds, crowded with birds. There they saw great golden trees 
splendid as the rising sun surrounding lotus ponds with clear waters, filled 
with turtles and large fish made of pure gold. And they saw gold and silver 
palaces covered with fretworks of pearl, with round windows of pure gold, 
and with floors made of gold and silver set with emeralds. 

[25—29] Everywhere the tawny monkeys saw fine mansions and 
blossoming, fruit-bearing trees looking like coral set with gems. And all 
about were golden bees and honey, and beds and seats glittering with gems 
and gold. And on all sides, they saw costly chariots and piles of vessels 
made of gold, silver, and brass, as well as heaps of aloewood and heavenly 
sandalwood. And they saw pure, edible roots, and fruits, and costly drinks, 
sweet and flavorful; and piles of heavenly, costly garments, and of bright- 
colored wool blankets and black antelope skins. 

[30-32] Searching here and there in that cavern, the splendid, heroic 
monkeys saw a woman not far from them. They saw that she was a fasting 
ascetic clothed in bark garments and a black antelope skin, who seemed to 
blaze with power, and they were greatly frightened. Then Hanuman, huge 
as a mountain, greeted the old woman with his palms cupped in reverence 
and asked her, “Tell us, who are you? And this dwelling, this cavern, these 
jewels—to whom do they belong?” 


Sarga 50 

[1-8] When he had spoken in this fashion, Hanuman once more addressed 
that righteous, illustrious ascetic woman clothed in black antelope skin: 
“Exhausted by hunger and thirst, and thoroughly fatigued in every way, we 
rashly entered this cavern though it was shrouded in darkness. Since we 
were thirsty, we entered this great opening in the earth. But now that we 
have seen miraculous objects of such various kinds as these, we are 
frightened, bewildered, and stupefied. Whose are these golden trees, bright 
as the newly risen sun, and these pure, edible roots and fruits, and these 
palaces of gold and houses of silver, with round windows of pure gold, and 
covered with fretworks of precious stones? Whose power created these 
sacred, sweet-smelling trees of gold, blossoming and bearing fruit, and 
these golden lotuses in clear water? And how is it that golden fish swim 
here along with turtles? Please tell us everything—about yourself and your 
greatness and whose ascetic power this reveals—for we are all ignorant.” 

[9-15] Addressed in this way by Hanuman, the righteous ascetic woman, 
who was devoted to the welfare of all beings, replied: “There was once a 
glorious bull among danavas named Maya, who possessed creative powers. 
It was he who fashioned this entire golden forest by those very creative 
powers. He who fashioned this excellent, heavenly, golden dwelling was 
once the chief architect for the danava leaders. After performing austerities 
in a great forest for thousands of years, he obtained all the wealth of Usanas 
as a boon from Grandfather Brahma. Mighty master of every object of his 
desire, he created all of this and then lived happily in this great forest for 
some time. But the lord Indra, smasher of citadels, took his thunderbolt and 
attacked and killed that bull among ddnavas, who was attached to the 
apsaras Hema. And Brahma bestowed upon Hema this wonderful forest, 
this golden mansion, and the everlasting enjoyment of every object of her 
desire. 

[16-19] “Best of monkeys, I am Svayamprabha, daughter of 
Merusavarni. I watch over this dwelling of Hema’s. My dear friend Hema is 
skillful at dancing and singing. Granted a boon by her, I watch over this fine 
dwelling. But why and for what purpose have you come to such a 
wilderness? And how did you discover this inaccessible forest? After you 
have eaten these edible roots and fruits and drunk some water, you must tell 
me everything.” 


Sarga 51 
[1—2] Then, when all the leaders of the troops of tawny monkeys had rested, 
the ascetic woman, devoted to righteousness, her thoughts focused, said 
these words to them: “Monkeys, if your fatigue has been dispelled by eating 
fruit, and if your story is proper for me to hear, I wish to hear it. Please tell 
it.” 

[3-7] Hearing these words of hers, Hanuman, son of Maruta the wind 
god, began to tell his tale frankly and truthfully: “Majestic Rama Dasarathi, 
king of all the world, the equal of great Indra or Varuna, entered the 
Dandaka forest with his brother Laksmana and his wife, Vaidehi. His wife 
was forcibly abducted from Janasthana by Ravana. It was a friend of that 
king, the heroic monkey named Sugriva, king of the monkey chiefs, who 
dispatched us with these prominent monkeys headed by Angada to the 
southern region, which, guarded by Yama, 1s traversed by Agastya. 

[8—10] “We were all exhorted to hunt together for the raksasa Ravana, 
who changes form at will, and for Sita Vaideht. But when we all had 
searched the entire southern region, we rested at the foot of a tree, starving 
and completely exhausted. All our faces were pale and we were all lost in 
brooding thought. Sunk in an ocean of gloomy thought, we could not reach 
its far shore. 

[11-14] “Then, casting our gaze about, we spied an enormous cavern 
concealed by vines and trees and shrouded in darkness. Out of it flew birds 
—hamsas, ospreys, and sdarasa cranes—dripping with water and with 
droplets of water on their wings. So, I said to the leaping monkeys, ‘Very 
well, let’s go in!’ All of them agreed. In their haste to accomplish their 
master’s purpose, they cried, ‘Let’s go! Let’s go in!’ Then, tightly grasping 
each other’s hands, we clambered down. And so we rashly entered this 
cavern shrouded in darkness. 

[15-17] “This was our purpose. With this object we came. And then all 
of us, emaciated and starving, came upon you. In keeping with the laws of 
hospitality, you gave us, tormented by hunger, roots and fruits, which we 
have eaten. Since you saved us when we were all dying of hunger, you must 
now say what the monkeys can do to repay your kindness.” 

[18—19] When the monkeys had addressed Svayamprabha in this way, 
the all-knowing woman replied to all the leaders of the monkey troops: “I 


am well pleased with all of you swift monkeys, but since I am engaged in 
religious practices, I have no need of anything.” 


Sarga 52 

[1-5] When the ascetic woman of blameless actions had spoken those fine 
words consistent with righteousness, Hanuman made this reply: “We have 
all come to you for refuge, righteous woman. The time allotted to us by 
great Sugriva elapsed while we have been wandering about in this cavern. 
Please deliver us from this dreadful cavern. Since we have transgressed 
Sugriva’s command, we are as good as dead. Please save us, for we are all 
overwhelmed with our terror of Sugriva. We have a great task to 
accomplish, righteous woman, but we cannot accomplish that task if we 
stay here.” 

[6-10] Addressed in this way by Hanuman, the ascetic woman replied: 
“Tt is difficult, I believe, for anyone who has entered here to get out alive. 
However, by the power of asceticism that I have gained through my 
religious penances, I shall rescue all of you monkeys from this cavern. 
Close your eyes, all you bulls among monkeys, for those whose eyes are not 
shut cannot get out.” Delighted and eager to escape, they all quickly closed 
their eyes and covered them with their delicate-fingered hands. And once 
they had covered their faces with their hands, she delivered the great 
monkeys from the cavern in the twinkling of an eye. 

[11-14] Then the righteous ascetic woman reassured all those monkeys 
who had emerged from that difficult place and said this: “This is the 
majestic Vindhya mountain with all its different trees and vines. There is 
Mount Prasravana. And the great body of water over here is the sea. 
Farewell, bulls among monkeys. I must return home.” And with these 
words, Svayamprabha reentered that magnificent cavern. And so the 
monkeys beheld the terrible ocean, abode of Varuna, boundless, wildly 
roaring, agitated by terrible waves. 

[15-18] Now, while they had been searching Maya’s mountain 
stronghold constructed through his creative powers, the month fixed by the 
king as a time limit had elapsed. So as the illustrious monkeys sat on a 
foothill of the Vindhya mountain amid trees in full flower, they fell prey to 
anxiety. Seeing the trees with their tops laden with spring blossoms and 
covered over by hundreds of creepers, they became frightened. Telling one 


another that spring had come, they slumped to the ground because they had 
not achieved their object within the allotted time. 

[19-22] Then Angada, the crown prince, a wise monkey with long, full 
arms and shoulders like a lion’s or a bull’s, said these words: “We have all 
departed on account of the monkey king’s instructions. Don’t you realize, 
tawny monkeys, that a whole month went by while we were in the cavern? 
Since the time allotted by Sugriva himself has passed, it would be proper 
for all of us forest-dwelling monkeys to fast to death. Sugriva, who has 
been appointed as our master, is harsh by nature; because we have offended 
against him, he will not forgive any of us when we go back. 

[23—27] “If we have no news of Sita, he will do a great evil. Therefore, it 
would be fitting for us to abandon our sons, wives, wealth, and homes and 
fast to death this very day, rather than all be put to death by the king on our 
return. Better death right here than shameful execution. It was not Sugriva 
who had me consecrated as crown prince; rather it was the lord of men, 
Rama, untiring in action, who consecrated me. So when the king, who is 
already hostile to me, discovers my transgression, he will resolve upon a 
harsh punishment and have me killed. How would it be for my friends to 
witness such a calamity at my life’s end? No, I shall sit right here fasting to 
death on the holy shore of the sea.” 

[28-30] Now, when all those great monkeys heard what the young crown 
prince said, they replied piteously: “Sugriva is harsh by nature, and 
Raghava is devoted to his beloved. When Sugriva sees that we have come 
back without finding Vaideht, he will undoubtedly have us killed out of a 
desire to please Raghava. Besides, it is not proper for those who have 
offended their master to return to his side.” 

[31-33] When he heard the words of the fearful leaping monkeys, Tara 
said: “Enough of this despondency! If you like, we can all go back into the 
cavern and live there. Constructed through creative powers, it is quite 
inaccessible and has plentiful water, food, drink, and trees. There we will be 
safe even from Indra, smasher of citadels, let alone from Raghava or the 
king of monkeys.” Pleased at hearing words agreeable also to Angada, the 
tawny monkeys all said, “Let us at once and without delay devise some 
means whereby we will not be killed.” 


Sarga 53 


[1-6] Now as Tara, splendid as the lord of stars, was speaking in this way, 
Hanuman thought that Angada had taken over the kingship. Hanuman 
believed that Valin’s son possessed the eight kinds of intelligence, the four 
strengths, and that he possessed the fourteen qualities. He thought too that 
Angada was constantly increasing in power, strength, and prowess, like the 
moon growing in majesty at the start of the bright fortnight. Moreover, 
Hanuman considered him like his father in valor, equal to Brhaspati in 
intelligence, and as attentive to Tara as Indra, smasher of citadels, was to 
Sukra. So Hanuman began to try to win over Aiigada, who, though skilled 
in every sdstra, was weary of his master’s purpose. Resorting to the third of 
the four expedients, he sowed dissension among all those monkeys by a 
wealth of arguments. 

[7-12] Then, when they were all at odds with one another, he 
intimidated Angada with many frightening arguments combining anger and 
expediency, saying: “Son of Tara, you are more capable than your father. 
And like your father, you could take firm control of the vanguard in battle 
and of the kingdom of the monkeys. But monkeys are always fickle 
minded, bull among tawny monkeys. Without their sons and wives, they 
will not tolerate being ordered about by you. I shall speak out clearly to 
you. They will not enter your service. You will not be able to alienate 
Jambavan, Nila, the great monkey Suhotra, me, and all these other monkeys 
from Sugriva with such expedients as conciliation and gifts, nor by 
punishment. They say that when a stronger person has waged war against a 
weaker one, he can then sit quietly, but not the reverse. Therefore, to save 
himself, a weak person should not wage war. 

[13-18] “And this cavern you have been hearing about, which you 
believe is your protection, would be easily split open by Laksmana’s 
arrows. Very little damage was done long ago by Indra when he hurled his 
thunderbolt. But Laksmana would tear it open with his sharp arrows as if it 
were a leaf-cup. And Laksmana has many such iron arrows. No sooner 
would you take up your position, scorcher of your foes, than all the tawny 
monkeys will make up their minds to desert. Remembering their sons and 
wives, constantly anxious, hungry and distressed by the difficult conditions, 
they will turn their backs on you. Deprived of well-wishing friends and 
relations, you will be terrified even by a quivering blade of grass. Nor will 


Laksmana’s swift and terrible arrows, unbearable and deadly, fail to strike 
you once you swerve from your duty. 

[19-21] “But if you go with us and approach Sugriva humbly, he will 
establish you in the kingship through regular succession. Your paternal 
uncle wishes to do right and desires your affection. Firm in his vows, honest 
and true to his promise, he would never want to kill you. And he wishes to 
please your mother: that is the sole purpose of his life. Moreover, he has no 
other offspring. Therefore, Angada, you should go back.” 


Sarga 54 

[1-4] Upon hearing Hanuman’s polite words, which were consistent with 
righteousness and full of reverence for his master, Angada replied: 
“Steadfastness, absolute integrity, benevolence, uprightness, valor, and 
firmness are not to be found in Sugriva. That disgusting person who 
appropriated his living elder brother’s beloved wife and queen, who is by 
rights his mother; the evil person who blocked the mouth of the cave when 
his brother had ordered him to fight—how would he know what is right? 

[S—8] “To whom would he ever be grateful, when he gave his hand in a 
solemn vow of mutual assistance and then forgot all about illustrious 
Raghava once he had received his help? How could there be any 
righteousness in someone who ordered us to search for Sita only out of fear 
of Laksmana, not out of fear of unrighteousness? What decent member of 
his family who wishes to stay alive would ever trust in that wicked, 
forgetful, fickle-minded ingrate? And whether he has good qualities or not, 
once Sugriva has installed his son as king, how could he permit me, his 
enemy’s son, to live? 

[9-15] “Since my plan has been disclosed and I have offended against 
him, how could I, powerless and weak as an orphan, survive once I reach 
Kiskindha? Or, for the sake of the kingship, that deceitful, cruel, and crafty 
Sugriva may inflict on me a secret punishment like imprisonment. It is 
better for me to fast to death than suffer imprisonment and despair. So bid 
me farewell, all you monkeys, and go home. I solemnly vow to you that I 
will not go back to the city. I will sit right here and fast to death. Death 
alone is best for me. But you must respectfully salute my younger father, 
King Sugriva, lord of the monkeys, and wish him well. And you must wish 
my mother Ruma health and good fortune. Also, please console my mother 


Tara. By her very nature that poor woman is fond of her son and full of 
compassion, so when she hears that I have died here, she will surely give up 
her life.” 

[16—20] This much he said, and then respectfully saluting his elders, 
Angada, dispirited and weeping, sat down on sacred darbha grass spread on 
the ground. And as he sat there, the bulls among monkeys were saddened 
and wept, shedding hot tears from their eyes. Blaming Sugriva and praising 
Valin, they all surrounded Angada and resolved to fast to death also. And 
so, once they had learned the intention of Valin’s son, all those bulls among 
leaping monkeys sipped water and, assembling on the northern shore of the 
sea, sat down facing east on sacred darbha grass whose tips pointed to the 
south. Resembling huge mountain peaks, the many leaping monkeys sitting 
there roared so loudly that the mountain with its streams and caverns 
seemed to fill with the thundering of mighty storm clouds. 


Sarga 55 

[1-5] Now the king of the vultures happened to come to that very place on 
the mountain where all those tawny monkeys sat fasting to death. Sampati 
was his name; and he was a long-lived, majestic sky-going bird famous for 
his strength and valor. He was the brother of Jatayus. Emerging from a cave 
in the great Vindhya mountain, he spied the tawny monkeys sitting there, 
and in his delight he spoke these words: “They say that in this world a 
man’s destiny inevitably follows him. Accordingly, this food ordained for 
me has come to me at long last. I shall eat these monkeys one after another 
as they die.” So said the bird upon seeing the leaping monkeys. 

[6—11] But when Angada heard these words of that bird who was greedy 
for food, he was deeply distressed and said to Hanuman: “Look! With Sita 
as a pretext, Yama Vaivasvata, the god of death, has come to this place in 
person to destroy the monkeys. R&ma’s purpose has not been accomplished, 
nor has the king’s command been carried out. And now this unexpected 
calamity has suddenly befallen the tawny monkeys. You have heard in its 
entirety the deed accomplished by the vulture king Jatayus in his desire to 
help Vaidehi. So it is that all creatures, even those born as mere animals, 
will give up their lives as we are doing to help Rama. Worn out for 
Raghava’s sake, we have given up our lives. We have ventured into the 
wilderness but have not found Maithilt. 


[12-15] “That vulture king was fortunate, for he was killed in battle by 
Ravana. Thus, he was free of fear of Sugriva and has attained the highest 
state. Through the deaths of Jatayus and King DaSsaratha, and through the 
abduction of Vaidehi, we tawny monkeys have fallen into this danger. ‘The 
sojourn of Rama and Laksmana in the forest with Sita, the slaying of Valin 
with Raghava’s arrow, the slaughter of all the raksasas through the wrath of 
Rama—all this misfortune was caused by the granting of boons to 
Kaikeyli.” 

[16—21] Now, when the sharp-beaked vulture heard these words that had 
come from Angada’s mouth, he spoke in a loud voice: “Who is this who 
troubles my heart by announcing in such words the death of my brother 
Jatayus, who is dearer to me than life itself? How did there come to be a 
battle in Janasthana between the raksasa and the vulture? It has been a long 
time since I have heard my brother’s name. Bulls among monkeys, I would 
like to hear about the death of my younger brother, who recognized virtue 
and was praiseworthy for his valor. How was it that Dasaratha—whose 
beloved eldest son is Rama, beloved by his elders—was a friend of my 
brother Jatayus, who lived in Janasthana? I cannot fly because my wings 
were burned by the sun’s rays, but I would like to come down from this 
mountain, tamers of your foes.” 


Sarga 56 

[1-3] Now although the leaders of the troops of tawny monkeys heard his 
voice breaking with grief, they still did not trust his words and were afraid 
of what he might do. But as they were fasting to death, those leaping 
monkeys, seeing the vulture, made the terrible decision that he should eat 
them all, saying, “Since we are fasting to death in any case, if he eats us, we 
shall in every respect accomplish our purpose and therefore quickly achieve 
success.” 

[4-8] All those bulls among monkeys concurred in that decision. So 
Angada brought the vulture down from the mountain peak and said to him: 
“Winged one, there was a splendid lord of monkeys, a prince named 
Rksarajas. He was my ancestor; and his two righteous sons, begotten by 
him, were Sugriva and Valin, each as strong as a whole army. King Valin, 
world famous for his deeds, was my father. Majestic Rama Dasarathi, king 
of the whole world and a great chariot-warrior of the Iksvakus, was devoted 


to his father’s commands and followed the path of righteousness. And so he 
entered the Dandaka forest with his brother Laksmana and with his wife, 
Vaidehi. But his wife was forcibly carried off from Janasthana by Ravana. 

[9-14] “Now the king of the vultures, Jatayus by name, who was a friend 
of Rama’s father, saw Sita, the daughter of Videha, being carried away 
through the sky. He deprived Ravana of his chariot and returned Maithili to 
the earth; but since he was old and exhausted, he was slain in battle by 
Ravana. And so the vulture was killed by Ravana, who was more powerful 
than he. He was ritually cremated by Rama and attained the highest state. 
Then Raghava formed an alliance with my paternal uncle, great Sugriva, 
and killed my father. For Sugriva and his ministers were hostile to my 
father. And when Rama had killed Valin, he had Sugriva consecrated. He 
established Sugriva in the kingship as lord of the monkeys; and it was that 
king of the monkey lords who sent us out. 

[15-19] “So, at Rama’s behest, we hunted here, there, and everywhere; 
but we did not find Vaideht any more than one finds the sunlight at night. 
Then, after searching the Dandaka forest most attentively, we entered, in 
our ignorance, a large cavern in the ground. And while we were searching 
that cavern constructed through the creative power of Maya, the month set 
by the king as a time limit for us elapsed. So although we are all obedient to 
the monkey king, we have nonetheless violated his decree. Now we are 
fasting to death out of fear. For if Kakutstha, Sugriva, and Laksmana are 
angry, we will not survive even if we all return.” 


Sarga 57 
[1-7] Addressed in these piteous words by the monkeys who had given up 
hope of living, the tearful vulture replied to the monkeys in a loud voice: “It 
is my younger brother Jatayus, monkeys, whom you have reported as killed 
in battle by mighty Ravana. Because I am old and without wings, I must 
endure hearing even that. For I no longer have the power to avenge my 
brother. Seeking victory, he and I long ago, at the time of Vrtra’s death, 
flew toward the sun, which blazed with its garland of sunbeams. Returning 
through the sky, we both flew with tremendous speed. But when the sun 
reached the meridian, Jatayus began to grow faint. When I saw my brother 
tormented by the sun’s rays and greatly afflicted, I covered him 
affectionately with my wings. But my wings were burned up, and so I fell 


on Mount Vindhya. And since I have been living here, best of monkeys, I 
have had no news of my brother.” 

[8—10] When he was addressed in this fashion by Jatayus’s brother 
Sampati, the very wise crown prince Angada then replied: “If you are 
indeed Jatayus’s brother, and if you heard what I just said, tell us if you 
know this rdksasa’s hiding place. If you know whether shortsighted 
Ravana, king of the rdksasas, lives near or far away, then tell us.” 

[11-14] Then, to the delight of the monkeys, Jatéyus’s glorious elder 
brother spoke words that were becoming to him: “Though I am only a 
vulture, leaping monkeys, whose wings are burned and whose strength is 
gone, through my words alone I shall provide great assistance to Rama. For 
I know all about Varuna’s worlds and Visnu’s three strides, as well as the 
wars of the gods and asuras and the churning of the nectar of immortality. 
Though old age has robbed me of my strength and my vital energies grow 
weak, my first duty is to accomplish this task of Rama’s. 

[15-18] “I myself saw evil Ravana carrying off a beautiful young 
woman adorned with every ornament. Crying, ‘Rama! Rama! Laksmana!’ 
she was throwing off her ornaments and was struggling in his grasp. Her 
fine silk garment was shining against the dark rdksasa like the sun’s light 
on a mountain peak or lightning against a thundercloud. I think it must have 
been Sita, for she was calling out Rama’s name. Now listen as I describe 
that rdksasa’s dwelling. 

[19-23] “This raksasa is called Ravana. He is actually the son of 
Visravas and brother of Kubera, and he inhabits the city of Lanka. That 
lovely city, Lanka, was built by Visvakarman on an island in the ocean a 
full one hundred leagues from here. And it is there that sorrowful Vaideht 
lives clothed in silk, imprisoned in Ravana’s women’s quarters, and closely 
watched by rdksasa women. It is there in Lanka, protected on all sides by 
the sea, that you will find King Janaka’s daughter Maithilt. If you go down 
to the edge of the sea and then cross over to its southern shore a full one 
hundred leagues beyond, you will find Ravana there. 

[24—27] “You must swiftly proceed there at once, leaping monkeys. I 
know by virtue of my special insight that you will surely find Sita and 
return. The first path in the sky is that of the ku/ingas and of others who live 
on grain. The second is that of the crows, who eat ritual offerings, and of 
those who eat the fruit of trees. Kites and Arauncas travel on the third, 


together with ospreys. On the fourth go falcons, while vultures use the fifth. 
The sixth path is that of the strong, vigorous hamsas, young and beautiful. 
The highest is the path of the sons of Vinata, and all of us are descended 
from Vinata’s son, bulls among monkeys. 

[28-34] “We have become flesh-eaters by doing a forbidden deed. 
Standing right here, I can see the daughter of Janaka and Ravana. ‘We also 
have Suparna’s divine power of vision. Therefore, both by our nature and 
by the potency of our food, we can always see farther than one hundred 
leagues, monkeys. For nature has ordained for our sustenance food seen 
from afar, just as the food right beneath their feet has been ordained for the 
sustenance of cocks, who fight with their feet. So you must find some 
means to cross the salt sea. Then, once you have recovered Vaidehi, you 
will have accomplished your object and can go home. But now I want you 
to lead me to the ocean, the abode of Varuna, for I would like to perform the 
water-offering for my great brother who has gone to heaven.” And so the 
mighty monkeys led Sampati, whose wings had been burned off, to a place 
on the shore of the ocean, lord of all rivers. Delighted to have obtained 
news, the monkeys carried the lord of the birds back to his own place. 


Sarga 58 

[1-4] When the bulls among leaping monkeys heard the words sweet as 
nectar that the vulture king had spoken, they repeated them and were 
delighted. Then Jambavan, best of tawny monkeys, sprang up from the 
ground with all the other leaping monkeys and spoke to the king of 
vultures: “Where is Sita? Who saw her? Who carried off Maithilt? Please 
tell us everything and so become the salvation of us forest dwellers. Who is 
it that takes no heed of the power of the arrows of Laksmana, DaSaratha’s 
son, which strike with the force of thunderbolts when he himself looses 
them?” 

[S—9] So to reassure further the joyful tawny monkeys who were eager to 
hear about Sita, kindly Sampati said these words: “Hear now how I learned 
of Vaidehi’s abduction, by whom I was told, and where that large-eyed lady 
is now. Because I was old and my prowess and vital strength were failing, I 
fell long ago on this inaccessible mountain that stretches for many leagues. 
Since I am in such a condition, my son Suparsva, the best of creatures that 
fly, sustains me with food at the proper times. Intense desire is natural for 


gandharvas, intense anger for serpents, intense fear for deer, and intense 
hunger for us birds. 

[10-15] “Now one day after dark when I was suffering from hunger and 
longing for food, my son arrived without any meat. And so, because of my 
old age and my anger, and because I was overcome by hunger and thirst, I 
berated my son, the best of creatures that fly. Distressed because there was 
no food for me, the joy of my life begged my pardon and spoke these words 
truthfully: ‘Seeking meat at the proper time, father, I flew up into the sky 
and hovered, obstructing the pass of Mount Mahendra. There I stayed all 
alone looking down, to cut off the path of those thousands of creatures who 
live in the sea. And there I saw someone as black as a mound of collyrium 
moving along carrying a woman as radiant as a sunrise. 

[16-19] “ ‘Since I wanted something to eat, I made up my mind when I 
saw those two. But in a conciliatory way, he politely asked me to let him 
pass. Nobody anywhere, even among the most despicable, attacks those 
who are conciliatory, so how could someone such as I do so? So he went by 
with such power that he seemed to compress the sky with his speed. Then I 
was approached by beings who could travel through the sky, and they 
greeted me. Those great seers said to me: “You are lucky to be alive, dear 
child! Since he had a woman with him, he has somehow passed you by. 
Undoubtedly, fortune is with you.” 

[20-25] “ ‘That is the way those most glorious perfected beings 
addressed me. And they told me that it was Ravana, king of the raksasas, 
and that he was carrying off Rama Dasarathi’s wife, the daughter of Janaka. 
Her hair was flying loose, and her jewels and silk garment had slipped off. 
She was overcome by intense grief and cried out the names of Rama and 
Laksmana. And that is why I am late.’ Suparsva, foremost of the eloquent, 
said this, as he informed me of this entire matter. Yet even when I heard 
that, I had no thought of taking any heroic action. For without wings, how 
can a bird undertake any action? Still, I can do something through my 
faculties of speech and thought. Listen, and I shall tell you what it is; but it 
depends on your valor. By speech and intellect, I shall help you all, for 
Dasarathi’s purpose is also mine. Of that there can be no doubt. 

[26-29] “You are very resolute, powerful, and wise. When you join 
forces with the monkey king, even the gods cannot assail you. Moreover, 
the sharp, heron-fletched arrows of Rama and Laksmana are sufficient 


either to protect or to destroy even the three worlds. It is no doubt true that 
ten-necked Ravana is splendid and mighty; still, nothing 1s impossible for 
you powerful creatures. So enough of this delay! Let your minds be 
resolute. For wise creatures like you do not hesitate to act.” 


Sarga 59 
[1-3] When the vulture had offered the funerary libation for his brother and 
bathed, the leaders of the troops of tawny monkeys sat all around him on 
that inaccessible mountain. Inspiring their confidence, Sampati spoke again 
joyfully to Angada, who sat near him, surrounded by all those tawny 
monkeys: “Keep still and listen to me attentively, tawny monkeys, and I 
shall tell you truly how I know about Maithill. 

[4—7] “Long ago, when I had been scorched by the sun’s rays and my 
body overcome by its heat, I fell in a forest on a peak of these Vindhya 
mountains. When I regained consciousness after six nights, helpless and 
unsteady, I looked around in all directions but could recognize nothing. But 
as I beheld all the seas, mountains, rivers and lakes, and forests, and 
wooded places, my wits returned. I concluded then that these mountains on 
the shore of the southern sea with their peaks and deep caves, and flocks of 
joyful birds, must be the Vindhyas. 

[8—11] “Now, there was a holy ashram there that even the gods revered. 
In it dwelt a seer of terrifying asceticism, named Nisakara. After Nisakara 
had gone to heaven, I lived here without the seer for eight thousand years, 
knowers of righteousness. Descending slowly and laboriously from a 
rugged peak of the Vindhyas, I regained with difficulty the level ground 
with its sharp darbha grass. For I wished to see that seer, whom Jatayus and 
I had visited many times, and so very painfully I approached him. 

[12—15] “In the vicinity of his ashram, fragrant winds were blowing and 
there were blossoms or fruits on every tree. Approaching that ashram, I 
rested against the roots of a tree and waited, eager to see holy Nisakara. 
Then close by I saw the unassailable seer, blazing with ascetic power, who 
was returning, his face to the north, after his ritual bath. Bears, gaur, tigers, 
lions, elephants, and snakes were approaching him on every side, as living 
creatures surround their benefactor. 

[16-21] “Then, realizing that the seer had reached his ashram, those 
creatures withdrew, as do the whole army and the ministers when the king 


has entered his private quarters. Then the seer, who was delighted to see 
me, reentered his ashram. But after a very short while, he emerged and 
asked my purpose in coming, saying: ‘Dear friend, seeing your lack of 
feathers, I did not recognize you. Your wings have been burned by fire and 
your skin has been scarred. In the past I used to see two vulture brothers, 
the equals of the wind in speed. They were both kings of vultures, who 
could change form at will. You, Sampati, were the elder and Jatayus was 
your younger brother. Taking on human form, you used to clasp my feet. Is 
this some sign of disease in you? Or is this a punishment inflicted by 
someone? How did your wings fall off? I ask you to tell me everything.’ ” 


Sarga 60 

[1-6] “Then I told the sage all about that terrible, impossible deed of 
following the sun that we had so rashly undertaken, saying: ‘Holy one, it is 
hard for me to speak because I am exhausted, and my senses are disturbed 
both by my injuries and by my shame. Jatayus and I, heroes deluded by our 
pride, flew into the sky, vying with each other to test our prowess. On 
Kailasa’s peak, in the presence of sages, we made a wager that we would 
pursue the sun as far as the great western mountain. We both reached the 
sky at the same time and saw, one after the other on the earth below, cities 
that seemed no bigger than chariot wheels. In one place we heard vedic 
recitations and the sound of musical instruments, while in another we saw 
many lovely young women dressed in red, singing. 

[7-11] “ ‘Flying swiftly up to the sky, we reached the path of the sun and 
beheld a forest so far below that it looked like a plot of grass. The earth 
with its multitudes of mountains seemed strewn with mere stones, and the 
land with its rivers seemed overlaid with threads. On the round surface of 
the earth, Himalaya, Vindhya, and vast Mount Meru looked like elephants 
in a pond. But then we began to experience intense sweating, fatigue, and 
fear. And we were seized by confusion, which soon gave way to a dreadful 
stupor. We could no longer tell which way was south, southeast, or west. 
The fixed world seemed to have been destroyed, as if consumed by fire at 
the end of the world. 

[12-16] “ ‘With a great effort we gazed once again at the shining sun, 
bringer of light, which by then looked as large as the earth to us. Then, 
without taking leave of me, Jatayus plummeted toward the ground. When I 


saw him, I swiftly hurled myself from the sky. Shielded by my wings, 
Jatayus was not burned. But through my own carelessness, I was burned 
and fell from the sky, the pathway of the wind. I suspect that Jatayus fell in 
Janasthana, while I, with my wings burned, fell senseless in the Vindhya 
mountains. Bereft of my kingdom, my brother, my wings, and my strength, 
I wish only to die; and so I shall hurl myself from a mountain peak.’ ” 


Sarga 61 

[1-5] “When I had spoken this way to that best of sages, I wept in my great 
desolation. But after meditating for a moment, the holy one said this: ‘You 
shall have new wings again and flight feathers as well, and also new eyes, 
vitality, valor, and strength. For in an ancient legend I heard about a very 
great matter that will come to pass. I know this both by hearing about it and 
by seeing it directly through the power of my asceticism. There will be a 
king, a descendant of the Iksvakus, named DaSaratha, and he will have a 
glorious son named Rama. Truly valiant, he will go to the forest with his 
brother Laksmana, directed to this end by his father. 

[6-10] “ ‘The king of raksasas, a raksasa named Ravana, whom neither 
gods nor danavas can kill, will abduct his wife from Janasthana. Renowned 
and illustrious Maithilt will be so plunged in sorrow that she will not eat, 
even though enticed with desirable foods. Realizing this, Indra Vasava will 
give Vaidehi a most excellent food that resembles nectar and is unavailable 
even to the gods. Receiving this food and recognizing that it is from Indra, 
Maithilt will remove a portion and scatter it on the ground for Rama, 
saying: “This food is for my master Rama, and Laksmana too, whether they 
are alive or have become gods.” 

[11-15] “ ‘Then leaping monkeys will come as messengers from Rama 
to search for his queen; and you, sky-going bird, must tell them where she 
is. So by no means are you to leave here. In any case, where could you go 
in your condition? Just await the proper time and place, and you will 
recover your wings. Of course I could restore your wings right now; but if 
you stay here, you will perform a service that will benefit the whole world. 
This you must surely do for those two princes and for the brahmans, gods, 
sages, and Indra Vasava. I too should like to see the brothers Rama and 
Laksmana. However, I do not wish to remain alive that long, and so I shall 
abandon my body.’ ” 


Sarga 62 

[1-7] “And so, prophesying to me with these and many other words, the 
eloquent seer took leave of me and entered his ashram. But as for me, I 
crept very slowly from the mountain cave and climbed Mount Vindhya to 
wait for you. More than a hundred years have passed since then; but taking 
the sage’s words to heart, I kept waiting for the right time and place. But 
since Nisakara took the final journey and went to heaven, pain has 
tormented me, and I have been filled with many doubts. Still, by 
remembering the sage’s words, I have driven away thoughts of death as 
they arose. And the resolution he gave me to preserve my life dispels my 
sorrow as does a blazing flame the darkness. Since I knew the strength of 
evil Ravana, I scolded my son with these words: ‘Why did you not rescue 
Maithilt?’ For although my son heard her wailing and knew the two princes 
had been robbed of Sita, he did not perform the service called for by my 
affection for Dasaratha.” 

[8—12] And while Sampati was speaking to the monkeys in this way, two 
wings sprouted on him before the very eyes of those forest dwellers. And 
when he saw the rosy-feathered wings that had appeared on his body, he felt 
unequaled joy and said this to the monkeys: “Through the power of the 
great seer Nisakara of boundless intellect, my wings, which were burned by 
the sun’s rays, have grown again. Now I feel the very same prowess, 
strength, and courage that I had in my youth. Make every effort. You will 
find Sita. The fact that I have regained my wings should make you 
confident of success.” 

[13-15] Then, when Sampati, best of creatures that fly, had spoken in 
this way to all those tawny monkeys, he flew up from the mountain peak, a 
bird eager to test his flight. But those tigers among tawny monkeys heard 
his words with joyful hearts, anticipating the success their valor would 
bring. Then those best of leaping monkeys, who moved like the wind and 
who had regained their courage, went to the quarter facing Abhijit, eager to 
search for Janaka’s daughter. 


Sarga 63 
[1-4] Filled with joy at what the king of vultures had told them, the leaping 
monkeys, courageous as lions, leapt up all together and roared. Having 
heard Sampati’s words, the delighted tawny monkeys, eager to see Sita, 


proceeded to the ocean, the abode of Ravana. Approaching it, the monkeys 
of terrifying valor gazed upon the ocean, which seemed like a whole 
reflection of the great world. Together those splendid monkeys reached the 
northern shore of the southern ocean and made camp there. 

[S—8] But those elephants among monkeys lost heart when they saw that 
hair-raising ocean churning with waves. Filled with danava lords who dwelt 
in the underworld Patala, and with all sorts of huge and grotesque creatures 
with enormous bodies and gaping mouths playing in its waters, in one place 
it seemed to sleep, in another it seemed to play, while in still another it was 
covered with billows the size of mountains. Gazing upon the sea, as 
impossible to cross as the sky, all the monkeys suddenly lost heart and said, 
“How can we possibly do it?” 

[9-11] Noticing that the army had become despondent at the sight of the 
ocean, Angada, best of tawny monkeys, comforted the fear-stricken tawny 
monkeys: “There is no need for us to be despondent. Despondency is very 
pernicious. Despondency destroys a person just as an angry snake destroys 
a child. This despondency is overpowering you just when the time for valor 
is at hand. The efforts of a person who is without valor never succeed.” 

[12-14] When the night had passed, Angada and the monkeys met once 
again with the tawny monkey elders and took counsel. Surrounding 
Angada, the monkey army looked as splendid as the host of Maruts 
surrounding Vasava. For who else but Valin’s son, or perhaps Hanuman, 
would be able to steady the monkey army? 

[15—20] First honoring the tawny monkey elders and the army, Angada, 
majestic subduer of his foes, made this sensible speech: “Which powerful 
monkey will now leap across the sea? Which of us will make foe- 
conquering Sugriva true to his promise? Which hero can leap a hundred 
leagues, leaping monkeys? Which one will free all these troop leaders from 
their great fear? Through whose favor shall we return from here happy and 
successful, to see once more our wives, our sons, and our homes? Through 
whose favor may we joyfully approach Rama, mighty Laksmana, and 
mighty Sugriva? If there is among you any tawny monkey capable of 
leaping over the sea, let him now quickly give us the sacred gift of 
protection from danger.” 

[21—23] But when they heard Angada’s words, not one of them said a 
thing. Indeed, the entire army of tawny monkeys was as if transfixed. So 


Angada, best of tawny monkeys, addressed the tawny monkeys once again: 
“You are all outstanding among the mighty and unswerving in your valor. 
You were born in renowned families and have been honored repeatedly. 
Nothing has ever hindered any one of you in your movement. Let each of 
you then, bulls among leaping monkeys, declare how far he can leap.” 


Sarga 64 
[1—2] Then, when those best of monkeys had heard Angada’s words, each 
of them—Gaja, Gavaksa, Gavaya, Sarabha, Gandhamadana, Mainda, 
Dvivida, Susena, and Jambavan—declared in turn his own prowess at 
leaping. 

[3-9] Gaja said, “I can jump ten leagues.” And Gavaksa stated, “I can 
jump twenty leagues.” The monkey Gavaya then told the monkeys, “I can 
leap thirty leagues, leaping monkeys.” The monkey Sarabha then said to the 
monkeys, “I can do forty leagues, without any doubt.” Then valorous 
Gandhamadana told the monkeys, “Without a doubt I can go fifty leagues.” 
And the monkey Mainda said to the monkeys, “I can leap more than sixty 
leagues.” Then glorious Dvivida responded, “There is no doubt that I can 
do seventy leagues.” The best of tawny monkeys Susena declared to those 
outstanding apes, “I might do eighty leagues, bulls among leaping 
monkeys.” 

[10-13] As they were speaking, Jambavan, the eldest among them, 
honored them all and then responded: “Once I too had a certain prowess in 
leaping, but now I have reached the end of my prime. Even so, I cannot 
disregard this matter upon which both the king of the monkeys and Rama 
are so firmly resolved. Know then how well I can leap now after all this 
time: I can leap ninety leagues without any doubt.” 

[14-17] And Jambavan spoke further to all those excellent tawny 
monkeys: “But my prowess in leaping was by no means always so limited. 
Long ago, at great Bali’s sacrifice, I reverently circled eternal Visnu of the 
three strides as he strode onward. Now I am old and my prowess in jumping 
is diminished. But in my youth no other could equal my strength. I suppose 
that at present I can go only so far; and that is not enough to bring about the 
success of this undertaking.” 

[18-19] Now wise Angada honored the great monkey Jambavan and 
then made this noble response: “I can leap the great distance of a hundred 


leagues, but I am not sure whether or not I have the power to return.” 

[20—27] But the best of tawny monkeys, eloquent Jambavan, said to him: 
“Your power to leap is well known, foremost of apes and monkeys. Granted 
you are capable of leaping a hundred or even a thousand leagues and 
returning, still it would not be proper for you to do so. For a commander is 
one who dispatches others, my child, and must on no account be dispatched 
himself. It is for you, best of leaping monkeys, to dispatch all of us. Since 
you have been established in the rank of commander, you are our wife. For 
the commander is the wife of the army, scorcher of your foes: that is the 
way of the world. Therefore, like a wife you must always be protected, my 
child. Moreover, you are the root of this undertaking, tamer of your foes. 
One must carefully guard the root of an undertaking. This is the policy of 
those who understand how things are to be done. If the root is intact, good 
results like flowers and fruits will surely follow. Therefore, you who are 
truly valiant and full of intelligence and valor are the only means for 
accomplishing this undertaking, scorcher of your foes. For you are our 
master and the son of our master, best of monkeys; only by relying on you 
will we be able to achieve our object.” 

[28-32] When wise Jambavan finished speaking, the great monkey 
Angada, son of Valin, made this reply: “But if neither I nor any of these 
other bulls among monkeys is to go, then surely we are again obliged to fast 
to death. For if we do not carry out the orders of the wise lord of tawny 
monkeys, I do not see how we can save our lives even if we return to him. 
For that tawny monkey has the power of clemency and even more so of 
punishment. If we went back without having carried out his instructions, we 
would die. You alone understand this matter. Therefore, please consider it 
carefully so that this undertaking does not fail.” 

[33-35] Answered by Angada, Jambavan, that bull among leaping 
monkeys, then replied to him: “There is nothing lacking for this 
undertaking of yours, hero; and I shall now call upon the one who will 
accomplish it.” Then the foremost of tawny monkeys, Jambavan, called 
upon that foremost of tawny monkeys and best of jumpers, renowned 
Hanuman, who was sitting at ease off by himself. 


Sarga 65 


[1-5] Perceiving that the army of tawny monkeys of hundreds of thousands 
was despondent, Jambavan spoke to Hanuman in this way: “Hero of the 
monkey folk, you are the best of those who know every sdastra. Why do you 
sit quietly by yourself without speaking, Hanuman? For you, Hanuman, are 
equal in valor and strength to Sugriva, the king of the tawny monkeys, and 
even to Rama and Laksmana. You are as celebrated as Garuda, 
Aristanemin’s mighty son, the child of Vinata and the greatest of all birds. 
Many times have I seen that illustrious, swift, and mighty bird snatching 
serpents from the ocean. 

[6-11] “The might of your arms equals that of his wings, and your valor, 
speed, strength, wisdom, power, and courage are not less than his, best of 
tawny monkeys. Do you not realize that you are superior to all beings? The 
celebrated apsaras Pufyjikasthala, foremost among apsarases, was known 
as Anjana, the wife of the tawny monkey Kesarin. Because of a curse, my 
child, she became a monkey who could change her form at will, a daughter 
of the great monkey lord Kufyjara. Although she was a monkey, she could 
change form at will and was lovely in every limb. Once, in the prime of her 
youth, she took human form and, wearing a costly silk garment and 
marvelous garlands and ornaments, she wandered about on the summit of a 
mountain that looked like a rain cloud. 

[12-15] “And as the large-eyed woman stood on the mountaintop, 
Maruta, the wind god, gently pulled away her lovely yellow garment with 
its border of red. Then he saw her firm, rounded thighs, and her full, close- 
set breasts, and her fine and lovely face. When he saw this illustrious 
woman with her large, wide hips, her slender waist, and her beautiful limbs, 
Pavana, the wind god, was infatuated with desire. With his whole body 
overpowered by love and his heart lost to her, Maruta embraced that 
blameless woman with his stout arms. 

[16—-18—1356* ll. 3, 8] “But the virtuous woman became agitated and 
said these words: ‘Who wishes me to break my vow as a faithful wife?’ 
Hearing Afjana’s words, Maruta replied: ‘Woman of lovely hips, I shall not 
harm you. Do not be afraid, lovely one. Illustrious woman, since by 
embracing you I have united with you through my mind, you shall bear a 
wise and mighty son.’ ‘Addressed in this way, great monkey, your mother 
was delighted. And so, in a cave she bore you, great-armed one, a bull 
among monkeys. 


[19-22] “As a child in the great forest you once saw the sun rising, and 
thinking it was a fruit, you wished to seize it. So you leapt up and flew into 
the sky. You leapt upward for three hundred leagues, great monkey, and 
though the sun’s heat tormented you, you were not discouraged. But as you 
flew swiftly through the sky, great monkey, wise Indra was filled with rage 
and hurled his vajra at you. Then, as you fell on a mountain peak, your jaw 
[hanu] was broken on the left side. And that is why you are named 
Hanuman, ‘He of the Powerful Jaw.’ 

[23-28] “Now the bearer of fragrances, the wind god himself, seeing you 
stricken, became enraged at all three worlds. And so the tempestuous wind 
god ceased to blow. With the three worlds disturbed, all the gods became 
agitated, so those lords of the worlds propitiated angry Maruta. Once 
Pavana was propitiated, Brahma gave you the boon that you could not be 
killed by any weapon in battle, dear child of true valor. Gratified at seeing 
you undamaged by the blow of his vajra, thousand-eyed Indra also gave 
you an excellent boon, which is that your death should occur only when you 
wish it, lord. And so, dreadful in your valor, you are both Kesarin’s son, 
since his wife bore you, and the flesh-and-blood son of Maruta, whom you 
equal in power. You are indeed the son of the wind, dear boy, and his equal 
in flight. 

[29-32] “My vitality is gone now. Among us at present you alone are 
full of skill and valor, like a second king of the birds. At the time of Visnu’s 
three strides, dear child, I reverently circled the world with its mountains, 
forests, and woods twenty-one times. At that time, I gathered, at the gods’ 
command, the herbs by means of which the nectar of the immortals was 
produced. I had great strength in those days. But now I am old, bereft of all 
prowess. At the present time you alone among us are possessed of all 
virtues. 

[33-36] “Therefore, rouse yourself, for you are valiant and the greatest 
of jumpers. The whole monkey army is eager to witness your strength. Rise 
up, tiger among tawny monkeys. Leap across the great ocean. For your 
ability to leap, Hanuman, is beyond that of all other beings. All the tawny 
monkeys are despondent, Hanuman. Why do you not heed them? Show 
your prowess, as did mighty Visnu when he took his three strides.” Urged 
on by Jambavan, Pavana’s monkey son, whose speed was well known, then 
delighted the army of tawny monkey heroes by making his body gigantic. 


Sarga 66 
[1-4] As he was being praised, mighty Hanuman began to grow. Growing 
mightier still, he waved his tail in delight. Praised by all those bulls among 
monkeys, he swelled with power, and his appearance was unsurpassed. The 
mighty jaws of Maruta’s flesh-and-blood son now gaped wide like those of 
a huge lion in his mountain lair. And as wise Hanuman’s jaws gaped open, 
his mouth, blazing like the sun, shone like a smokeless fire, the purifier. 

[S—10] Rising up from the midst of the tawny monkeys, his fur bristling, 
Hanuman respectfully greeted the elder tawny monkeys and said this: 
“Anila, god of the wind, companion of fire the oblation eater, is boundless 
and strong. Ranging the sky, he shatters the mountaintops. And I am the 
flesh-and-blood son of that impetuous, swift-moving god of the wind, great 
Maruta. No one is my equal in leaping. For without pause I can go a 
thousand times around vast Mount Meru, which seems to touch the sky. 
Driving the ocean before me with the force of my arms, I could flood the 
world together with its mountains, rivers, and lakes. The force of my thighs 
and shanks will heave up the ocean, abode of Varuna, and stun its mighty 
sea creatures. 

[11-14] “I can fly circles around the snake-eater Vainateya a thousand 
times as he flies through the sky attended by other birds. Even after the 
blazing sun garlanded with rays has set forth from the sunrise mountain, I 
can overtake it before it sets. And then, through my great and awesome 
speed, I can return without once touching the ground, bulls among leaping 
monkeys. I can outstrip all those who range the skies. I shall stir up the 
ocean! I shall tear up the earth! 

[15-19] “In leaping I shall make the mountains tremble, leaping 
monkeys. And as I leap the sea, the force of my thighs will carry along the 
blossoms of vines, shrubs, and trees on every side. They will follow behind 
me as I leap through the sky this very day, so that my path will resemble the 
Milky Way in the heavens. All beings will see me leaping upward, flying 
through the terrible sky and alighting, monkeys. You shall see me, leaping 
monkeys, blocking out the sky like great Mount Meru, as I move along 
swallowing up the heavens as it were. I shall scatter the clouds. I shall make 
the mountains tremble. Intent upon my leaping, I shall stir up the sea. 

[20-25] “Only King Suparna Vainateya, Maruta the wind god, and I 
have such power. Indeed, except for those two, I know of no being who 


could keep pace with me as I leap. In no more than the time it takes to wink 
an eye, I shall rush swiftly across the self-supporting sky, like lightning 
streaking from a cloud. As I leap over the sea, my form will seem to be that 
of Visnu when he made his three strides. I know in my mind that I shall find 
Vaidehi, and the workings of my heart tell me the same. So rejoice, leaping 
monkeys! Equal to Maruta in force and to Garuda in speed, I feel certain 
that I can jump ten thousand leagues. Attacking Indra Vasava armed with 
his vajra or self-existent Brahma, I could take the nectar of the immortals 
from their hands by force and bring it here. And I feel certain that I could 
even uproot Lanka and carry it away.” 

[26-30] That finest of tawny monkeys, Jambavan, was thoroughly 
delighted and said to that excellent and immeasurably powerful monkey 
who was boasting in this fashion: “Heroic son of Kesarin! Swift offspring 
of Maruta! Dear child! You have dispelled the profound grief of your 
kinsmen. The assembled monkey chiefs, desiring your welfare, will 
earnestly offer blessings for the success of your undertaking. By the grace 
of the seers, by the grace of your superiors, and with the consent of the 
monkey elders, you must leap over the ocean! And we shall stand on one 
foot until your return, for the lives of all the forest-dwelling monkeys 
depend on you.” 

[31-33] Then Hanuman, that tiger among tawny monkeys, said to those 
forest-dwelling monkeys: “The earth will not withstand the force of my 
leap. But these peaks of Mount Mahendra, which abounds in masses of 
stone, are big and firm. They will withstand the crushing force of my feet 
as I leap the hundred leagues from here, you foremost of those who leap.” 

[34-37] After that, tawny monkey, crusher of his foes, the son and very 
image of Maruta the wind god, climbed Mahendra, greatest of mountains. It 
was covered with all sorts of trees and full of creepers and flowers, while its 
trees were always laden with fruits and flowers, and its grassy plots 
frequented by deer. Full of waterfalls, it was inhabited by lions and tigers, 
frequented by rutting elephants, and noisy with its flocks of mating birds. 
His valor equal to great Indra’s, that mighty and excellent tawny monkey 
strode across high-peaked, lofty Mount Mahendra. 

[38-44] Crushed under the feet of that great monkey, the great mountain 
cried out like a mighty rutting elephant attacked by a lion. Out poured 
gushing streams of water, while masses of rock were scattered about, great 


trees were violently shaken, and the deer and elephants were terrified. Hosts 
of vidyadharas, gandharva couples intent on drinking and sexual pleasure, 
and birds flying up—all abandoned the ridges of the great mountain. Its 
mighty serpents hid themselves and its rocks and stony peaks clashed 
together. Then, with those hissing serpents half-protruding from it, the 
mountain looked as if it were decked with flagpoles. Abandoned by seers 
fleeing in terror, the rocky mountain sank lower, like the heart of a traveler 
left behind in some vast wilderness by his caravan. Endowed with speed, 
intent on speed, that heroic slayer of enemy heroes, that wise and noble 
tawny monkey, composed his mind and turned his thoughts to Lanka. 
The end of the Kiskindhakanda. 


a Emendation: see PVR 4: 204—5. 
b Emendation: see PVR 4: 283. 
c Emendation: see PVR 4: 308. 
d Emendation: see PVR 4: 338. 
e Emendation: see PVR 4: 342. 
f Emendation: see PVR 4: 359. 
g Emendation: see PVR 4: 364. 


Chapter 5 
The Sundarakanda 


Sarga 1 
[1-3] Then Hanuman, tormentor of his foes, resolved to take to the sky, the 
path traveled by celestial bards, in order to find the place where Sita, who 
had been carried off by Ravana, was. And so, frightening birds, shattering 
trees with his chest, and slaughtering many animals, the wise, resolute, and 
powerful monkey, like a great lion, freely ranged the lapis-hued meadows, 
which resembled bodies of water. 

[4-6] The slope of that great mountain was ornamented with various 
minerals in their natural state: dark blue, pale pink, lotus-red, marbled black 
and white. It was constantly thronged with yaksas, kinnaras, gandharvas, 
and great serpents. Resembling gods, accompanied by their attendants, they 
could take on any form at will. Standing there, on that slope filled with the 
foremost among the great serpents, the monkey himself looked like a great 
serpent in a lake. 

[7-10] Cupping his hands in reverence to the sun god Sirya, great Indra, 
the wind god Pavana, self-existent Brahma, and all the great beings, he 
resolved to set forth. Facing east, the clever monkey cupped his hands in 
reverence to his father Pavana and then began to increase his size in 
preparation for his journey to the south. Thus, the monkey formed his 
resolution to jump. In order to fulfill Rama’s purpose, he increased in size 
—tright before the eyes of the monkey leaders—as does the sea on the days 
of spring tide. In his desire to leap the ocean, he assumed a body of 
immeasurable size and pressed down on the mountain with his fore and 
hind feet. 

[11-14] Pressed down by the monkey, the lovely mountain trembled for 
a moment so that it shook all the blossoms from its flowering trees. 
Covered all over with the fragrant mass of blossoms shaken loose from the 
trees, the mountain looked as if made of flowers. Pressed down by the 
enormously powerful monkey, the mountain poured forth its waters, as a 


rutting elephant pours forth fluid from its temples. Pressed down by the 
powerful monkey, Mount Mahendra exposed veins of gold, antimony, and 
silver and let loose huge boulders tinged with red arsenic. 

[15-19] The creatures dwelling in the mountain caves cried out in 
unnatural voices, as they were crushed by the mountain as it was pressed in 
upon them on every side. The din of these great creatures caused by the 
crushing of the mountain filled the parklands and the earth in all directions. 
The serpents, their broad hoods clearly showing their characteristic 
markings, struck at the rocks with their fangs, spewing forth dreadful fire, 
the purifier. Bitten by those enraged and venomous creatures, the huge 
boulders glowed—shining with purifying fire—and shattered into 
thousands of pieces. Even the dense thickets of medicinal herbs that grew 
on the mountain and could counteract poisons were unable to neutralize the 
venom of the serpent lords. 

[20-24] The ascetics, thinking, “The mountain is being destroyed by 
some great creatures!” were terrified, while the vidyadharas flew up from 
there with their womenfolk. They left their golden seats and goblets in their 
drinking hall, along with their precious bowls and golden pitchers. They 
abandoned their soft delicacies and their various meats and other assorted 
delicacies. They left their bull-hide shields and golden-hilted swords. Still 
wearing their necklaces, their bodies decked with red garlands and 
ointments, intoxicated, their lotus eyes still red, they rose into the sky. 
Wearing their pearl necklaces, their anklets, their armlets, and their 
bracelets, the vidyadhara women, amazed and smiling, hovered in the sky 
with their lovers. 

[25-28] Demonstrating their supernatural power, those great seers, the 
vidyadharas, hovered together in the sky gazing at the mountain. Then they 
heard these words uttered by the contemplative seers, celestial bards, and 
perfected beings who hovered there in the clear sky: “This creature who 
looks like a mountain is Hanuman, the swift son of Maruta, the wind god. 
He wishes to cross the ocean, the abode of sea monsters. He wishes to reach 
the farther shore of the sea, so hard to reach; for he desires to accomplish 
this all-but-impossible feat for the sake of Rama and the monkeys.” 

[29-33] Resembling a mountain, the monkey, his fur bristling, shook 
himself. He let out a mighty roar like a great thundercloud. As he made 
ready to leap, he wildly tossed about him his rounded, tapering tail, all 


covered with fur, as Garuda, the king of birds, might toss a serpent. And 
indeed, trailing behind the swift monkey, his coiled tail resembled some 
great serpent being carried off by Garuda. Then, firmly planting his 
forefeet, which were like great iron bars, the monkey crouched down on his 
haunches and drew in his hind feet. Drawing in his arms and neck, the 
mighty, majestic creature summoned all his energy, might, and fortitude. 

[3440] He raised his eyes to look far along his path, gazed into the sky, 
and held his breath. Placing his hind feet firmly on the ground, mighty 
Hanuman, that elephant among monkeys, laid back his ears. As he prepared 
to leap, that best of monkeys spoke these words to the other monkeys: “Just 
as an arrow loosed by Raghava would fly as swiftly as the wind, so shall I 
fly to Lanka, the citadel guarded by Ravana. And if I do not find the 
daughter of Janaka there in Lanka, then with that same speed I shall 
proceed to the realm of the gods. But if, despite these efforts, I do not find 
Sita there in the highest heaven, I will bind Ravana, the king of the 
rdksasas, and bring him here. One way or the other, I will accomplish my 
mission and return with Sita, or else I will uproot Lanka—Ravana and all— 
and bring it back.” When swift Hanuman, the foremost of monkeys, had 
spoken in this fashion to the monkeys, he leapt swiftly into the air without 
further deliberation. 

[41-45] So great was his speed that as he leapt up, the trees that grew on 
the mountain flew up after him on every side with all their branches pressed 
flat. And so he leapt up into the clear sky, and the force of his haunches was 
such that he carried with him the trees full of blossoms and love-maddened 
koyastibhakas. Drawn powerfully upward by the force of his haunches, the 
trees followed the monkey for a while, just as people follow a kinsman who 
is setting out on a long journey. Drawn up violently by the force of his 
haunches, the sd/as and other great trees followed in Hanuman’s wake, as 
soldiers follow their king. And thus, closely followed by so many trees in 
full blossom, the monkey Hanuman, who resembled a mountain, was a 
wonder to behold. 

[46-49] The largest of the trees soon plunged into the salt sea, just as the 
mountains themselves had once plunged into the ocean, the abode of 
Varuna, in their fear of great Indra. Covered with all the different blossoms, 
buds, and sprouts, the monkey, who resembled a cloud, now looked like a 
mountain covered with fireflies. Torn loose by his rushing speed, the trees 


shed their blossoms and fell back into the water, like friends turning back. 
But because they were so light, the various blossoms of the trees in all their 
different colors, driven onward by the wind stirred up by that monkey, 
drifted into the sea. 

[50-53] With multicolored streams of blossoms clinging to him as he 
rose, the monkey resembled a cloud adorned with streaks of lightning. 
Strewn with the blossoms shaken loose by his speed, the ocean resembled 
the sky scattered with lovely, newly risen stars. His outstretched arms 
reaching into the sky looked like two great five-headed serpents rearing up 
from a mountain peak. The great monkey seemed to be devouring the vast 
ocean with its fretwork of waves. Indeed, he seemed intent on devouring 
the sky itself. 

[54-59] And as Hanuman followed the path of the wind, his eyes, 
shining like lightning, blazed brightly like twin fires on a mountain. The 
great, round, yellow eyes of that foremost of yellow-eyed monkeys blazed 
like the moon and the sun. His face, tinted with the redness of his nose, 
looked red itself, just like the circle of the sun when it is tinged by twilight. 
And as the son of the wind leapt upward into the sky, his tail, flung out 
behind him, resembled the upraised flagstaff of Sakra. With his white fangs 
and encircling tail, the great and wise son of the wind god looked like the 
haloed sun, bringer of light. His reddish rump lent the great monkey the 
appearance of a mountain on which a vast area of red ore has been exposed 
through excavation. 

[60-63] And as that lion among monkeys sped across the ocean, the 
wind rushing through his armpits roared like a thundercloud. That elephant 
among monkeys resembled a comet hurtling down from the highest reaches 
of heaven with its tail flung out behind. The huge monkey looked like the 
sun coursing through the sky or like an immense elephant with a girth 
bound around it. With his body up above and his shadow lying far below 
him, the monkey looked like a sailing ship at sea driven before the wind. 

[64-69] As the great monkey sped onward, the portion of the sea 
beneath him seemed to be in the grip of a convulsive seizure due to the 
speed of his body. Shattering the ocean’s mountainous fretwork of waves 
with his chest, the great monkey sped onward with tremendous speed. The 
powerful blast of wind stirred up by the monkey, together with the stiff 
breeze issuing from the clouds, violently agitated the sea so that it made a 


terrible roar. He continued on his way with tremendous speed, ploughing 
through the great fretwork of waves in the salty ocean, as if to count them. 
Seeing that tiger among monkeys flying through the sky, the sea serpents 
took him for Suparna. The shadow of that lion among monkeys—ten 
leagues in breadth and thirty in length—looked very beautiful as it lay on 
the waters. 

[70-74] Following along after the son of Vayu the wind god, his shadow, 
spread across the salty sea, was as lovely as a streak of dark clouds against 
a bright sky. Seeing the leaping monkey flying so swiftly, the gods, 
gandharvas, and danavas released a shower of blossoms. Surya, the sun 
god, did not burn that lord of the monkeys, and Vayu served him as well in 
order to accomplish his purpose, Rama’s quest. The seers praised him as he 
flew through the sky, and the gods and gandharvas sang, praising that 
mighty monkey. Seeing the great monkey suddenly free from weariness in 
the sky, the great serpents, yaksas, raksasas, gods, and birds praised him. 

[75-78] As Hanuman, that tiger among leaping monkeys, was flying 
along, Sagara, the god of the ocean, wishing to honor the House of Iksvaku, 
thought: “If I do not assist Hanuman, the lord of monkeys, I shall surely be 
censured by all beings gifted with speech. For I was nourished by the 
Iksvaku lord Sagara, and this monkey is a counselor to the Iksvakus and so 
must not be allowed to fail. Therefore, I must arrange for this monkey to 
rest. Then, once he has rested on me, he will be able to leap the rest of the 
way easily.” 

[79-82] When he had thus formed this excellent resolution, Samudra, the 
god of the ocean, addressed Mainaka, the great golden-peaked mountain 
who lay hidden beneath his waters: “The king of the gods set you here, best 
of mountains, to be a barrier against the hordes of asuras who inhabit the 
underworld known as Patala. And so you remain, barring the door against 
them whose might is well known and who are liable to rise up once more 
from the measureless realm of Patala. You have the power, O mountain, to 
extend yourself upward, downward, and on any side. Therefore, best of 
mountains, I beg of you, ‘Rise up!’ 

[83-88] “For the mighty tiger among monkeys, Hanuman of awesome 
deeds, leaping into the sky for the sake of R&ama’s quest, is passing over 
you. And I, of course, must render assistance to him, for he is acting in 
obedience to the House of Iksvaku; and the Iksvakus, whom I must 


venerate, should be still more venerable to you. Please render me 
assistance. We must not neglect our duty, for the failure to perform one’s 
obligations rouses the wrath of the virtuous. Rise up above the water so that 
the monkey may rest on you. For he, foremost among leaping monkeys, 1s 
our guest and we must honor him. Once Hanuman has rested upon you, 
mountain of the great golden peak and resort of gods and gandharvas, he 
can complete his journey. Taking into consideration Kakutstha’s 
tenderheartedness, his separation from Sita, the princess of Mithila, and the 
weariness of this lord of the leaping monkeys, please rise up.” 

[89-93] When golden-peaked Mainaka had heard the words of Sagara of 
the salty waters, he immediately rose—all covered with great trees and 
clinging vines—above the waters. Like the bright-rayed sun, maker of day, 
breaking through the clouds, he parted the waters of the sea and grew to a 
great height. By virtue of the mountain’s lofty golden peaks inhabited by 
kinnaras and great serpents—those golden peaks that painted the heavens 
like a sunrise—the steel blue sky was suffused with a golden light. Its 
golden peaks shining with an inner radiance, that foremost of mountains 
resembled a hundred suns. 

[94-96] Hanuman was certain that the mountain, risen up so suddenly to 
stand before him in the midst of the salt waters, was an obstacle. So with his 
chest the great and very swift monkey pushed aside that mountain, which 
had risen so high, as the wind might push a cloud. Pushed aside by the 
monkey, the foremost of mountains, perceiving the monkey’s speed, was 
delighted and rejoiced. 

[97-100] Seeing the heroic monkey in the sky, the mountain, who had 
risen into the sky himself, was delighted. His heart filled with joy, he took 
on a human form, and standing on his own summit, he addressed him: “This 
is an all-but-impossible feat you have accomplished, best of monkeys. 
Alight then on my peaks and rest comfortably. Sagara, the repository of 
waters, was nourished by the sons of the House of Raghava. Therefore, 
since you are engaged on Rama’s behalf, he is doing you honor in return. 
‘One good turn deserves another,’ such is the time-honored custom. Since 
he now wishes to return that favor, he is worthy of your respect. 

[101-104] “Out of respect for you and for your benefit, Sagara enjoined 
me with the following words: ‘This monkey has undertaken a leap of one 
hundred leagues. Let him rest on your slopes and then traverse the rest of 


the way.’ So stay, tiger among tawny monkeys. Once you have rested upon 
me, you may depart. Here there is an abundance of sweet and fragrant 
bulbs, roots, and fruits. When you have tasted of it, best of tawny monkeys, 
and are rested, you may depart. Moreover, foremost of monkeys, I have a 
manifold relationship with you, one that is well known throughout the three 
worlds. Son of Maruta! Elephant among monkeys! I look upon you as the 
very foremost among those leaping monkeys who leap with such 
tremendous speed. 

[105-107] “It 1s said that a guest, even an ordinary one, is deserving of 
reverence from a wise man who seeks to understand what is proper; how 
much more so is one such as you. For you, elephant among monkeys, are 
the son of great Maruta, foremost of the gods, and are his equal in speed. 
When you—who know what is right—are honored, then the wind god 
Maruta is honored as well. Therefore, I must honor you. Hear now the 
reason for this: 

[108-112] “Long ago, my son, during the Krta Yuga, the mountains had 
wings and they used to fly in all directions with the speed of Garuda or the 
wind. And thus, when they would move about, the hosts of gods, along with 
the seers, and indeed all creatures, would be terrified with the fear of their 
falling. Thereupon thousand-eyed Indra of the hundred sacrifices was 
furious with the mountains, and with his vajra he hacked off their wings by 
the thousands wherever he found them. But when the king of the gods 
confronted me in his rage, his vajra raised, I was suddenly swept aside by 
the great wind god. And then, best of leaping monkeys, I was hurled down 
intact into these salty waters, my wings preserved, saved by your father. 

[113-115] “Therefore, I greatly honor you; for you are deserving of my 
honor, Maruta. This then is my manifold relationship to you, foremost of 
monkeys. Since this obligation on the part of Sagara and myself has arisen 
in this fashion, great monkey, please incline your heart favorably toward us 
and favor us. Cast off your weariness, best of monkeys, accept my 
reverence, and acknowledge my affection. I am favored by your sight 
alone.” 

[116-120] When the best of monkeys had been addressed in this fashion, 
he said this to the great mountain: “I am already favored; for you have 
offered full hospitality. Please do not be angry. But the time allotted for my 
mission 1s fleeting, and the day is getting on as well. Moreover, I gave my 


solemn word, so I must not stop here in the middle.” When he had spoken 
in this fashion, that mighty bull among tawny monkeys touched the 
mountain with his hand, rose into the sky, and proceeded on his way, 
smiling gently. Thus, the son of the wind, having been shown great honor 
by both the mountain and the mighty ocean and having been worshiped 
with appropriate blessings, left them both behind. Leaping high, he regained 
his father’s path and flew on through the clear sky. 

[121—129] Rising once more to a great height and looking down on that 
mountain, the son of the wind went on his way through the clear and 
unsupported sky. When the gods, perfected beings, and great seers had 
witnessed this second supremely difficult feat, they all praised him. All the 
gods who were present, including the thousand-eyed Indra Vasava, were 
delighted with that deed of the golden mountain with its lovely peaks. And 
so wise Indra, the lord of Saci, his voice trembling with delight, spoke these 
words directly to that foremost of mountains with its lovely peaks: “I am 
very pleased with you, golden-peaked lord of mountains, and I grant you 
immunity. You may rest at ease. You rendered very great assistance to bold 
and fearless Hanuman as he leapt a hundred leagues despite the danger. 
This tawny monkey is on his way as an emissary of Rama Dasarathi. 
Because you have greeted him as hospitably as you could, I am very 
pleased with you.” Seeing that the lord of the gods, Indra of the hundred 
sacrifices, was pleased, that foremost of mountains experienced the greatest 
delight. When the mountain had received this boon, he resumed his place 
beneath the waves, but as for Hanuman, after a moment he resumed his leap 
over the ocean. 

[130-133] Then the gods, along with the gandharvas, perfected beings, 
and great seers, addressed Surasa, mother of great serpents, who was as 
resplendent as the sun: “The wind god’s majestic son, whose name is 
Hanuman, is leaping over the ocean. Take on the dreadful form of a female 
raksasa, huge as a mountain, with yellow eyes and a pair of jaws fanged 
and gaping so that they touch the very heavens. Please create a momentary 
obstacle for him. For we wish to ascertain his strength and his valor. Will he 
foil you through some stratagem, or will he give way to despair?” 

[134-136] When the goddess Surasa had been addressed in this fashion 
and treated with such respect by the gods, she stood in the middle of the 
ocean taking on the deformed and hideous appearance of a raksasa, 


terrifying to all. Obstructing Hanuman as he flew onward, she said this: 
“The gods have ordained you as my food, bull among monkeys. I am going 
to eat you, so get into my mouth.” 

[137-143] When that majestic bull among monkeys had been addressed 
by Surasa, he cupped his hands in reverence, and with his delight evident in 
his face, he said these words: “Rama, who is known as Dasarathi, entered 
the Dandaka forest with his brother Laksmana and his wife, Vaideht. The 
rdaksasas have an implacable hatred for him, and while he was engaged in 
some activity, Ravana abducted his illustrious wife, Sita. At Rama’s 
command, I am on my way to her side as his messenger. You should render 
assistance to Rama, for you dwell in his kingdom. Or else once I have seen 
Maithill and tireless Rama, I shall return and enter your mouth, I promise 
you this faithfully.” When Surasa, who could change her form at will, had 
been addressed in this fashion by Hanuman, she replied: “No one can 
escape me, for such is my boon.” Addressed in this fashion by Surasa, the 
bull among monkeys became angry and replied: “Then make your mouth 
big enough to hold me.” 

[144-149] Having spoken these words in anger to Surasa, Hanuman 
grew to a height of ten leagues. When Surasa saw that he had expanded 
himself to a distance of ten leagues so that he resembled a huge cloud, she 
opened her mouth to a distance of twenty leagues. Hanuman, however, in a 
rage, extended himself to thirty leagues, and Surasa then stretched her jaws 
to a height of forty leagues. Then heroic Hanuman extended himself to the 
height of fifty leagues, and Surasa stretched her jaws to a distance of sixty 
leagues. Heroic Hanuman grew to a height of seventy leagues, while Surasa 
stretched her jaws to a distance of eighty. Then Hanuman, who now 
resembled a mountain, extended himself to the height of ninety leagues, and 
Surasa stretched her jaws to a distance of one hundred leagues. 

[150-156] But when Maruti, the wise son of the wind god, who 
resembled a great cloud, saw the gaping mouth of Surasa with its long 
tongue, looking like hell itself, he contracted his body so that in an instant 
he was no bigger than a thumb. He entered her mouth and flew out. Then 
that swift and majestic monkey hovered in the sky and said these words: 
“Homage to you, Daksayani. I have entered your mouth. Now I shall go to 
where Vaidehi is. May your words ever prove true.” When the goddess 
Surasa saw that the monkey had escaped from her jaws, as the moon is 


freed from Rahu, demon of the eclipse, she resumed her true form and 
addressed him: “Go as you please, gentle friend, in order to accomplish 
your quest. Best among tawny monkeys, you must reunite Vaidehi with 
great Raghava.” When they witnessed this third, nearly impossible feat on 
the part of Hanuman, all the great beings praised that tawny monkey, 
crying, “Wonderful! Wonderful!” 

[157-165] But he who was as swift as Garuda, lord of the birds, flew up 
into the sky and proceeded on his way, moving across the unconquerable 
ocean, the abode of the sea god Varuna. Drawn along in the monkey’s 
wake, great clouds shone brightly in the auspicious path of the sun and 
moon. That path was sprinkled by showers of rain and thronged with birds, 
frequented by masters of the Kaisika style of dramatic performance, and 
made lovely by rainbows. It was adorned with shining chariots that flew 
along, drawn by lions, elephants, tigers, birds, and serpents. It was 
beautified by purifying fires as intense in force as the vajra or the 
thunderbolt, and it was graced by great persons who had won the heavenly 
world through the performance of meritorious deeds. It was frequently 
marked by the blazing sacrificial fire that bore offerings; and it was adorned 
with planets, constellations, the moon, the sun, and all the hosts of stars. It 
was thronged with hosts of great seers, gandharvas, great serpents, and 
yaksas. It was pure and spotless, limitless, and frequented by Visvavasu, the 
king of the gandharvas. The auspicious path of the sun and moon, it was 
trodden by the elephant of the king of the gods. Indeed, it was a canopy 
fashioned by Brahma and spread out above the world of living beings. It 
was frequented by many heroes and the foremost hosts of vidyddharas. 
Plunging into the clouds, then emerging again and again, he resembled the 
moon as it enters and emerges from the clouds in the rainy season. 

[166-169] Seeing him flying along, a huge raksasa woman named 
Simhika, who could take on any form at will, had the following thought: 
“Now, at long last, I shall get something to eat! For after so long, this great 
creature has come within my grasp.” And thinking thus to herself, she 
caught hold of his shadow. When his shadow had been seized, the monkey 
thought: “I have been caught; for suddenly, like a great ship on the ocean 
checked by unfavorable winds, I am unable to move forward.” 

[170-173] Looking up and down and all around him, the monkey spied a 
huge creature rising from the salt sea and thought: “Without a doubt this is 


that mighty, extraordinary-looking creature, the shadow catcher mentioned 
by the monkey king.” Recognizing her as Simhika from the nature of his 
situation, the clever monkey grew to enormous size, like a cloud in the 
rainy season. When she saw the body of the great monkey expanding, she 
stretched her jaws as wide apart as the sky and underworld Patala. 

[174-177] The great and clever monkey noted her huge and hideous 
jaws, the full extent of her body, and her vital spots. But once inside her 
open mouth, the powerful monkey instantly contracted his adamantine body 
and flew out. Perfected beings and celestial bards saw him vanish in her 
mouth, like the moon on a night when it is full, swallowed up by Rahu, 
demon of the eclipse. With his sharp claws the monkey slashed her vital 
organs and flew up swiftly, moving with the speed of thought. 

[178-181] When all the beings who roamed the heavens saw Simhika 
fallen, quickly slain by the monkey, they addressed that bull among leaping 
monkeys: “In killing this mighty creature today, you have accomplished a 
formidable feat. Now you may accomplish your chosen quest without 
hindrance, best of leaping monkeys. For he who, like you, possesses the 
four virtues of firmness, foresight, intelligence, and skill never fails in his 
undertakings.” Thus honored by them, that honorable monkey, his goal 
practically accomplished, flew on through the sky like Garuda, devourer of 
serpents. 

[182-184] Having almost reached the farther shore, he looked around 
and saw there, at the end of the hundred leagues, a line of trees. As he flew 
along, that foremost among monkeys spied an island adorned with all kinds 
of trees, and he saw the groves on the Malaya mountains. He saw the ocean, 
and the marshes of the ocean, and the trees growing in the ocean’s marshes. 
And he saw the mouths of the rivers, the ocean’s wives. 

[185-190] As the wise and self-controlled monkey surveyed his own 
body, which resembled a vast cloud that seemed to block out the sky, he 
came to a decision. The great monkey thought, “If the raksasas should see 
the size of my body and my speed, they will become curious about me.” So 
contracting his body, which was like a mountain, he resumed his natural 
form, as might a self-controlled person when all worldly delusions have 
vanished. Having reached the farther shore of the sea and having examined 
his body, he took on a form unobtainable by any other. And in that lovely 
and variegated form, he considered how to proceed. Then the great monkey, 


who resembled a great mountain peak, alighted on a lofty peak of Mount 
Lamba, which, with its ketaka shrubs, udddlaka trees, and coconut palms, 
resembled a mass of beautiful things. And so having thus through sheer 
strength crossed over the sea—filled with ddanavas and serpents and 
garlanded with towering waves—he landed on the shore of the mighty 
ocean and gazed upon Lanka, which was like Amaravati, the city of Indra. 


Sarga 2 

[1-4] Having crossed the unconquerable ocean, powerful Hanuman gazed 
calmly upon the city of Lanka, which stood on the peak of Mount Trikita. 
Standing there, covered with showers of blossoms loosed from the trees, the 
mighty monkey looked as though he were made of flowers. And even 
though he had traveled a hundred leagues, that majestic monkey, endowed 
with extraordinary power, was not winded and felt no fatigue, thinking: “I 
could easily traverse many hundreds of leagues; how easy then to reach this 
shore of the ocean, which accounts for a mere hundred.” 

[S—8] Then, having leapt the vast ocean, Hanuman, foremost among the 
mighty and most eminent of leaping monkeys, proceeded swiftly to Lanka. 
He passed through deep blue meadows and fragrant woodlands filled with 
boulders and great trees. And Hanuman, powerful bull among leaping 
monkeys, strode onward past thickly forested hills and groves of 
blossoming trees. Standing on that mountain, the son of the wind god spied 
woods and parks and the city of Lanka. 

[9-13] The great monkey saw lovely parklands and all kinds of lakes and 
pleasure groves completely covered with every sort of tree that blossomed 
and bore fruit in all seasons. There were sarala, karnikadra, and kharjira 
trees in full blossom. There were priydlas, muculindas, kutajas, and ketakas 
as well. There were priyangu trees that were filled with fragrance; there 
were nipas and saptacchadas too. There were asanas, kovidaras, and 
flowering karaviras. And all these trees were thick with masses of blossoms 
and yet still budding. They were filled with birds, and their crowns waved 
gently in the breeze. And he saw ponds thronged with hamsas and 
karandavas and covered with red and blue lotuses. 

[14-18] Approaching Lanka, fortunate Hanuman gazed upon that city, 
which was under the protection of Ravana and adorned with moats covered 
with red and blue lotuses. Because of the abduction of Sita, Ravana had it 


especially well guarded by rdaksasas who patrolled it on every side, 
wielding fearsome bows. It was a great and lovely fortress, surrounded by a 
golden rampart, bristling with hundreds of towers, and wearing a garland of 
flags and banners. It had heavenly golden gateways decorated with vine 
motifs. Such was the city of Lanka—like the city of the gods in heaven— 
that Hanuman gazed upon. With its splendid white mansions, Lanka, set 
high on the mountain peak, looked to that majestic monkey like a city in the 
sky. 

[19-22] Hanuman gazed upon that city, built by Visvakarman and 
protected by the lord of the raksasas, as if upon a city floating in the sky. It 
was as filled with horrible raksasas as is the city of Bhogavati with its great 
serpents. Beautifully made and gleaming, it was unimaginable; for it had 
previously been the home of Kubera, lord of wealth. Guarded by vast 
numbers of rdksasa warriors with protruding fangs and with lances and 
spears in their hands, it was as formidable as a cave guarded by venomous 
serpents. With its embankments and ramparts for thighs and its wide moats 
for new garments, with its lances and hundred-slayers for long hair and 
towers for earrings, the city resembled a woman. 

[23—29] The monkey reached the northern gate, which resembled the 
peak of Mount Kailasa and seemed to scrape the sky. With its wonderful 
lofty mansions, it seemed as if it were propping up the sky. He fell to 
brooding. Taking into consideration the ocean and the city’s immense 
fortification and reflecting upon what a dreadful foe Ravana was, the 
monkey was plunged into gloomy thought: “Even if the tawny monkeys 
could get here, they would be able to accomplish nothing, for not even the 
gods themselves could conquer Lanka in battle. Even if great-armed 
Raghava himself should reach this impregnable fortress of Lanka, which is 
under the protection of Ravana, what could he do? When it comes to the 
rdksasas, there is no scope for conciliation, nor is there any scope for 
bribery, sowing dissension, or open warfare. Only four of the great 
monkeys, Angada the son of Valin, Nila, myself, and wise King Sugriva, 
can even reach this place. Let me first find out whether or not Vaidehi is 
still alive. Once I have found the daughter of Janaka, I will decide what to 
do.” 

[30-33] Then the foremost among monkeys, devoted to Rama’s success, 
reflected for a moment as he stood there on that mountain peak: “In my 


present form, I will never be able to enter the rdksasas’ city, guarded as it is 
by fierce and powerful raksasas. The rdksasas have fierce energy, great 
valor, and enormous strength. I must deceive them all if I am to search for 
Janaki. Taking an inconspicuous form, I shall enter the city of Lanka by 
night. That is the proper time for me to accomplish this great task.” 

[34-38] Seeing what the city was like—unassailable by the gods or the 
asuras—Hanuman sighed repeatedly and fell once more to brooding: “By 
what means can I find Janaka’s daughter Maithili without being seen by 
Ravana, the evil lord of the rdksasas? How can the failure of wise Rama’s 
mission be avoided? How can I manage to see Janaka’s daughter in a 
secluded spot, with just the two of us present? If the place and time are not 
propitious, or if the agent is injudicious, even well-conceived plans can 
come to nothing, like darkness at sunrise. Even a firm decision as to what 
ought or ought not be done can come to nothing. For messengers who think 
they are clever can destroy an undertaking. 

[39-43] “How can the failure of the mission be avoided? How can I 
avoid making a blunder? How can I ensure that my leaping over the ocean 
will not prove to have been in vain? If the raksasas should see me, then this 
mission of wise Rama, who seeks the destruction of Ravana, would surely 
fail. Even were I to assume the form of a rdksasa, it would be impossible to 
pass unnoticed by the rdksasas. What chance would I have in any other 
form? It seems to me that not even the wind can pass undetected here, for 
there is nothing that these mighty raksasas do not notice. If I remain here in 
my natural size, I will surely be destroyed, and thus my master’s mission 
will fail. 

[44-126*—46ef] “Therefore, retaining my natural shape, I shall make 
myself very small and enter Lanka at night in order to accomplish 
Raghava’s mission. I shall enter Ravana’s impregnable fortress tonight, and 
I shall search his entire palace until I find Janaka’s daughter.” Thus did the 
mighty monkey Hanuman deliberate, as, in his eagerness to find Vaideht, he 
anxiously waited for the sun to set. (Once the sun had set and night had 
fallen, Maruti contracted his body until he was no bigger than a cat. It was a 
wonderful sight to see. 

[47-51] At evening time mighty Hanuman leapt up swiftly and entered 
that lovely city with its well-laid-out avenues. He gazed upon the great city. 
With its long rows of palaces, its columns of gold and silver, and its 


fretwork of gold, it was like a city of the gandharvas. It had seven- and 
eight-storied buildings whose floors were inlaid with crystal and 
ornamented with gold. The mansions of the rdksasas were resplendent, 
their floors ornamented with fretwork of pearl and variegated with lapis 
lazuli and gemstones. The lovely, golden gateways of the rdksasas 
illuminated the well-adorned city of Lanka on every side. 

[52-55] As the great monkey, anxious to find Vaidehi, gazed upon 
unimaginable Lanka so marvelous in appearance, he was at once both 
thrilled and despondent. He entered the glorious city, which was protected 
by the arms of Ravana and filled with night-roaming rdksasas of dreadful 
strength. Its rows of white mansions were crowded up against each other, 
and its gateways were covered with fretwork of precious jambunada gold. 
Then, shining in the midst of the multitudes of stars and flooding the world 
with a mass of light, the many-rayed moon rose as if to render him 
assistance. The mighty monkey gazed upon the radiant moon as it rose. It 
shone like a conch shell and was as white as the color of milk or lotus fiber. 
Indeed, it looked like a hamsa swimming swiftly in a lake. 


Sarga 3 

[1-7] And so that night, there on a lofty peak of Mount Lamba, which 
resembled a lofty cloud, wise and mighty Hanuman, elephant among 
monkeys and son of the wind god, relying on his own great strength, 
entered the city of Lanka, filled with lovely woods and waterways and 
guarded by Ravana. It was made lovely by its great mansions, resembling 
autumnal clouds; it was cooled by sea breezes, and it sounded like the sea 
itself. It was guarded by stout troops just as is Vitapavatt. Its gleaming 
white gates and archways were adorned with beautiful reliefs. Filled with 
serpents and well protected, it was as lovely as Bhogavatti. It was covered 
with lightning-streaked clouds and crossed by the paths of the heavenly 
bodies. Resounding with the sound of fierce winds, like Indra’s city 
Amaravati, it was completely surrounded by a great rampart of gold. It was 
adorned with banners that jingled with thousands of tiny bells. Swiftly 
reaching this city, Hanuman approached the rampart with great excitement. 

[8—11] As Hanuman gazed all around him at the city of Lanka, his heart 
was filled with wonder. Its gateways were of jambunada gold; the 
enclosures within them were paved with emeralds. Those gateways were 


adorned with mosaics of gemstones, crystals, and pearls. And they were 
adored with reliefs of refined gold and shone brightly with silver. Their 
floors and stairways were made of emerald. And their crystalline interiors 
were utterly spotless. They had beautiful courtyards. Their structures 
seemed almost to soar into the sky. They echoed with the sound of krauficas 
and peacocks, and they were thronged by rajahamsas. The city resounded 
on every side with the sounds of musical instruments and ornaments. 

[12—17] As the monkey Hanuman looked upon the city of Lanka, which 
resembled the city of Vasvokasara and seemed to soar into the sky, he was 
filled with joy. But as he surveyed the beautiful city of the raksasa lord, 
prosperous and unsurpassed Lanka, the mighty monkey fell once more to 
brooding: “No one can take this city by force, for it is protected by 
Ravana’s troops carrying their weapons at the ready. This place is notorious. 
Kumuda, Angada, the great monkey Susena, Mainda, and Dvivida might be 
able to reach it. But only Vivasvant’s son Sugriva, the tawny monkey 
KusSaparvan, the ape Ketumala, and I are able to enter it.” Still, as the 
monkey reflected upon the might of great-armed Raghava and the valor of 
Laksmana, he was reassured. 

[18-21] With precious gems for garments, storehouses for earrings, and 
catapult-turrets for breasts, the city looked to him like a beautiful, richly 
ornamented woman. Thus did the great monkey gaze upon the city of the 
lord of the raksasas, where all darkness was dispelled by lamps and 
illuminated palaces. Entering by night, the powerful son of Maruta struck 
out on the main highway adorned with pearls and blossoms. With its 
splendid mansions resounding with the sounds of laughter and musical 
instruments, marked with vajras and elephant goads, and ornamented with 
diamond fretwork, the city was as lovely as the sky with its great clouds. 

[22—25] At that hour, Lanka was glittering with the splendid mansions of 
the raksasas. Those mansions of various types—the svastika, the padma, 
and vardhamana—beautifully ornamented on every side, resembled great 
white clouds. Roaming on Raghava’s behalf through the city with its 
various garlands and ornaments, the majestic monkey, acting for the benefit 
of the monkey king, looked about him and rejoiced. He heard the sweet 
singing of impassioned women, like that of the apsarases in heaven. It was 
embellished with sounds produced from the three organs of articulation. 
And he heard the tinkling of ladies’ belt ornaments and the jingling of their 


anklets, and he heard the sound of footsteps on the stairs coming from the 
houses of the great. And here and there he heard the sound of hands 
clapping and the murmur of pleasant conversation. 

[26-30] He saw yatudhanas engaged in vedic recitation, and he saw 
raksasas roaring out their praise of Ravana. A large force of raksasas was 
stationed so as to guard the royal highway. And in the central encampment 
he saw many agents of the raksasa’s secret police. Some of the raksasas 
had been consecrated to perform sacrifices; some wore the matted locks of 
ascetics; some had shaven heads; some were clad in cowhide, and others 
were naked; some were armed with handfuls of darbha grass, and others 
were equipped with vessels for the sacrificial fire. Some held mallets and 
war hammers in their hands; others were armed with staves. Some had only 
one eye or one ear; some had pendulous breasts that shook when they 
moved. Some had protruding fangs and distorted faces; some were 
misshapen; some were dwarfs; some were armed with bows and others with 
swords; some were armed with hundred-slayers and others with cudgels; 
some had great iron clubs in their hands; and some were resplendent in their 
marvelous armor. 

[31—34ab—168* line 1] There were some who were neither too fat, too 
thin, too tall, nor too short. Some were hideous; some had mutilated forms; 
some were handsome; and others were resplendent. And the great monkey 
saw some raksasas armed with javelins and vrksas, some who bore spears 
and darts, and still others with slings and nooses. Some wore garlands and 
were smeared with unguent; some were adorned with the finest ornaments; 
some bore sharp lances; others were very powerful and bore vajras. ‘And 
that monkey saw the central protective force, which was vigilant and 
consisted of one hundred thousand troops, stationed by the lord of the 
raksasas in front of the walled city. 

[168* ll. 2-4~-34cd—37] ‘Then the great monkey spied the palace of the 
lord of raksasas with its great golden archways. It was renowned and 
situated on the mountain peak. It was encircled by moats and crested with 
white lotuses, and it was entirely enclosed within a protective rampart. And 
so, the monkey approached the well-guarded palace of the lord of the 
raksasas. It was heavenly and resembled Indra’s heaven Trivistapa, and it 
resounded with heavenly sounds. For it was filled with the sound of the 
neighing of horses and resounded with the sound of ornaments. It was 


adorned with chariots, carriages, and flying palaces, with exquisite 
elephants and horses, and with great four-tusked bull elephants that 
resembled masses of white clouds. It had lovely gates and was adorned with 
animals and birds in the throes of passion. 


Sarga 4 

[1-3] Then the wise monkey saw the brilliant, many-rayed moon in the 
middle of the sky, spreading around it a great canopy of brilliance. It 
resembled a lusty bull roaming his pen. And he watched the cool-rayed 
moon as it rose, ending the sorrows of all the world, causing the sea to rise, 
and illuminating all beings. The splendor that on earth is reflected in Mount 
Mandara and at evening is reflected upon the sea, the splendor that in the 
waters is reflected in the lotus, now shone forth reflected in the beautiful 
moon, maker of night. 

[4-7] Like a hamsa in a silver cage or a lion in a cave on Mount 
Mandara, like a hero mounted on a haughty elephant, so did the moon shine 
forth in the sky. Rising like a sharp-horned bull, like a great white mountain 
with its lofty peak, like an elephant whose tusks are bound with gold, the 
moon shone forth, its form fully revealed. The blessed, heavenly evening 
was luminous, its darkness banished by the rising of the brilliant moon; its 
danger—the flesh-eating of the raksasas—increased; its troubles—lovers’ 
quarrels—now banished. The sound of stringed instruments pleasing to the 
ear could be heard. Virtuous women slept next to their husbands, while 
rangers of the night, whose deeds were marvelous and dreadful, set forth to 
take their pleasure. 

[8—13] The wise monkey saw mansions—one after another—filled with 
amorous and intoxicated people, crowded with chariots, horses, and golden 
seats, and filled with the splendor of warriors. The radksasas were quarreling 
among themselves, flinging their powerful arms about. They babbled 
drunkenly and ridiculed one another as drunkards. He saw raksasas beating 
their chests and throwing their arms about their beloveds. And lovely 
women were applying cosmetics to their bodies, while others went on 
sleeping. With its great trumpeting elephants, its virtuous men receiving 
great honor, and its warrior heroes heaving angry sighs, the city resembled a 
lake filled with hissing serpents. And there in the city Hanuman saw 
yatudhanas, who were outstanding in intelligence, mellifluous in speech, 


firm in their faith, engaged in various occupations, and with sweet-sounding 
names. Indeed, some of them were among the foremost people in the world. 
Some of them were very beautiful. They possessed various virtues and had 
the looks to match them. Some of them were radiantly handsome, while 
some, on the other hand, were very ugly. Gazing upon them, Hanuman was 
filled with joy. 

[14-19] And there he saw their women. They were worthy of the finest 
things. Pure in mind and noble in spirit, their thoughts were constantly 
focused on their beloveds and their intoxicating beverages. Indeed, in their 
radiance they resembled the stars. Some that he saw were radiant with 
splendor, and some were overcome with modesty. Others, there in the night, 
were wrapped in the tight embraces of their lovers, transported with delight, 
like birds nestled in flowers. And the wise monkey saw other women on 
different floors of tall mansions seated comfortably in the laps of their 
lovers. They were given over to righteousness, dear to their lords, and 
devoted to them. They were overwhelmed with passion. The heroic tawny 
monkey saw exquisite women without their upper garments. They were 
separated from their lovers, and with their fine complexions—like 
burnished gold or moonlight—they looked like streaks of gold. Then he 
saw other ravishing women who, having gone out to meet their lovers, were 
experiencing the greatest delight. And he also saw supremely enchanting 
women who achieved delight in their own homes. He glimpsed many faces 
as radiant as the moon, many eyes with curling lashes, and many ornaments 
that looked like streaks of lightning. 

[20-24] ‘But he did not see the slender, mind-born Sita of lofty lineage, 
who was born in a royal family fixed in the path of righteousness and who 
was as lovely as a creeper in full bloom. She was fixed in the eternal path. 
Her glance was for Rama alone, and she was consumed with love for him. 
She had entered fully into her husband’s noble heart, and at all times she 
surpassed even the most outstanding women. She was tormented with the 
burning pangs of love. Once, her throat had been adorned with the most 
splendid gold ornaments; now it was filled with a never-ending flow of 
tears. With her sweet voice and lovely eyelashes, she now resembled a 
peahen wandering the woods. She resembled a faint sliver of the moon, a 
streak of gold obscured by dust, an arrow wound superficially healed, or a 
wisp of cloud torn off by the wind. When, after a long time, the leaping 


monkey had not found Sita, the wife of Rama, lord of men and foremost 
among the eloquent, he was suddenly overwhelmed with sorrow and 
seemed incapable of going on. 


Sarga 5 
[1-3] Wandering freely among those great mansions, the monkey, who 
could take on any form at will, moved swiftly through Lanka. Then the 
handsome monkey came upon the dwelling of the raksasa lord, encircled 
by a shining rampart as golden as the sun. Gazing upon that mansion—as 
well guarded by terrible raksasas as is the deep forest by lions—that 
elephant among monkeys appeared radiant. 

[4-12] That mansion had marvelous gateway arches inlaid with silver 
and embellished with gold. It was enclosed by wonderful courtyards and 
splendid gates. It was filled with mahouts mounted on elephants and with 
tireless warriors whose chariots were drawn by unstoppable horses. It was 
constantly traversed by splendid, rumbling chariots covered with the skins 
of lions and tigers and embellished with ivory, gold, and silver. It was filled 
with many jewels and with precious seats and vessels. It was the home of 
mighty chariot-warriors and their great chariots. Everywhere it was filled 
with thousands and thousands of beautiful birds and animals, pleasing to the 
eye, of every kind. It was very well guarded by rdksasas and well-trained 
border guards, and everywhere it was filled with the most exquisite of 
beautiful women. It was filled with lovely and happy women and with the 
mansions of raksasa lords. Because of the jingling of fine ornaments, it 
sounded like the sea. It held all the articles necessary to show devotion to 
the king and had the very choicest sandalwood. It was filled with the sound 
of mrdanga and bheri drums and echoed with the blowing of conch-shell 
trumpets. There was constant worship going on, and vedic fire sacrifices 
were performed on the parvan days, for the raksasas were always engaged 
in religious observances. It was as profound as the ocean, and it echoed 
with the same deep sound. 

[13-17] The great monkey gazed upon the vast palace of the great lord, 
which was covered with great gemstones and filled with eminent citizens. It 
shone with its splendor, and it was crowded with elephants, horses, and 
chariots. Indeed, the great monkey thought it was the very ornament of all 
of Lanka. Moving from one rdksasa home to another and across parklands, 


the monkey roamed fearlessly among the palaces, searching everywhere. 
Leaping from the house of Prahasta, the swift and powerful monkey leapt 
onto Mahaparsva’s dwelling. Then the great monkey leapt to the house of 
Kumbhakarna, which looked like a great storm cloud, and from there to the 
house of Vibhisana. 

[18-25] From there the great monkey leapt in turn to the houses of 
Mahodara, Viripaksa, Vidyujjihva, Vidyunmali, and Vajradamstra. Then 
that swift leader of troops of tawny monkeys proceeded to the houses of 
Suka, wise Sarana, and Indrajit. After that the leader of the troops of tawny 
monkeys moved from there to the mansions of Jambuméalin, Sumali, 
Rasmiketu, and Suryasatru. Then the son of Maruta proceeded to the 
mansions of Dhtmraksa, Sampati, Vidyudripa, Bhima, Ghana, and 
Vighana. One after another, the son of Maruta went to the houses of 
Sukanabha, Vakra, Satha, Vikata, Hrasvakarna, Damstra, the raksasa 
Romasa, Yuddhonmatta, Matta, Dhvajagriva, Nadin, Vidyujjihva, 
Indrajihva, Hastimukha, the pisdca Karala, and Sonitaksa as well. And in 
every one of those luxurious mansions, the great and glorious monkey 
observed the wealth of those wealthy rdksasas. 

[26-33] When he had leapt over the mansions of all of them on every 
side, the handsome monkey at last came to the dwelling of the lord of the 
raksasas. Prowling around there, that best of tawny monkeys, that tiger 
among tawny monkeys, saw evil-eyed raksasa women—lances and war 
hammers in hand, bearing javelins and iron cudgels—who slept close to 
Ravana. And there, in the house of the lord of the rdksasas, he saw various 
companies of troops. In the compound, he saw swift steeds tethered, some 
bay and some white, and he saw beautiful thoroughbred war-elephants, 
destroyers of enemy elephants. They were exceedingly well trained, like 
Airavata himself in battle. And they were destroyers of enemy forces. 
Pouring forth streams of rut fluid, they resembled rain clouds or mountains 
with their cascades. They trumpeted with a sound like thunder, and they 
were unassailable by enemies in battle. And he saw thousands of troops all 
decked out in jambiinada gold; and there in the dwelling of Ravana, lord of 
the rdksasas, the monkey, son of Maruta, saw many different kinds of 
palanquins. Completely covered with fretwork of hemajala gold, they shone 
like the newly risen sun. 


[34-38] There in the dwelling of Ravana, lord of the raksasas, he saw 
lovely creeper-covered bowers, buildings with picture galleries, and still 
other buildings for play, as well as little hillocks made of wood. There was 
a delightful building just for lovemaking, and there were buildings for 
daytime activities. He gazed at that magnificent palace, which, filled with 
banners and flagstaffs and covered with areas set aside for peacocks, 
resembled Mount Mandara. With its endless heaps of gems and masses of 
treasure on every side, it was like the dwelling of the lord of beings. It had 
been won through the profound penances undertaken by Ravana, that 
master of self-possession. By the brilliance of its precious stones and the 
blazing splendor of Ravana himself, that palace shone as brightly as does 
the many-rayed sun by virtue of its rays. 

[39-42] There the leader of the troops of tawny monkeys saw beds, 
chairs, and splendid drinking vessels all made of jambunada gold. Flowing 
with honey-wine and spirits and filled with jeweled vessels, the palace was 
as delightful and spacious as the palace of Kubera himself. And so 
Hanuman entered that great, vast palace compound with its well-laid-out 
courtyards. It was filled with hundreds of exquisite women and lined with 
rows of lofty palaces. The whole compound resounded with the beating of 
mrdangas and other instruments, the tinkling of women’s belt ornaments, 
and the jingling of their anklets. 


Sarga 6 

[1-4] The mighty monkey gazed upon rows of buildings all inlaid with 
fretwork of gold and lapis lazuli. They looked like a massive bank of clouds 
in the rainy season, laced with streaks of lightning and flocks of birds. He 
saw the many different chambers of the mansions and great storerooms for 
conches, weapons, and bows. And on the top of those buildings, tall as 
mountains, he saw broad and lovely terraces. The monkey gazed on those 
buildings, resplendent with every type of wealth and much esteemed even 
by the gods and asuras. They were free from any defect and had been won 
by Ravana through his own might. He gazed upon the great buildings of the 
lord of Lanka, which were foremost in every quality on earth. They were 
constructed with great care and seemed as if they had been built by Maya 
himself. 


[5—10] Then he spied the fabulous palace of the lord of the raksasas, 
which was commensurate with his enormous power. It was lofty and 
resembled a great cloud; it was captivating with its golden splendor. Its 
beauty had no rival. Blazing with splendor and covered with innumerable 
gems, it looked like heaven fallen to earth. Surrounded with all kinds of 
trees and covered with flowers, it looked like a mountaintop dusted with 
pollen. With its exquisite women it was as resplendent as a storm cloud 
illuminated by flashes of lightning. It had all the splendor of a flying palace 
—treward of saintly people—drawn through the air by splendid hamsas. Just 
as a mountain peak is tinged with the colors of many minerals, just as the 
heavens sparkle with the moon and the planets, just as a mass of clouds 
reflects varying hues, so was that superb flying palace rendered colorful by 
virtue of its many gems. On it was rendered the earth complete with its 
mountain ranges. The mountains were rendered with their canopy of trees, 
the trees with their canopy of blossoms, and each blossom with its petals 
and filaments. White mansions had been rendered there, and lotus ponds 
filled with blossoms. And there were lotuses complete with their filaments 
as well as dense and beautiful woodlands. 

[11-14] The great monkey gazed upon that vast and resplendent flying 
palace called Puspa. It towered above even the other great mansions; and 
yet—through the radiance of its gems—it seemed to be even larger than it 
was. It had birds made of lapis and birds fashioned of silver and coral. And 
there were beautiful serpents, wrought of various costly materials, as well 
as horses with exquisite bodies fashioned to resemble the different breeds. 
There were birds with beautiful faces and lovely wings. They had flowers 
wrought of coral and jambunada gold inlaid on their wings; and those 
wings, held sportively extended, seemed to be, as it were, accomplices of 
Kama, the god of love. Holding blue lotuses in their lovely trunks, those 
elephants were covered with lotus filaments. And there, in a lotus pond, was 
the goddess Laksmi holding lotuses in her beautiful hands. 

[15-17] Approaching Ravana’s splendid, beautiful, and magnificent 
palace, which looked like a mountain, Hanuman was struck with wonder. It 
was as lovely as a fragrant tree whose hollows are lovely at winter’s end. 
When he had reached that venerable city protected by the arms of ten-faced 
Ravana, the monkey roamed about but did not see the highly venerable, but 
deeply sorrowful, daughter of Janaka, who had been won by the force of her 


lord’s virtues. Continuing to wander about, great and clear-sighted 
Hanuman—whose mind was oppressed by many cares and who always trod 
the path of righteousness—was unable, despite his strenuous efforts, to find 
the daughter of Janaka. At last his mind gave way to deep despair. 


Sarga 7 

[1—4] In the midst of that fabulous residence, Hanuman, the son of Maruta, 
saw a broad and spacious palace. The palace compound of the raksasa lord 
was one and a half leagues in length and one league in breadth. It was 
crowded with many mansions. Nonetheless, Hanuman, subduer of his 
enemies, combed every inch of it searching for long-eyed Sita Vaidehi. It 
was surrounded by elephants, some with four tusks, some with two, and 
some with three; and it was protected by guards with weapons raised. Yet it 
was not crowded. 

[S—8] The palace of Ravana was filled with raksasa women and with 
princesses he had abducted by force to be his wives. It resembled an ocean 
filled with crocodiles and sharks, teeming with whales and great fish, full of 
serpents, and tossed by violent winds. The same imperishable royal 
splendor that characterizes Kubera Vaisravana and Indra of the bay steeds 
was forever inseparably associated with the House of Ravana. Whatever 
opulence was to be found in the palaces of King Kubera, Yama, and Varuna, 
equal or even greater opulence was to be found here in the mansions of the 
raksasas. 

[9-13] There, within that residential complex, the son of Pavana the 
wind god saw a separate, exquisitely constructed palace adorned with many 
beautiful reliefs. It was the heavenly flying palace known as Puspaka. It 
was adorned with every gem, and it had been made in heaven by 
Visvakarman on behalf of Brahma. It was the same one that Kubera had 
acquired from Grandfather Brahma through supreme austerities and that the 
lord of the raksasas had obtained by conquering Kubera through the force 
of arms. It was supported by finely wrought pillars that were fashioned of 
gold and silver and embossed with an animal motif. It seemed ablaze with 
splendor. It was adorned everywhere with exquisite penthouses, which, 
resembling Mount Meru and Mount Mandara, seemed almost to scrape the 
sky. 


[14-17] The great monkey then climbed the heavenly flying palace 
Puspaka, which had been finely wrought by Visvakarman and which, with 
its golden staircases and its lovely raised platforms, resembled the blazing 
sun. Its ornamental skylights and windows were of gold and crystal; and its 
raised platforms were set with lovely emeralds and sapphires. Standing 
there, he smelled a divine and intense aroma of food, drinks, and rice. It 
rose so powerfully that the air itself seemed to have substance. That aroma 
seemed to say to that great being—as a friend might to a close friend 
—‘‘Come over here where Ravana is.” 

[18-22] Heading in that direction, he saw a spacious and beautiful hall, 
which was as dear to Ravana’s heart as a beautiful, deeply beloved woman. 
It was variegated with jeweled staircases and radiant with lattices of gold; 
its floors were inlaid with crystal; and it was decorated with panels inlaid 
with ivory. It was adorned with pearls, coral, silver, and gold, and with 
jeweled columns. Indeed, it was adorned with innumerable columns. 
Supported by those columns that were straight, smooth, tall, and beautifully 
ornamented on every side, it seemed almost to soar into the heavens on 
them as if on wings. It was covered with a huge carpet, woven to resemble 
the surface of the earth; and it seemed as wide as the earth itself with its 
towns and countryside. 

[23-29] That hall echoed with the cries of impassioned birds and was 
redolent with heavenly fragrances. It was covered with costly fabrics. It was 
indeed the abode of the lord of the rdksasas. It was filled with the smoke of 
aloe incense; it was spotless and white as a hamsa; it was as beautifully 
variegated with floral offerings as a splendid brindled cow. It refreshed the 
spirit and brightened the complexion. It banished all sorrow. It was 
heavenly and like the very source of all splendor. Like a mother, that palace, 
under the protection of Ravana, catered to the five senses with the very 
finest of the five objects of sense. Maruti thought: “This must be heaven! 
This must be the realm of the gods! This must be the citadel of Indra! Or 
perhaps, it is the highest goal of perfection!” He saw golden lamps, which 
seemed as if lost in gloomy thought, like crooked gamblers outdone in 
dicing by still more crooked ones. What with the brilliance of its lamps, the 
splendor of Ravana, and the radiance of its dazzling ornaments, the hall 
seemed to him to be ablaze with light. 


[30-34] And there he saw reclining on the carpet a thousand beautiful 
women. They were wearing clothes and garlands of all different colors, and 
they wore every sort of dress and ornament. It was past midnight, and they 
had all succumbed to the power of drink and sleep. They had ceased their 
amorous play and now slept soundly in the dead of night. Lying there in 
slumber, the various sounds of their ornaments stilled, they collectively 
resembled a vast bed of lotuses whose hamsas and bees had fallen silent. 
Maruti gazed upon the faces—fragrant as lotuses—of those beautiful 
women, their eyes closed and their teeth concealed. Their faces resembled 
lotuses that had awakened with the waning of the dark and once more 
closed their petals at night. 

[35-40] The great and majestic monkey reflected that their faces shared 
the qualities of water-born lotuses, and he aptly thought: “Surely 
intoxicated bees must repeatedly seek out these lotuslike faces as if they 
were blooming lotuses sprung from the waters.” Still further beautified by 
those women, the hall of the raksasa lord was as lovely as the clear 
autumnal sky adorned with stars. Surrounded by these lovely women, the 
lord of the raksasas looked as beautiful as the majestic moon, the lord of 
the night, surrounded by stars. The tawny monkey thought: “It must be that 
all the stars fallen from the sky have gathered here, retaining yet some 
portion of their merit.” The splendor, beauty, and radiance of those women 
shone forth as clearly as that of large and brilliant stars. 

[41-45] The women lay there, their consciousness stolen by slumber. 
Their thick and heavy garlands were disordered, and their fine jewelry lay 
scattered about them from their bouts of drinking and physical exertions. 
Some of them had their ti/akas smudged, and some had their anklets all 
awry; while some of those beautiful women had their necklaces tossed to 
one side. The pearl necklaces of some had been broken; the garments of 
others had fallen away. Indeed, with their belt-strings snapped, they 
resembled young fillies relieved of their heavy loads. Some of them, 
wearing beautiful earrings, their garlands crushed and torn, resembled 
flowering creepers crushed by mighty elephants in the great forest. Splendid 
pearl necklaces—shining with the luster of moonbeams—trested like 
sleeping hamsas between the breasts of some of the women. 

[46-49] The lapis lazuli necklaces that some wore looked like kadamba 
birds, while the gold chains of others resembled cakravaka birds. Their 


buttocks resembling sandbanks, the women looked like rivers crowded with 
hamsas and karandavas and adorned with cakravakas. With their masses of 
tiny bells for lotus buds and their large gold ornaments for full-blown 
lotuses, with their amorous gestures for crocodiles and their radiant beauty 
for banks, the sleeping women resembled rivers. The lovely marks left on 
some of them, impressed on their tender limbs and nipples by their 
ornaments, looked like the ornaments themselves. 

[50-53] Trembling in the breath from their mouths, the fringes of the 
garments of some of them fluttered up over their faces again and again. And 
fluttering there, those lovely, shining fringes resembled banners waving 
around the faces of those wives, their complexions lovely and various. The 
pendant earrings of some of those radiantly beautiful women were swinging 
slowly from the touch of the breath from their mouths. Their sweet breath, 
so naturally fragrant, wafted over Ravana with the added fragrance of sweet 
wine. 

[54-59] Some of Ravana’s women kissed the faces of their rivals again 
and again under the false impression that their faces were his. Their 
thoughts thoroughly focused on Ravana, no longer in control of themselves, 
those beautiful women gave pleasure to their rivals. Some of those beautiful 
young women—all adorned with bracelets—lay cushioning their heads on 
their arms and on their lovely upper garments. One of them lay on another’s 
breast and yet another upon her arm. One lay on another’s lap, while yet 
another lay across the first one’s arms. They all lay there mutually 
intertwined, resting on each other’s thighs, sides, buttocks, and backs. In the 
grip of love and intoxication, they lay there, their bodies all entangled with 
one another. Those slender-waisted women slept, their arms intertwined, 
experiencing deep pleasure from the touch of one another’s bodies. 

[60-64] That garland of women threaded, as it were, on the string of one 
another’s arms was as lovely as a floral garland threaded on a string and 
swarming with intoxicated bees. The multitude of Ravana’s women 
resembled a thicket of creepers in full bloom in the springtime month of 
Madhava: a thicket swarming with bees, where all the plants seemed woven 
together into garlands through the motion of the breeze, their clusters of 
blossoms pressed together, their branches entwined. Even when the 
women’s ornaments, limbs, garments, and garlands were clearly in their 
proper places, it was impossible to determine which ones belonged to 


whom. Only because Ravana was sound asleep did those blazing golden 
lamps unblinkingly gaze upon those women of manifold splendor. 

[65—67] For these women were the daughters of royal seers, the pitrs, the 
daityas, gandharvas, and rdksasas. And they were all passionately in love 
with him. That immensely powerful warrior had not taken a single one of 
the women there by force; rather, they had been won over by his virtues. 
With the sole exception of Janaka’s daughter, who was deserving of only 
the best, not one of them desired another man or had previously belonged to 
one. Not one of his wives had lowly origins; not one was deficient in 
beauty. Not one was unskilled, and none was lacking in good breeding. Not 
one was wanting in health, and there was none whom her husband did not 
desire. 

[68-69] Suddenly the pure-minded lord of the tawny monkeys was 
struck by this thought: “If the lawful wife of Raghava is in any way like 
these wives of the raksasa king, then it is a lucky thing for him indeed.” 
Then, overwhelmed once more by sorrow, he thought: “But surely Sita’s 
virtues make her unique, and then too, the mighty lord of Lanka has 
perpetrated a foul offense against her, an act unfitting to an dryan.” 


Sarga 8 

[1-4] Gazing about him, Hanuman noticed one bed that stood out from the 
rest. It was made of crystal and adorned with gems, a bed such as one might 
find in heaven. On one side of it, he saw a white umbrella adorned with 
magnificent garlands and resembling the moon, lord of stars. Perfumed with 
various fragrances and covered with the smoke of costly incense, the bed 
was fanned on every side by female attendants holding yak-tail fly whisks 
in their hands. It was piled with exquisite coverlets and covered with 
sheepskins. It was adorned on all sides with garlands of lovely flowers. 

[S—9] On that glittering bed, the great monkey saw the mighty lord of the 
raksasas sleeping. With his red eyes, great arms, garments shot with gold, 
and his precious dazzling earrings, he resembled a great storm cloud. His 
body smeared with fragrant red sandalwood paste, he truly resembled a 
cloud laced with streaks of lightning and reddened in the sky at twilight. He 
was handsome and could take on any form at will. Surrounded by heavenly 
ornaments, he looked like Mount Mandara slumbering with its trees, 
forests, and thickets. He had now ceased his dalliance for the night and left 


off his drinking. And there—adorned with costly jewelry—he lay, the 
beloved of the raksasa maidens and the bringer of delight to the raksasas. 

[10-12] Approaching Ravana, who was breathing like a great hissing 
serpent, that best of monkeys, greatly agitated, drew back as if in fear. 
Reaching the staircase and ascending to the landing, the great monkey 
contemplated that sleeping tiger among rdksasas. With the lord of the 
rdksasas sleeping on it, the magnificent bed resembled mighty Mount 
Prasravana with an indomitable elephant bull asleep on it. 

[13-20] Hanuman saw the two arms of that huge lord of the raksasas. 
Flung wide and adorned with golden bangles, they were like two flagstaffs 
of Indra. They had been scarred by the blows of the tips of Airavata’s tusks. 
His muscular shoulders had been marked by Indra’s vajra and wounded by 
Visnu’s discus. His shoulders were muscular, symmetrical, well knit, and 
powerful. His hands were characterized by beautiful fingers and palms, and 
his nails and thumbs were marked with auspicious signs. Solid and shapely, 
his arms were like great iron beams and looked like elephant trunks. Flung 
wide on that beautiful bed, they looked like five-headed serpents. They 
were beautifully ornamented and well anointed with costly sandalwood 
paste—fragrant, cooling, and as crimson as hare’s blood. Although they 
were caressed by the most beautiful women and perfumed with the finest 
scents, they nonetheless made yaksas, great serpents, gandharvas, gods, and 
danavas cry out in fear. As the monkey gazed upon Ravana’s arms spread 
out across the bed, they seemed to him like two immense and wrathful 
serpents sleeping in a cave on Mount Mandara. With his two immense 
arms, the lord of the raksasas—who seemed as large as a mountain— 
resembled Mount Mandara with its twin peaks. 

[21—27] A powerful exhalation issued from the mouth of that lion among 
raksasas as he lay there. It bore the fragrance of mango and pumndaga 
blossoms and of the finest bakula flowers. It was mingled with the aroma of 
savory foods and permeated with the smell of strong drink. It seemed to fill 
the chamber. His crown, slightly awry, shone with gold and glittered with 
pearls. His face was illuminated by his earrings. With his broad, deep, and 
muscular chest anointed with red sandalwood paste and adorned with a 
splendid necklace of pearls, he looked resplendent. His eyes were bloodred, 
and he was clad in white silk, which was now awry, and in a fine and costly 
yellow upper garment. Dark as a heap of black beans and breathing like a 


hissing snake, he resembled an elephant sleeping in the vast waters of the 
Ganges. His entire body was illuminated by four golden lamps that lit up all 
directions as flashes of lightning light up a thundercloud. 

[28—33] The great raksasa lord was fond of his wives; and there, in his 
hall, Hanuman saw them clustered at their master’s feet. The leader of 
troops of tawny monkeys gazed once more at those women. Their faces 
were as radiant as the moon, and they were adorned with splendid earrings. 
They wore jewelry and unfading garlands. They were skillful in dancing 
and playing musical instruments, but now the monkey saw them wearing 
splendid jewelry and lying across the lap and arms of the rdksasa lord. Near 
their ears he saw earrings and armlets of burnished gold inlaid with 
diamond and lapis lazuli. The entire palace was illuminated by their lovely 
moonlike faces and their exquisite earrings, as is the evening sky by the 
hosts of stars. Fatigued from the exertions of love, the slender-waisted 
wives of the raksasa lord would sleep during the pauses in their 
lovemaking. 

[34-39] One of the ladies of the court, sleeping with her arms around her 
vind, looked like a lotus plant torn loose by a mighty river and clinging to a 
buoy. Another dark-eyed beauty, sleeping with her madduka nestling at her 
side, resembled a doting mother sleeping with her infant son. Yet another, a 
woman with beautiful breasts and lovely in every respect, lay embracing 
her pataha, like a woman embracing her long-lost lover. Still another 
lovely, lotus-eyed woman lay sleeping, embracing her flute as if she had 
fallen asleep with her lover. Yet another, her eyes inflamed with passion, 
had fallen asleep tightly clutching a mrdanga with her golden limbs, so soft, 
full, and enchanting. Yet another flawless, slender-waisted woman— 
exhausted by her passionate lovemaking—slept with her panava tucked 
under her arm at her side. 

[40-45] Another lovely woman, holding a dindima, had fallen asleep 
tightly embracing a second dindima, like a woman who, still clutching her 
infant, nonetheless embraces her lover. Still another woman, stupefied by 
drink, her eyes like lotus petals, had fallen asleep clasping her adambara in 
her arms. Another lovely lady, who had spilled her jug of water as she fell 
asleep, looked like a freshly sprinkled spring garland made colorful by 
different blossoms. Yet another young woman, overcome by the power of 
sleep, lay sleeping, her breasts—like golden pitchers—cupped in her hands. 


Exhausted by passionate lovemaking, one woman—her eyes like lotus 
petals, her hips beautiful, and her face like the full moon—slept embracing 
yet another. Those exquisite women slept with their various instruments 
pressed to their bosoms, like lovers embraced by their beloveds. 

[46-50] Then the monkey saw one extraordinarily beautiful woman 
sleeping on a magnificent bed that was set apart from those of the other 
women. She was beautifully adorned with jewelry studded with pearls, and 
she seemed to ornament that magnificent palace with her own radiant 
beauty. It was fair Mandodari, the beautiful, golden-skinned, and deeply 
beloved queen of the inner apartments, that the monkey saw sleeping there. 
When he saw her so richly bejeweled, the great-armed son of Maruta 
reasoned on the basis of her extraordinary beauty and youth, “This must be 
Sita!” And filled with tremendous excitement, the leader of the troops of 
tawny monkeys rejoiced. He clapped his upper arms and kissed his tail. He 
rejoiced, he frolicked, he sang, he capered about. He bounded up the 
columns and leapt back to the ground, all the while clearly showing his 
monkey nature. 


Sarga 9 

[1-3] But the great monkey dismissed that notion and, once more 
recovering his composure, took up another line of thought concerning Sita: 
“That lovely lady would never sleep apart from Rama, nor would she eat, 
drink, or adorn herself. Nor would she ever go near another man, even the 
lord of the gods. For Rama has no peer, even among the thirty gods 
themselves. This must be someone else.” Having reached this conclusion, 
he once more roamed the drinking hall. 

[4-9] Some of the women were exhausted from playing, some from 
singing, and some from dancing, while still others lay under the influence 
of drink. Some lay resting on their murajas, mrdangas, and hassocks, while 
other women rested on fine coverlets. And the leader of the troops of tawny 
monkeys saw Ravana, who, having left off his lovemaking, lay sleeping, 
surrounded by a thousand bejeweled women. They were given to 
conversing about matters of beauty and to discussing the proper meanings 
of their songs. They were knowledgeable about the proper time and place 
for various activities, and they knew the appropriate words for all 
occasions. In their midst the great-armed lord of the raksasas looked as 


splendid as a bull surrounded by magnificent cows in a vast cowpen. And 
that lord of the rdksasas, surrounded by his women, resembled a great bull 
elephant surrounded by his cows in the forest. 

[10—15ab] There, in the house of the lord of the rdksasas, the tiger 
among monkeys gazed upon the great rdksasa’s drinking hall, replete with 
everything one could desire. In that drinking hall he saw portions of meat 
set out: venison, buffalo, and boar. And the tiger among monkeys saw half- 
eaten peacocks and jungle fowl on large golden platters. Hanuman saw 
boars and vardhranasakas, prepared with curd and sauvarcala salt. And 
there were also porcupine, deer, and peacocks; as well as various kinds of 
krkaras and half-eaten cakoras; buffalo, ekasalya fish, and goats, all well 
seasoned. And there were soft delicacies, all manner of drink, and every 
sort of food, along with various kinds of condiments: sour, salty, and 
pungent. 

[15cd—20] With costly pearl necklaces, anklets, and bracelets scattered 
about, and with all kinds of fruit strewn among the drinking vessels, the 
floor, covered with floral offerings, took on an even greater splendor. With 
its finely wrought beds placed here and there, the drinking hall seemed to 
be ablaze without fire. And there, along with many different kinds of meats 
that had been exquisitely prepared by master chefs and set out in the 
drinking hall, he saw various heavenly crystal-clear spirits, both natural and 
fortified. There were rum, mead, and fruit and flower wines, all flavored 
with various fragrant powders. The floor, strewn with heaped-up garlands 
and covered with silver jars, crystal vessels, and other vessels of jambunada 
gold, looked beautiful. 

[21-25] And there in jars of silver and jambtinada gold, the monkey saw 
great quantities of the finest drink. The great monkey saw brimming wine 
vessels made of gold, jewels, and silver. Some of the beverages that he saw 
had been half-drunk, some completely consumed, while others had not even 
been touched. Thus did he wander about seeing here various foods, and 
there drinks served out in portions, and elsewhere the leftover food. He saw 
water and fruits all mixed up with garlands amid shattered jars and 
overturned vessels. 

[26—32] And he saw that many of the women’s beds were empty and that 
some of those beautiful women were embracing one another in their sleep. 
One young woman, overcome by the power of sleep, had taken off 


another’s garment, and embracing her made love to her in her sleep. The 
lovely clothes and garlands that they wore stirred slightly from their 
breathing as if caught in a gentle breeze. A breeze was blowing there, 
bearing in all directions a varied fragrance of cool sandalwood paste and 
sweet-tasting rum, of various garlands and blossoms. Thus, a fragrant and 
overwhelming aroma of sandal for the bath and incense wafted through the 
Puspaka palace. Some of those beautiful women in the raksasa’s palace 
were dark and lovely, others were black, while others had limbs the color of 
gold. Overcome by the power of sleep and half-fainting after making love, 
they looked like sleeping lotuses. 

[33-36] In this way, the enormously powerful monkey scoured the entire 
inner apartments of Ravana, leaving nothing out. But still he did not see 
Janaki. But even as he was gazing upon those women, the great monkey 
was alarmed by a concern for propriety, and he fell prey to great anxiety: 
“My having cast my gaze upon the women of another man’s inner 
apartments while they slept will constitute a serious breach of propriety. Up 
until now I have never cast my eyes upon the women’s quarters of another. 
Nonetheless, here I have had to look upon the women of another man’s 
household.” 

[37-42] But then that wise monkey, whose mind was focused on his sole 
objective, had a second thought, showing him clearly what he had to do: “It 
is true that I have observed all of Ravana’s women while they were 
unsuspecting, but even so, my mind was not in the least disturbed. In the 
end, it is the mind alone that stimulates all the senses to perform good or 
evil actions, and in this respect, my mind remains undisturbed. In any case, 
I could not have searched for Vaidehi anywhere else. When one is 
searching, one should always expect to find a woman where the women are 
kept. A creature is to be sought among those of its own kind; one cannot go 
searching for a lost woman among does! I have searched the entire inner 
apartment of Ravana with a pure mind, but still I have not found Janaki.” 

[43-44] Mighty Hanuman saw the daughters of the devas, the 
gandharvas, and the great serpents, but still he did not see Janaki. After 
seeing those other exquisite women, but not her, the heroic monkey left that 
place and fell once more to brooding. 


Sarga 10 


[1-5] Anxious to find lovely Sita, the monkey wandered within the palace 
grounds through creeper-covered bowers, picture galleries, and night 
chambers, but he could not find her. Unable to find the beloved of the 
delight of the Raghus, the great monkey lapsed once more into gloomy 
thought: “Since I cannot find Sita Maithili, even though I have searched for 
her, she must surely be dead. That mere child, who was determined to 
preserve her virtue and was firmly fixed in the noble path of adryan conduct, 
must have been killed by the lord of the raksasas, a creature of wicked 
deeds. Or the daughter of the lord of the Janakas may have died of terror 
when she saw the hideous, dark, and deformed women of the rdksasa king 
with their huge mouths and their large and ugly eyes. After wasting so 
much time with the monkeys, there is no way that I can go back to Sugriva 
without having found Sita and accomplishing my mission. For he is a 
powerful monkey and wields a cruel rod of punishment. 

[6-9] “I have searched the entire inner apartments and I have seen 
Ravana’s wives, yet I have not found virtuous Sita. Indeed, all my effort has 
been in vain. What will all the monkeys say to me in their assembly when I 
return? ‘Tell us, O hero, what did you accomplish by going there?’ What 
will I say to them if I have not found the daughter of Janaka? Since we have 
exceeded the time limit, they will surely fast unto death. And what will 
elderly Jambavan, Angada, and the assembled monkeys say to me when I 
reach the far shore of the ocean? 

[10-15] “Fortitude is the root of success. Fortitude leads to the greatest 
happiness. Very well then, I shall renew my search in places where I have 
not yet searched. Fortitude always provides the impetus to all undertakings. 
It renders fruitful whatever undertaking it inspires in anyone. Therefore, I 
must make a supreme effort and carry it through with fortitude. I shall 
search all the places under Ravana’s protection that I have not yet seen. I 
have already searched the drinking hall and the halls of flowers; I have 
searched the picture galleries, and the game rooms, as well as the paths 
through the gardens and the great mansions.” Such were the reflections of 
Hanuman. Then, jumping up and jumping down, sometimes moving, 
sometimes standing motionless, he began once more to search the 
underground chambers, shrines, and penthouses. 

[16-18] And so, opening doors and smashing door panels, going in and 
coming out, going up and going down, the great monkey went through 


every room in the palace. There was not a single space in Ravana’s inner 
apartments big enough even for four fingers into which the monkey did not 
go. He searched them all: passageways inside the ramparts, platforms 
around shrines, cellars, and lotus ponds. 

[19-23] And there Hanuman saw raksasa women of all different 
appearances, hideous and deformed. But he did not see Janaka’s daughter. 
Hanuman saw exquisite vidyadhara women, unparalleled in this world for 
beauty. But he did not see her who was the delight of Raghava. And 
Hanuman saw daughters of the great serpents with beautiful hips and faces 
like the full moon. But he did not see there fair-waisted Sita. And he saw 
daughters of the great serpents whom the lord of the raksasas had violently 
abducted through conquest. But he did not see the delight of Janaka. Seeing 
those other exquisite women, but not her, great-armed Hanuman, the son of 
Maruta, became deeply despondent. 

[24—25] Reflecting that the efforts of the lords of the monkeys and his 
own leap over the ocean had been in vain, the son of Anila the wind god 
lapsed once more into gloomy thought. Then Hanuman, son of Maruta, 
descended from the flying palace. His mind stricken with grief, he lapsed 
once more into gloomy thought. 


Sarga Il 

[1-5] Leaping down from the flying palace to the ramparts, Hanuman, 
leader of the troops of tawny monkeys, moved as swiftly as does lightning 
across a cloud. When he had completely circled Ravana’s dwelling and still 
had not seen Sita Janaki, the monkey Hanuman spoke these words: “I have 
turned Lanka inside out again and again in my efforts to please Rama, but I 
have not found Sita Vaideht, lovely in every limb. I have searched the entire 
land: ponds, tanks, lakes, streams, rivers, marshlands, woods, and 
inaccessible mountains—and still I have not found Janaki. The king of the 
vultures, Sampati, said that Sita was in Ravana’s house, but I cannot find 
her. 

[6-10] “Can it be that Sita Vaidehi—the lady of Mithila and a daughter 
of Janaka—has given herself to evil Ravana in her helplessness? I think that 
Sita may have fallen when the rdksasa, having seized her, was swiftly 
flying up in his fear of Rama’s arrows. Or I think that when she saw the sea 
while being carried away through the sky—the path frequented by perfected 


beings—the heart of that noble lady may have stopped. Or I think that 
perhaps that noble, wide-eyed lady may have lost her life due to the 
immense pressure of Ravana’s thighs and the crushing grip of his arms. Or 
perhaps in struggling with him as he flew higher and higher over the ocean, 
the daughter of Janaka fell into the sea. 

[11-15] “Or perhaps poor Sita, cut off from her kin, was eaten by cruel 
Ravana as she attempted to defend her virtue. On the other hand, that 
innocent, black-eyed lady may have been devoured by the malicious wives 
of the lord of the raksasas. The poor thing must have died still thinking of 
R&ama’s face, which is like the full moon, its eyes like lotus petals. And thus 
Vaidehi, the lady of Mithila, must have given up her life, loudly lamenting, 
‘Alas, Rama! Laksmana! Alas, Ayodhya!’ Or I think she may be locked 
away somewhere in Ravana’s palace, softly lamenting like a caged sarika 
bird. 

[16—20] “How could Rama’s fair-waisted wife, her eyes like lotus petals, 
a lady born in the House of Janaka, have come under the power of Ravana? 
It is impossible for me to report to Rama, who is so fond of his wife, 
whether Janaka’s daughter is invisible, hidden, or dead. It would be wrong 
for me to report what has happened and equally wrong not to do so. Now 
what am I supposed to do? It seems to me that I have come to an impasse. 
Since the situation has come to this, what would be the proper and timely 
thing to do?” Thus did Hanuman deliberate in his thoughts. “If I should 
return from here to the city of the monkey lord without having found Sita, 
then what would I have accomplished? 

[21-25] “My leaping over the ocean, my entering into Lanka, and my 
seeing the raksasas will have all been for nothing. And what will Sugriva, 
the assembled tawny monkeys, and the two sons of DaSaratha say to me 
back in Kiskindha? If I return to Kakutstha and tell him the most 
unwelcome news that I have not found Sita, then he will surely die. For he 
will not survive hearing that unwelcome news concerning Sita, so harsh, 
dreadful, cruel, painful, and tormenting to his senses. Seeing him in such a 
dreadful state—his thoughts fixed on death—wise Laksmana, who is deeply 
devoted to him, will surely die as well. 

[26-30] “And when Bharata hears that his brothers are dead, he too will 
die, and Satrughna will not survive seeing Bharata dead. Then, without a 
doubt, their mothers, Kausalya, Sumitra, and Kaikeyi, learning that their 


sons are dead, will likewise die. Upon seeing Rama in such a state, the lord 
of the leaping monkeys, Sugriva, filled with gratitude and having honorably 
formed a compact with him, will give up his life. Then poor Ruma— 
depressed, hysterical, dejected, and joyless—will give up her life, 
tormented by grief for her lord. And Tara too—already drawn with grief 
and tormented by her grief for Valin—will never survive the death of the 
king. 

[31-36] “How then will Prince Angada survive the death of both his 
mother and his father and the loss of Sugriva as well? Then the forest- 
dwelling monkeys, overwhelmed by grief for their master, will beat their 
heads with their palms and fists. Those monkeys, so well treated by the 
glorious monkey king—conciliated, rewarded, and honored—will abandon 
their lives. Never again will those elephants among monkeys assemble to 
play in the forests, hills, and caves. Then, oppressed by the calamity that 
has befallen their master, they will assemble in the high hills with their 
sons, wives, and ministers and hurl themselves from the mountain peaks. 
All the monkeys will take their own lives by means of weapons, fasting, 
self-immolation, hanging, or poison. 

[37-42] “I anticipate that when I get there, there will be dreadful 
wailing; for it will mean the destruction of the Iksvaku dynasty as well as of 
the forest-dwelling monkeys. Therefore, I shall not go from here to the city 
of Kiskindha; for I dare not see Sugriva without Maithili. As long as I stay 
here and do not return, the two righteous chariot-warriors and the wise 
monkeys will live on in hope. If I cannot find the daughter of Janaka, I will 
become a forest hermit, living under a tree, restraining my senses, eating 
only what falls into my hands or my mouth. I will build a funeral pyre in 
some marshy country by the sea—tich in roots, fruits, and water—and there 
I shall enter the sacred fire, the son of the fire sticks. Or let the crows and 
wild beasts devour my body as I sit in meditation duly perfecting my soul. 

[43-47] “I think that there is yet another mode of ending one’s life that 
has been sanctioned by the seers. If I do not find Janaki, I shall enter the 
water in the prescribed fashion. This long night that began so auspiciously, 
that was so lovely, so filled with the potential for fame and glory, has ended 
in disaster; for I have not found Sita. I shall become an ascetic, restraining 
my senses under a tree. I shall not go back unless I find that black-eyed 
woman. For if I should return without having recovered Sita, then Angada 


and all the rest of the monkeys will surely die. Many calamities will ensue 
in the event of my death. On the other hand, if a person remains alive, he 
will surely gain felicity. Therefore, I must remain alive. For if I do, then a 
successful outcome is assured.” 

[48-50] Thus did that elephant among monkeys reflect on his manifold 
sorrows over and over, but still he could not surmount his despair: “On the 
other hand, I could kill the powerful ten-necked Ravana. Granted, Sita 
would still have been abducted, but at least we would have taken 
vengeance. Or I can hurl him high across the ocean and present him as a 
sacrificial offering to Rama, as one might a sacrificial beast to Siva, lord of 
beasts.” 

[51-57] Having failed to recover Sita and lost in gloomy thought, the 
monkey—his mind overwhelmed with grief and brooding—brooded 
further: “I shall continue to search this city of Lanka over and over again 
until I find Rama’s illustrious wife, Sita. For if I should bring Rama 
Raghava here on the strength of what Sampati said and he should not find 
his wife, he would surely kill all the monkeys. So I will stay right here, 
eating barely enough to stay alive and controlling my senses, lest all those 
men and monkeys perish on my account. But there stands a large grove of 
huge asoka trees. I shall go there, for I have not yet searched it. After first 
paying obeisance to the Vasus, the Rudras, the Adityas, the ASvins, and the 
Maruts, I shall go there to bring great sorrow upon the raksasas. And once I 
have conquered the raksasas, I shall bestow the queen, the delight of the 
Iksvaku dynasty, upon Rama, just as supernatural power is bestowed upon 
an ascetic.” 

[58-60] Having brooded in this fashion, his senses overwhelmed with 
gloomy thought, great-armed Hanuman, son of Maruta, rose up and said: 
“Homage to Rama, Laksmana, and to the queen, the daughter of Janaka. 
Homage to Rudra, Indra, Yama, and Anila the wind god. Homage to the 
Moon, the Sun, and the hosts of Maruts.” When he had offered his 
obeisance to these divinities and to Sugriva, Maruti scanned all the 
directions to take the measure of the asoka grove. 

[61-65] Then, when he had mentally traversed the lovely asoka grove, 
the monkey, the son of Maruta, pondered his next move, thinking: “Surely 
this asoka grove, crowded with stands of trees, must be full of raksasas, for 
it is carefully tended with every kind of care. There must be guards posted 


here to guard the trees; and even the wind—that holy divinity who pervades 
all things—is not blowing too violently. I have made myself very small for 
Rama’s sake and to evade Ravana. So may the gods and hosts of seers grant 
me success. May holy, self-existent Brahma and the gods—Agni, Vayu, and 
Indra, invoked by many and wielder of the vajra—ordain success for me. 
[66-69] “May Varuna, noose in hand, the Moon, the Sun, the great 
Asvins, all the Maruts, all great beings, and the lord of beings, as well as 
other invisible beings who may govern my path, grant me success. Oh, 
when will I see that noble lady’s flawless face, which—with its prominent 
nose, white teeth, bright smile, and eyes like lotus petals—resembles the 
bright moon, the lord of the stars? How may I set my eyes today on that 
poor, frail woman, so violently assaulted by that cruel, despicable, and evil 
creature, whose beautifully adorned appearance belies his ruthlessness?” 


Sarga 12 

[1-4] The powerful monkey remained lost in thought for a moment. Then, 
having mentally traversed the asoka grove, he bounded from Ravana’s 
mansion to its outer wall. Once on the wall, the great monkey, his whole 
body charged with excitement, saw various trees covered with blossoms at 
the advent of spring. There were sdlas, asokas, bhavyas, blossoming 
campakas, uddalakas, nagavrksas, mangoes, and kapimukhas. Then, like an 
iron arrow loosed from a bowstring, he leapt swiftly to a grove of trees that 
was surrounded by a stand of mangoes and covered with hundreds of 
creepers. 

[S—10] The monkey Hanuman entered and gazed upon that lovely grove, 
which resounded with the songs of birds. That lovely grove was surrounded 
on every side by trees of silver and gold. It was made still more beautiful by 
flocks of birds and herds of deer. It had the splendor of the rising sun. It was 
filled with all sorts of trees just coming into fruit and flower and was the 
home of impassioned bees and kokilas. At that season—when people are 
filled with excitement and when birds and beasts are everywhere—it 
abounded with flocks of every sort of bird and was filled with the cries of 
impassioned peacocks. As he searched for that blameless, fair-hipped 
princess, the monkey startled birds that had been peacefully sleeping. And 
as the flocks of birds flew off, they struck the trees with their wings, letting 
loose showers of blossoms of every color. 


[11-15] Covered with blossoms, Hanuman, son of Maruta, resembled a 
mountain of flowers there in the midst of the asoka grove. And when the 
creatures there saw the monkey racing in all directions through the stands of 
trees, they all thought he was the spirit of springtime. Strewn with all the 
different kinds of blossoms that had fallen from the trees, the ground there 
was as lovely as a young woman all bejeweled. Violently shaken by the 
powerful monkey, the trees let fall their lovely blossoms. Their leaves 
shaken from their crowns, their fruits and flowers fallen, the trees 
resembled gamblers who have staked their clothes and jewelry and lost. 

[16—20] Shaken by swift Hanuman, those splendid trees in glorious 
blossom shed their flowers, leaves, and fruits all at once. With nothing left 
but their trunks, abandoned by the flocks of birds, all the trees became as 
inhospitable as trees shattered by the wind. Crushed by the monkey’s tail 
and fore and hind feet, the asoka grove, its splendid trees smashed, 
resembled a young woman, her hair disheveled, her makeup smeared, her 
lovely teeth and lips bruised with kisses, and her body wounded by nails 
and teeth. The monkey violently tore through the lines of hanging creepers, 
as does the wind through the masses of clouds over the Vindhya mountains 
in the rainy season. 

[21—26] As he roamed about, the monkey saw charming grounds paved 
with gemstones, silver, and gold. Here and there were pools of various 
shapes filled with the purest water with costly, jewel-inlaid stairways 
leading down to them. They had pearl and coral in place of sand, their 
bottoms were inlaid with crystal, and they were adorned with beautiful 
golden trees set along their banks. They had beds of red and blue lotuses in 
full bloom, and they resounded with the murmuring of cakravaka birds, the 
cries of natyithas, and the calls of hamsas and sarasa cranes. They were fed 
on every side by long, limpid streams with trees along their banks and water 
like nectar. And they were completely overhung with hundreds of creepers 
and surrounded by santanaka blossoms as well as provided with groves of 
various shrubs interspersed with karavira trees. 

[27-31] Then that tiger among monkeys saw a mountain—the most 
beautiful mountain in the world—with a huge peak. It looked like a cloud 
and had a beautiful peak with many lesser peaks around it. It was covered 
with stone buildings and full of various kinds of trees. The monkey saw a 
stream descending from that mountain, like a beloved woman who, having 


arisen from her lover’s lap, had thrown herself on the ground. It was 
adorned with trees that trailed their branches in its water so that it 
resembled an angry young woman restrained by close friends. And the great 
monkey watched that stream as its waters eddied back so that it now 
resembled a beloved woman who had returned to her lover, propitiated. 

[32-35] A little way beyond that stream, the tiger among monkeys, 
Hanuman, son of the wind god, saw lotus ponds filled with flocks of 
various birds. He also saw an elongated artificial tank filled with cool water. 
The steps leading down to it were of fine gemstones, and it had pearls in 
place of sand. It was thronged with herds of various animals, and it had a 
lovely grove of trees. It was adorned on every side with artificial woodlands 
and with vast palaces fashioned by Visvakarman. All the trees there were 
bursting into fruit and flower. They were surrounded with parasols, raised 
benches, and raised platforms of gold. 

[36-39] There the great monkey spied a solitary golden simsapd tree. It 
was covered with thick foliage and many climbing creepers, and it was 
surrounded by raised platforms of gold. He saw springs issuing forth from 
fissures in the earth and other golden trees the color of fire. In the reflected 
radiance of those trees, which was like that of Mount Meru, the great and 
heroic monkey thought, “I have been turned into gold!” Gazing upon that 
tree, which was waving gently in the breeze along with the stand of golden 
trees and which gave off the sound of hundreds of little bells, he was filled 
with wonder. 

[40-42] Then the swift monkey climbed the beautiful blossoming 
simsapa tree with its dense foliage and young sprouts and buds and thought: 
“From here I shall see Vaideht, who is so desperately longing for the sight 
of Rama. For wandering here and there, distracted with sorrow, she may by 
chance come this way. Surely this lovely asoka grove, adorned with 
campaka, sandalwood, and bakula trees, must belong to that wicked 
raksasa. 

[43-47] “And here too is this lovely lotus pond filled with flocks of 
birds; surely Janaki, Rama’s queen, must come this way. Surely that 
beautiful woman Janaki, Raghava’s beloved, Rama’s queen, who is 
accustomed to walking through the forest, will come this way. Moreover, 
that fawn-eyed woman must be familiar with this grove and so, drawn with 
brooding on Rama, she must come to it. That lovely-eyed lady, pained with 


her grief for Rama, must always come here, for she loved living in the 
forest and used to wander in it. Then, too, the virtuous daughter of Janaka, 
Rama’s beloved wife, always used to love the creatures of the forest. 

[48-51] “Surely Janaki, that fair and lovely young woman, thinking 
ahead to the time of the sandhya rituals, will come to this stream with its 
limpid waters to perform them. For this lovely asoka grove is a fitting place 
for the lovely and cherished wife of Rama, lord of kings. If indeed that lady, 
whose face is like the moon, the lord of stars, is still alive, then she will 
surely come to this stream with its limpid waters.” And so, reflecting in this 
fashion, great Hanuman hid himself in that beautifully blossoming tree, 
dense with leaves, observing everything, watching, and waiting for the wife 
of the lord of men. 


Sarga 13 

[1-6] Perched in that tree, Hanuman gazed all around him searching for 
Maithill. He looked down to the ground and surveyed the entire grove. With 
its trees and their clinging santdnaka vines, it looked very beautiful. It was 
decorated everywhere and filled with heavenly essences and fragrances. It 
was full of animals and birds and resembled the heavenly Nandana garden. 
It was crowded with mansions and palaces. It was filled with the songs of 
birds and the cry of the kokila arching above them all. It was made beautiful 
by lotus ponds filled with red and blue lotuses fashioned of gold. It had 
many seats with costly coverings and numerous underground chambers. It 
had lovely trees full of fruit that blossomed all year round. With the 
splendor of its blossoming asoka trees, it had the radiance of the sunrise. To 
Maruti, perching there, it looked as though it were ablaze. The branches of 
its trees looked as if they were being constantly stripped of their leaves by 
the hundreds of colorful birds, garlanded with flowers, that flew up from 
them. 

[7-10] By virtue of its trees—asokas that drive away sorrow, so dense 
with blossoms down to their roots that they seemed to touch the ground 
from their weight, and its blossoming karnikaras, and fully blooming 
kimsukas—that spot seemed as if ablaze with radiance on every side. And 
all its many pumnaga, saptaparna, campaka, and uddalaka trees with their 
large roots and beautiful blossoms appeared radiant as well. There were 


thousands of asoka trees there, some shining like gold, others resembling 
tongues of flame, still others glistening like blue-black collyrium. 

[11-14] The grove was as variegated as Nandana, Indra’s grove, and as 
lovely as Caitraratha, the grove of Kubera. Indeed, it seemed to surpass 
them both; for it was unimaginable, heavenly, lovely, and filled with 
radiance. It looked like a second sky with flowers for its host of stars. With 
blossoms for its hundreds of jewels, 1t seemed to be a fifth ocean. With its 
massed trees, honey scented and bearing flowers all year round, and with its 
birds and flocks of animals with their various cries, the grove was 
ravishing. With its many wafting fragrances, ravishing the heart with its 
sweet scents, it seemed to be a second Mount Gandhamadana, rich in 
fragrances. 

[15-17] Not far off in the asoka grove, the bull among monkeys spied a 
lofty domed palace. White as Mount Kailasa, it stood surrounded by a 
thousand pillars. It had stairways worked in coral and railings of burnished 
gold. It seemed to steal away one’s eyes, for it appeared to be ablaze with 
splendor. Pure white, it stood so tall 1t seemed to scrape the sky. 

[18—24] Then he saw a woman clad in a soiled garment and surrounded 
by raksasa women. She was gaunt with fasting. She was dejected and she 
sighed repeatedly. She looked like the shining sliver of the waxing moon. 
Her radiance was lovely; but with her beauty now only faintly discernible, 
she resembled a flame of fire occluded by thick smoke. She was clad in a 
single, fine yellow garment, now much worn. Covered with dirt and lacking 
ornaments, she resembled a pond without lotuses. Ashamed, tormented by 
grief, disconsolate, and suffering, she looked like the constellation Rohini 
occluded by the planet Mars. She was dejected, her face covered with tears. 
She was emaciated through fasting. She was depressed, given over to 
sorrow. Brooding constantly, she was consumed with her grief. No longer 
seeing the people dear to her but only the hosts of raksasa women, she was 
like a doe cut off from her herd and surrounded by a pack of hounds. She 
had a single braid—like a black serpent—falling down her back. Deserving 
only happiness and unaccustomed to calamity, she was consumed with 
SOITOW. 

[25-29] Closely examining that wide-eyed woman—so dirty and 
emaciated—he reasoned from these indicative signs: “She must be Sita! 
This woman looks exactly like the one I saw earlier being carried off by that 


raksasa, who can take on any form at will.” Sita’s face was like the full 
moon; her eyebrows were beautiful; her breasts were lovely and full. With 
her radiance that lady banished the darkness from all directions. Her hair 
was jet black, her lips like bimba fruit. Her waist was lovely, and her 
posture was perfect. Her eyes were like lotus petals, and she looked like 
Rati, wife of Manmatha, god of love. That lovely woman—as cherished by 
all living things as the radiance of the full moon—was seated on the ground 
like an ascetic woman practicing austerity. 

[30-36] Sighing constantly, that timorous woman resembled a daughter- 
in-law of a serpent lord. By virtue of the vast net of sorrow spread over her, 
her radiance was dimmed like that of a flame of fire obscured by a shroud 
of smoke. She was like a blurred memory or a fortune lost. She was like 
faith lost or hope dashed, like success undermined by catastrophe or 
intellect dulled. She was like a reputation lost through false rumors. She 
was distraught at being prevented from rejoining Rama and anguished by 
her abduction by the raksasa. That delicate, fawn-eyed woman was looking 
about here and there. Her sorrowful face with its black-tipped eyelashes 
was covered with a flood of tears. She sighed again and again. Dejected, 
covered with dirt and grime, and devoid of ornaments—though she was 
worthy of them—she resembled the light of the moon, the king of stars, 
obscured by a black storm cloud. As he examined Sita closely, Hanuman’s 
mind was once more afflicted with uncertainty; for she seemed barely 
discernible, like some vedic text once learned by heart but now nearly lost 
through lack of recitation. 

[37-38] It was only with great difficulty that Hanuman was able to 
recognize Sita without her ornaments, just as one might make out the sense 
of a word whose meaning had been changed through want of proper usage. 
Still, after closely examining the wide-eyed, blameless princess, he 
concluded that this was indeed Sita, confirming his judgment through the 
telltale signs. 

[39-45] Then he noticed on Vaidehi’s body—beautifying her limbs—the 
mass of jewelry that Rama had described: “Though blackened with long 
use, her beautifully formed earrings, her finely crafted ‘dog’s teeth,’ and the 
handsome jewelry on her hands, variegated with gemstones and coral, are 
all in their proper places. I think they must be the very ones that Rama 
described. I do not see the ones that fell back there, but those that have not 


fallen off are undoubtedly the very ones described by Rama. Then, caught 
in a tree, where she had let it fall, the leaping monkeys spied her splendid, 
yellow upper garment. It looked like a sheet of gold. On the ground they 
also found the large, jingling pieces of fine jewelry that she had thrown 
down. Although this garment of hers is exceedingly worn from long use, 
still, surely, 1t is the same splendid color as the other. 

[46-52] “This must be Rama’s beloved golden-hued queen, who, though 
she is lost to him, has not departed from his heart. This must be she on 
whose account Rama has suffered fourfold misery: because of his 
compassion, because of his kindness, because of his grief, because of his 
love. His compassion has been aroused by the thought that a woman has 
been lost, his kindness by the thought that a supplicant has perished, his 
grief because his wife is gone, and his love because his beloved has been 
taken from him. The beauty of this black-eyed lady and the perfection of 
her every limb are just like Rama’s. She must therefore belong to him. This 
lady’s thoughts are firmly fixed on him and his on her. It is for this reason 
alone that she and that righteous man have been able to survive even for a 
moment. Great-armed Rama has accomplished the impossible in managing 
to survive even for a moment without this intoxicating lady, Sita.” Having 
discovered Sita in this fashion, the son of Pavana, the wind god, in great 
delight, fixed his thoughts on Lord Rama and praised him. 


Sarga 14 

[1-5] When the bull among tawny monkeys had praised praiseworthy Sita 
and Rama, so delightful for his many virtues, he lapsed once more into 
gloomy thought. After a moment’s brooding, powerful Hanuman lamented 
for Sita, his eyes brimming with tears: “Sita is so deeply cherished by 
Laksmana’s elder brother, and he was so well trained by his gurus. If even 
she can suffer such misery, then truly the power of time is inescapable. But 
this lady knows the firm resolve of Rama and wise Laksmana, and so she is 
no more excessively agitated than is the river Ganges at the onset of the 
rainy season. Raghava is a fit mate for Vaidehi, for they are matched in 
character, age, and conduct as well as in birth and auspicious marks. And 
that black-eyed lady is likewise a fit mate for him.” 

[6-10] Gazing at her, who was young and golden and as beloved by all 
people as Sri, the goddess of fortune, his thoughts went back to Rama, and 


he said these words: “It was for the sake of this wide-eyed lady that mighty 
Valin was struck down and Kabandha, Ravana’s equal in might, was slain. 
And it was for her sake that Viradha, that rdksasa of fearsome valor, was 
attacked and killed in battle by Rama in the forest, just as was Sambara by 
great Indra. It was for her sake as well that fourteen thousand rdksasas of 
dreadful deeds were slaughtered in Janasthana with arrows like tongues of 
flame. It was for her sake that Khara was killed in battle, Trisiras was slain, 
and mighty Disana destroyed by celebrated Rama. 

[11-14] “The lordship of the monkeys, so difficult to obtain and so 
highly esteemed throughout the world, had been in the keeping of Valin. It 
was because of her that Sugriva acquired it. And it was also for the sake of 
this wide-eyed lady that I leapt across the majestic ocean, lord of rivers and 
streams, and searched this city. If Rama were to turn all the land stretching 
to the sea upside down for her sake, or even the universe itself, it would, in 
my opinion, be well justified. If one had to decide the relative worth of the 
kingship over the three worlds on the one hand and Janaka’s daughter on 
the other, the undivided kingship of the three worlds would not be worth 
one-sixteenth of Sita. 

[15-20] “For she is Sita, daughter of the great and righteous King Janaka 
Maithila, unwavering in her devotion to her lord. Splitting open the earth, 
she arose from the land as it was cut by the ploughshare. She was covered 
with the auspicious soil of the field—tresembling lotus pollen. She is the 
illustrious eldest daughter-in-law of King Dasaratha, who was valorous and 
noble and never retreated in battle. She is the beloved wife of the skillful 
and celebrated Rama, who knows what is right. But she has now fallen into 
the hands of the raksasa women. Abjuring all pleasures, driven only by the 
power of her love for her husband, she entered the desolate wilderness with 
no care for its hardships. Satisfied with a diet of fruits and roots, devoted to 
her husband’s service, she experiences the greatest delight whether in the 
wilderness or in a palace. 

[21-26] “Her body is of a golden hue, and she always spoke with a 
smile. Yet she who had never suffered misfortune now must endure this 
torment. Raghava is yearning to see that virtuous lady who has been 
tormented by Ravana, as a thirsty man yearns to find a well. Once he 
recovers her, Raghava will surely be as delighted as a king who regains his 
lost kingdom. Deprived of all pleasures and cut off from her family, she 


manages to survive only in the expectation of being reunited with him. She 
does not even notice these raksasa women, nor these trees full of fruits and 
blossoms. For her heart is fixed on just one thing, and she can see only 
Rama. Truly a husband is a woman’s finest ornament, surpassing all others. 
For without him, this lady, though made for beauty, is not beautiful. 

[27-32] “Lord Rama is accomplishing a difficult feat in that he manages 
to sustain his life and has not died of grief through being deprived of her. 
Seeing this lady with her black locks and eyes like hundred-petaled lotuses, 
who 1s deserving of pleasure but stricken with pain, even my heart is deeply 
pained. Enduring as the earth, the lotus-eyed woman, who was once 
guarded by Raghava and Laksmana, is now guarded under a tree by rdksasa 
women with hideous eyes. Stripped of her beauty like a lotus pond smitten 
by frost, oppressed by one calamity after another, the daughter of Janaka 
has been reduced to a pitiable state, like a female cakravaka bird separated 
from her mate. These asoka trees, their branches bent down under the 
weight of their blossoms, only intensify her sorrow, and so does the 
thousand-rayed moon with its gentle beams, now rising at the onset of 
spring.” Reflecting in this way on the matter, the monkey came to the firm 
conclusion that it was indeed Sita. But having taken refuge in that tree, the 
swift and mighty bull among tawny monkeys remained there. 


Sarga 15 
[1-3] Then the bright moon, resembling a mass of white lotuses, rose into 
the clear sky, like a hamsa plunging into blue water. With its cool rays, the 
bright moon refreshed the son of Pavana the wind god, while with its 
radiance, it seemed as if to serve as his assistant. Then he saw Sita, whose 
face was like the full moon. She was weighed down by her burden of grief, 
like a ship at sea by heavy cargo. 

[4-8] Straining to see Vaidehit, Hanuman, son of Maruta, saw—a short 
distance away—frightful-looking raksasa women. One had but one eye. 
One had but a single ear, while another’s ears covered her entire upper 
body. One had no ears at all. Another had pointed ears, while yet another 
had her nose on her forehead. One had a huge head; another’s neck was 
long and thin. One had hardly any hair, while another was completely bald. 
Yet another’s hair covered her like a woolen blanket. One had pendulous 
ears and a bulbous forehead; another’s breasts and belly hung down. One’s 


lips protruded, while another’s lips were on her chin. Yet another’s mouth 
hung open, while still another’s knees stuck out. One was very short, 
another very tall. One was hunchbacked, another was deformed, while yet 
another was a dwarf. One was snaggletoothed; another had a sunken face. 
One had yellow eyes, while another’s features were distorted. 

[9-17] The best of monkeys stared at those raksasa women, whose 
appearance caused his fur to bristle. They were deformed, yellowish, black, 
wrathful, fond of quarrels, and armed with lances, mallets, and war 
hammers of black iron. Some had the faces of boars, deer, tigers, buffalo, 
goats, or jackals. Some had feet like those of elephants, camels, and horses. 
Others’ heads were sunk into their bodies. Some had only one hand, others 
one foot. Some had the ears of donkeys, horses, cows, elephants, or 
monkeys. Some had no noses; others had huge ones. Some had crooked 
noses or noses without nostrils. Some had noses like elephants’ trunks, 
while others had nostrils in their foreheads. Some had the feet of elephants, 
some had enormous feet, some had feet like cows’ hooves, and some had 
hairy feet. Some had enormous heads, necks, breasts, and bellies. Some had 
enormous mouths and eyes, while others had long tongues and nails. Some 
of those dreadful-looking raksasa women had the faces of goats, elephants, 
cows, sows, horses, camels, or donkeys. They held lances and war 
hammers; and they were wrathful and fond of quarrels. Those raksasa 
women were snaggletoothed. Their hair was like smoke, and their faces 
were hideous. Addicted to meat and wine, they were constantly guzzling 
strong drink. Their bodies were smeared with flesh and blood, for such was 
their food. 

[18—23] They were seated all around the mighty trunk of that massive 
tree. Beneath it fortunate Hanuman observed that lady, Janaka’s daughter, 
the blameless princess. She was lusterless and wracked with sorrow; her 
hair was matted with dirt. She resembled a star fallen from the heavens and 
crashed to earth, its merit exhausted. Although she was richly endowed with 
a fine reputation because of her virtuous character, she had become 
impoverished through the loss of her husband’s company. Deprived of her 
splendid ornaments, she was adorned only by her love for her husband. She 
was imprisoned by the lord of the raksasas and separated from her kin. She 
was like an elephant cow captured by a lion and cut off from her herd. She 
resembled a sliver of the moon obscured by autumnal clouds at the end of 


the rains. From want of her husband’s touch, she had been reduced to a 
wretched state, like a lute that no one plays. She, Sita, was devoted to the 
welfare of her husband, but unjustly held in the power of the rdksasas. 

[24-29] Hanuman gazed on that lady, who was drowning in a sea of 
sorrow there in the midst of the asoka grove. Surrounded by those raksasa 
women, like the planet Rohini occluded by malignant planets, she 
resembled a creeper stripped of its blossoms. Her body was covered with 
dirt, yet she was adorned with her own physical beauty, and so—like a 
tender lotus stalk covered with mud—she both lacked beauty and possessed 
it. The monkey Hanuman gazed upon the lovely fawn-eyed lady clad in a 
worn and soiled garment. But, though her face was despondent, the black- 
eyed lady Sita was both confident in the might of her husband and protected 
by her own virtuous conduct. Hanuman watched fawn-eyed Sita as she 
glanced around in all directions like a frightened fawn. She seemed almost 
to be scorching the sprouting trees with her sighs. She seemed to be a solid 
mass of sorrow or a wave risen from the ocean of grief. 

[30-32] Gazing upon Maithilt, who was emaciated yet perfect in every 
limb and who was lovely even without her ornaments, Maruti experienced 
unparalleled joy. Gazing upon that woman of intoxicating eyes, Hanuman 
shed tears of joy and made obeisance to Raghava. But the mighty monkey, 
having paid his obeisance to Rama and Laksmana, remained in hiding, 
delighted at having found Sita. 


Sarga 16 

[1-5] While Hanuman had been exploring the grove with its flowering trees 
in his search for Vaidehi, the night had drawn nearly to a close. At 
daybreak, he heard the sound of vedic recitation by rdksasa brahmans, who 
knew the vedas and their six subsidiary sciences. This was precisely the 
time when great-armed and mighty ten-necked Ravana would wake to the 
sounds struck from auspicious musical instruments, charming to the ear. 
Awakening at his usual time, the mighty lord of the raksasas, his garlands 
and clothes disheveled, immediately thought longingly of Vaidehi. Wholly 
obsessed with her and intoxicated with desire, the radksasa was unable to 
contain his passion. 

[6-9] Adorned with every sort of jewelry and possessed of an 
unsurpassed majesty, he headed for the asoka grove, gazing about him at 


the pathways with their jeweled and golden arches. The grove was filled 
with various trees bursting with every sort of fruit and flower; it was dotted 
with lotus pools and adorned with various flowers. It was wonderful, made 
beautiful by constantly impassioned birds. And it was filled with various 
kinds of artificial animals, beautiful to behold. It was densely wooded, 
filled with herds of all sorts of animals, and strewn with fallen fruit. 

[10-15] A hundred beautiful women accompanied Paulastya as he 
walked along, just as the women of the gods and gandharvas follow great 
Indra. Some of the women held golden lamps; others held yak-tail fly 
whisks or palmyra fronds. Some went before, bearing water in golden 
pitchers; while some walked behind, carrying curved swords. One skilled 
and lovely woman held a jeweled vessel full of drink in her right hand. Yet 
another walked behind him holding an umbrella with a golden shaft. It 
shone like the full moon and looked like a rajahamsa. Ravana’s exquisite 
women, their eyes still blurred from sleep and drink, accompanied their 
mighty lord, as streaks of lightning do a thundercloud. 

[16—23] The monkey, son of Maruta, first heard the sound of the belt 
ornaments and anklets belonging to those exquisite women. Then the 
monkey Hanuman spied Ravana—unparalleled in his deeds and 
inconceivable in his strength and valor—who had just reached the gateway. 
He was illuminated on all sides by many lamps filled with fragrant oil and 
held in front of him. In his desire, arrogance, and passion, and with his large 
eyes reddened and leering, he seemed like Kandarpa, the god of love 
incarnate, who had cast aside his bow. He was playfully trailing his 
splendid upper garment—spotless like the foam of freshly churned milk— 
for it had slipped from its place and snagged in his armlet. Concealed on his 
leafy branch, covered by a mass of leaves and blossoms, Hanuman was able 
to observe Ravana closely as he approached. Then the elephant among 
monkeys gazed around him and saw Ravana’s exquisite women, who were 
so young and beautiful. Surrounded by those extremely beautiful women, 
the glorious king at last entered the women’s grove, which resounded with 
the cries of beasts and birds. 

[24-28] The mighty son of Visravas, overlord of the radksasas, with his 
tapering ears and various kinds of jewelry, was intoxicated. The monkey 
watched him. Great and powerful, the monkey gazed upon that very 
powerful raksasa, who, surrounded by those splendid women, resembled 


the moon surrounded by stars. The monkey thought, “This must be great- 
armed Ravana!” Then Hanuman, that mighty son of Maruta, crept lower. 
Although Hanuman was himself endowed with fierce power, he was so 
shaken by Ravana’s power that he clung there in a hidden place covered 
with leaves. But as for Ravana, in his urgent desire to see that fair-hipped 
woman with her black hair, her full breasts crowding one another, and her 
dark, darting eyes, he advanced toward her. 


Sarga 17 
[1-3] At that very moment, the young, beautiful, fair-waisted Princess 
Vaidehi—blameless in every way—caught sight of Ravana, lord of the 
rdksasas, who was adorned with the finest jewelry. She began to tremble 
like a banana plant in a gale. Covering her stomach with her thighs and her 
breasts with her arms, the beautiful wide-eyed woman sat there weeping. 

[4-8] As ten-necked Ravana gazed upon Vaidehi—dejected, guarded by 
hosts of raksasa women, and overcome by misery—she appeared to him 
like a ship foundering in the ocean. She, whose ascetic vows were very 
severe, rested on the bare earth, like the severed limb of some great forest 
tree that had fallen to the ground. She, who was worthy of the finest 
ornaments, was unadorned save for the dirt, which took the place of 
ornaments on her soiled body. She looked as though she were speeding to 
the side of Rama, that celebrated lion among kings, with wishes for her 
chariot and resolve for her horses. Alone, weeping, and wasting away, given 
over to brooding and grief, the lovely woman—-so utterly devoted to Rama 
—could see no end to her misery. Swaying from side to side like the wife of 
a serpent lord transfixed by a spell, she looked like the constellation Rohini 
occluded by the malign planet Dhtmaketu. 

[9-13] She was like a woman born into a righteous and virtuous 
traditional family who had, through marriage, become part of a bad one. 
She was like a fine reputation destroyed, like trust betrayed, like wisdom 
decayed, and like hope shattered. She was like one’s future destroyed, like a 
command disobeyed, like the skies aflame at a time of catastrophe, and like 
divine worship improperly performed. She resembled a ruined lotus pond or 
an army whose heroes have been slain; she was like a light shrouded in 
darkness or a river run dry. She was like a sacrificial altar defiled, a flame 


extinguished; she was like a full-moon night on which the orb of the moon 
has been eclipsed by Rahu. 

[14—17] She was like a lotus pond fouled by the trunks of elephants, its 
lotus blossoms and leaves torn up, its sky-going birds frightened away. 
Anguished with grief for her husband, she was emaciated, like a riverbed 
whose waters have been diverted. Without her usual scrupulous cleanliness, 
she was like a night of the waning moon. She was delicate and splendid in 
every limb, and she was fit to dwell in mansions lined with jewels. Instead, 
she was like a newly plucked lotus stalk, withering in the heat. She was like 
an elephant lord’s captured mate who, bound fast to a post and cut off from 
that leader of the herd, heaves deep sighs in her profound misery. 

[18—21] Although she took no care of her long, single braid, it made her 
look as lovely as the earth with a line of dark forest at the end of the rains. 
She was exhausted from fasting and emaciated with grief; she was dejected 
with brooding and fear. She ate almost nothing and was rich only in 
austerities. With her hands cupped in reverence, anguished by her sorrow, it 
seemed as if she were supplicating some divinity with all her heart for the 
defeat of ten-necked Ravana at the hands of the foremost of the Raghus. 
Such was the condition of blameless Maithilt, who wept, looking all around 
her with her red-rimmed, wide, and bright eyes with their lovely lashes. 
Then Ravana—to his own undoing—tried to seduce her, though she was 
completely devoted to Rama. 


Sarga 18 

[1-5] Then, with honeyed words fraught with meaning, Ravana revealed his 
intentions to that deyected woman as she sat there surrounded, joyless and 
suffering: “On seeing me, lady with thighs like elephants’ trunks, you cover 
your breasts and stomach as if in your fear you wished to make yourself 
invisible. I long for you, wide-eyed lady. Dear lady, you are endowed with 
every bodily perfection. Stealer of all men’s hearts, please look upon me 
with favor. There are no men here, nor are there other rdksasas, who can 
change their form at will. So banish your fear of me, Sita. For, timorous 
woman, making love to other men’s wives and even carrying them off by 
force is perfectly appropriate behavior for raksasas. Let there be no doubt 
about this. 


[6-10] “Nevertheless, Maithili, I will never touch you unless you desire 
it, though Kama, the god of love, may rage through my body to his heart’s 
content. You must trust me, dear lady. You need have no fear on this 
account. Give me your true love. You must not become prey to sorrow like 
this. This single braid, your sleeping on the ground, your brooding, your 
soiled garments, and your fasting at the wrong time: such things do not 
become you at all. Lovely floral garlands, sandalwood, and aloe; various 
garments, heavenly jewelry, costly drink, carriages, and beds; singing, 
dancing, and music—accept me, Maithili, and you shall have it all. 

[11-15] “For you are a jewel among women. You must not keep on like 
this. You should place jewelry on your limbs. Since you have won me, 
lovely lady, how could you be undeserving of such things? The lovely 
bloom of your youth is fading, and—like the swift current of a river—once 
gone, it will never return. I think that the creator of all things, the author of 
all beauty, must have left off his work after fashioning you. For, beautiful 
woman, there is no other woman to equal you in loveliness. What man, 
Vaidehi—even Grandfather Brahma himself—could give you up having 
once laid eyes on you and your extraordinary youth and beauty? Your face 
is like the cool-rayed moon, and whichever of your limbs I see captivates 
my gaze, broad-hipped lady. 

[16—20] “You must be my wife, Maithilt! Abandon this folly! You will 
be the chief queen over all my many magnificent women. All the choice 
things I have taken by force from all the worlds will be yours, timid lady, as 
will my kingdom and myself. I shall conquer the entire earth with its 
garland of different cities and present it to Janaka for your sake, lovely lady. 
I know of no other in this world who can rival me in strength. Just look at 
my immense power, irresistible in battle. Many times have I smashed the 
gods and asuras in battle and ground their battle standards into the dust. 
They can no longer stand in hostile ranks before me. 

[21-27] “You must desire me. You should, this very moment, put on 
splendid jewelry. You must put dazzling jewels upon your limbs and let me 
behold your natural beauty, fully and properly adorned. Properly adorned 
and filled with kindness, lovely lady, you should enjoy all pleasures to your 
heart’s content. You must drink, timorous woman, and enjoy yourself. Give 
as many presents as you like; give away my wealth, even the earth itself. 
Enjoy yourself fully, trusting in me. Order me about impudently. Since you 


will be enjoying yourself through my power, your kinfolk will enjoy 
themselves as well. Consider my wealth, fortunate lady, my magnificence, 
and my fame. Of what use to you, my lovely, is this Rama with his 
barkcloth robes? Rama has renounced the triumph of a warrior and has lost 
his royal splendor to become an ascetic, a wanderer in the forest, who 
sleeps on the bare ground. Indeed, I doubt that he is still alive. Nor will 
Rama ever get even a glimpse of you, Vaidehi, any more than he could of 
moonlight occluded by the dense, black storm clouds that the balaka cranes 
herald. Unlike Hiranyakasipu, who brought his wife back from Indra’s 
clutches, Rama will never be able to get you back from mine. 

[28-31] “Beautiful lady, your smile, teeth, and eyes are lovely. You carry 
away my heart, as Suparna would a serpent. Since first I set my eyes on 
you, I have taken no pleasure in my own wives, even though you are 
emaciated, stripped of ornaments, and clad in a garment of tattered silk. No 
matter how many women—replete with every virtue—I may have in my 
inner apartments, Janaki, you will rule over them all. All my women—the 
finest in all the three worlds—will wait upon you, lady of the raven tresses, 
as do the apsarases upon Sri, the goddess of good fortune. 

[32-35] “Whatever wealth and choice things were once VaiSravana’s, 
you will now enjoy to your heart’s content, woman of lovely brows and 
hips, as well as all the worlds and me. Rama cannot compare to me, my 
lady, in ascetic power, physical strength, valor, wealth, power, or fame. So 
drink, enjoy yourself, amuse yourself, take pleasure in all pleasurable 
things. I shall bestow heaps of wealth and even the earth itself upon you. 
Delight in me, delightful one, to your heart’s content, and let your kinfolk 
join you here and delight themselves as well. In seaside forest groves— 
canopied with stands of flowering trees and swarming with bees—you will 
enjoy yourself with me, timid lady, your body ornamented with bright 
necklaces of gold.” 


Sarga 19 
[1-4] Afflicted and dejected, Sita listened to those words of the dreadful 
raksasa. Then, sorrowfully, she replied in a soft and sorrowful voice. 
Weeping, trembling, and afflicted with sorrow, poor lovely Sita, lady of the 
sweet smile—mourning for her husband and utterly devoted to him—placed 
a straw between Ravana and herself and said: “Turn your thoughts away 


from me and fix them on your own wives. You are no more worthy of 
having me than is a sinner of acquiring spiritual perfection. And how could 
a woman like me, devoted to one husband, born into a noble family, and 
married into a meritorious one, do something so contemptible and 
forbidden?” 

[5—9ab—-498*—9cd—499*] Having spoken to the raksasa Ravana in this 
fashion, illustrious Vaidehi turned her back on him and continued with the 
following words: “As the virtuous wife of another man, I am not a suitable 
wife for you. You should properly consider what is right, and you should 
properly follow the conduct of the virtuous. You ought to protect the wives 
of other men, night-roaming rdksasa, just as you do your own. Make an 
example out of yourself and make love to your own wives. Other men’s 
wives bring ruin upon a man—promiscuous, evil-minded, his senses 
unrestrained—unsatisfied with his own. ¢Whether there be virtuous men in 
this country or not, it is clear that you do not heed them, for your mind is 
perverse and utterly averse to proper conduct. "Your mind given to delusion, 
you do not heed the beneficial words that wise men utter; and this will lead 
to the destruction of the rdksasas. 

[10—13] “Even prosperous cities and countries can be brought to ruin if 
their monarch’s mind 1s uncontrolled and he is addicted to vicious conduct. 
With you for its ruler, the city of Lanka, filled with heaps of precious 
things, will soon be destroyed in just this fashion, solely because of your 
misconduct. Indeed, all creatures rejoice in the downfall of a shortsighted 
evildoer brought down by his own doing, Ravana. And all the people you 
have oppressed will, in their delight, say this about you, you evil wretch, 
‘Thank god that brutal tyrant has met with destruction.’ 

[14-17] “You cannot seduce me with your power or your wealth, for I 
am as inseparable from Raghava as is its radiance from the sun, bringer of 
light. Having once laid my head on the venerable arm of the lord of the 
world, how could I rest it on the arm of any other? I am the proper consort 
for that lord of the earth alone, just as is sacred learning for a learned 
brahman who has bathed in preparation for a religious observance. Very 
well then, Ravana, please reunite me, in my distress, with Rama, as one 
might a young elephant cow with the lord of the elephants in the forest. 

[18—24] “If you desire to retain your station, and if you wish to avoid a 
terrible death, it would be appropriate for you to make a friend of Rama, 


that bull among men. Indra’s vajra, when hurled, might miss you, and 
Yama, the ender of all things, himself might long spare you. But once 
angered, Raghava, lord of the world, will never spare the likes of you. You 
will hear the deafening sound of Rama’s bow, loud as the thunderbolt 
loosed by Indra of the hundred sacrifices. Swift, well-jointed arrows, their 
tips blazing like serpents’ mouths, will soon be falling here, marked with 
the names of Rama and Laksmana. Those heron-feathered arrows will soon 
be falling everywhere in the city, slaughtering the raksasas and bringing life 
to a halt. Then that great Garuda Vainateya in the form of Rama will swiftly 
annihilate those great serpents in the form of the raksasa lords, just as 
Vainateya himself annihilates real serpents. That subduer of his foes, my 
husband, will quickly take me back from you, just as Visnu took back the 
glorious royal sovereignty from the asuras with his three strides. 

[25—30] “When your army of rdksasas had been destroyed in Janasthana, 
land of the dead, you, in your impotence, O rdaksasa, did this wicked thing. 
Vile creature, you entered that desolate ashram only when those two 
brothers, lions among men, had gone out to the forest; and you carried me 
off. If you had caught so much as a whiff of Rama and Laksmana, you 
would not have been able to stand your ground in their sight any more than 
a dog at the sight of a pair of tigers. If you were really to face the two of 
them in combat, it would be impossible for you to defeat them both. It 
would be like the defeat of one-armed Vrtra by the two arms of Indra. My 
lord Rama and Saumitri will draw out your life’s breath with their arrows as 
quickly as the sun does a drop of water. Whether you flee to Kubera’s 
mountain abode or the assembly hall of King Varuna, there is no way that 
you can escape Dasarathi any more than a mighty tree—doomed to 
destruction—can escape the lightning bolt.” 


Sarga 20 
[1—6] When the lord of the rdksasas heard Sita’s harsh words, he responded 
to her—so pleasant to behold—in a most unpleasant manner: “However a 
man tries to conciliate women, he ends up being humiliated. The more I 
speak sweetly to you, the more I am rejected. Nonetheless, the desire for 
you that has arisen in me reins in my anger, as a skilled charioteer reins in 
his speeding horses on the road. Truly, desire is one of man’s perversities; 
for it gives rise to compassion and affection in whomever it is aroused. That 


is the only reason I do not kill you, my pretty one, even though you deserve 
death and dishonor and remain devoted to that false ascetic. A gruesome 
death would be fitting for you, Maithili, for each of the harsh things you 
have said to me.” 

[7-9] When he had spoken these words to Sita Vaidehi, Ravana, lord of 
the raksasas, addressed her further in a fresh paroxysm of rage: “I will 
honor the two-month period that I set as your deadline. But after that, my 
pretty, you must come to my bed. Once the two months have passed, if you 
still do not want me for your husband, then they will slaughter you in the 
kitchen for my breakfast.” 

[10-11] Now, when those wide-eyed daughters of the gods and 
gandharvas saw Janaki being threatened by the lord of the raksasas, they 
became distressed. They tried to encourage Sita, who was menaced by that 
raksasa, some with movements of their lips, others with gestures of their 
eyes and faces. 

[12-17] Encouraged by the women, Sita replied to the lord of the 
rdksasas in words that were for his benefit and that expressed her pride in 
the power of her virtue: “Evidently there is no one here who takes an 
interest in what is good for you—someone who would restrain you from 
this contemptible behavior. What other man in all the three worlds would so 
much as think of attempting to woo me? For I am as inseparably the wife of 
that righteous man as Saci is the wife of Indra, Saci’s lord. Now that you 
have spoken in so vile a fashion to the wife of immeasurably powerful 
Rama, where can you flee to escape him, you despicable rdksasa? It would 
be as if a proud bull elephant and a rabbit were to meet in the forest. Rama 
is like that great elephant and you, wretch, are the rabbit. You are not 
ashamed to insult the lord of the Iksvakus just so long as you keep out of 
his sight. 

[18-22] “And why is it, ignoble wretch, that these cruel and hideous 
eyes of yours—all yellow and black—do not fall to the ground as you ogle 
me? And how is it, villain, that your tongue does not shrivel as you speak to 
me, the wife of a righteous man and the daughter-in-law of DaSaratha? It is 
only because I have not been so ordered by Rama and because I wish to 
preserve intact the power of my austerities that I do not reduce you to ashes 
with my own blazing power, for that is what you deserve. It is impossible 
for me to be taken away from wise Rama. Doubtless all of this was 


ordained by destiny to bring about your doom. How could you, a warrior 
with all your armies and the brother of Kubera the bestower of wealth, have 
stooped to luring Rama away and stealing his wife?” 

[23—27] When Ravana, lord of the raksasas, heard those words of Sita 
Janaki, he rolled his cruel eyes in rage and glared at her. With his great arms 
and huge neck, he looked like a black storm cloud. He had the strength and 
the gait of a lion; he was majestic. His tongue was like a flame, and his eyes 
were fierce. He was tall, and the tip of his crown quivered; he wore brightly 
colored garlands and ointments. His clothes and floral wreaths were red, 
and his armlets and jewelry were of burnished gold. With his dark blue 
waistband wrapped about him, he looked like Mount Mandara with the 
great serpent wrapped around it to produce the nectar of immortality. 
Adorned with earrings that resembled the newly risen sun, he looked like a 
mountain with two asoka trees, their sprouts and blossoms red. 

[28-30] Glaring at Sita Vaideht with eyes red with rage, Ravana 
addressed her once again, hissing like a serpent: “So, you are devoted to 
that miserable pauper! I shall destroy you this very minute, as the sun with 
his radiance dispels the twilight of dawn.” When he had finished speaking 
to Maithili in this fashion, King Ravana, who makes his foes cry out, gave 
orders to all his dreadful-looking raksasa women. 

[31-33] One of the raksasa women had a single eye, another but a single 
ear, while another’s ears covered her upper body. One had the ears of a cow, 
another those of an elephant. One had long hanging ears, another no ears at 
all. One had the feet of an elephant, another those of a horse; a third had 
cow’s feet, while another had hairy feet. One had but a single eye, another 
but a single foot. One had enormous feet, and still another had no feet at all. 
One had an enormous head and neck, and another enormous breasts and 
belly. One had an enormous mouth and eyes; one had a long tongue, while 
another had no tongue at all. One had no nose. One had the face of a lion, 
another a cow’s face, while yet another had the face of a sow. 

[34-36] He said to them, “All you raksasa women must get together at 
once and act so as to make Sita Janaki immediately compliant to my 
wishes. You must bring Vaidehi around, using any means you can: harsh or 
gentle tactics, conciliation, gifts, provoking a rift, or even violence.” After 
repeatedly instructing them in this fashion, the lord of the rdaksasas 
continued to menace Janaki, his mind overcome by lust and wrath. 


[37-41] But then, suddenly, the rdaksasa woman Dhanyamalini 
approached ten-necked Ravana and, embracing him, said these words: 
“Come play with me, your majesty. What do you want with this Sita? The 
body of a man who desires a woman who does not want him suffers 
torments, but he who desires a responsive woman experiences enormous 
delight.” Addressed in this fashion by the raksasa woman, mighty Ravana 
was diverted and went back into the palace, which shone with the splendor 
of the blazing sun, bringer of light. Then those daughters of the gods, 
gandharvas, and great serpents—who formed the retinue of ten-necked 
Ravana—reentered his magnificent palace. Thus, having menaced Sita 
Maithill, who, though trembling, stood firm in her devotion to 
righteousness, Ravana, infatuated by the god of love, left her and returned 
to his splendid residence. 


Sarga 21 
[1-4] When King Ravana, who makes his foes cry out, had spoken to 
Maithill in this fashion and had given his orders to all the raksasa women, 
he left. No sooner had the lord of the rdksasas departed and returned to his 
inner apartments than the horrible-looking raksasa women swarmed about 
Sita. Crowding in upon Sita Vaidehi, the raksasa women, beside themselves 
with fury, addressed her with these exceedingly harsh words: “Sita, you 
don’t seem to think very much of the idea of being the wife of the great and 
outstanding ten-necked Ravana Paulastya.” 

[S5—8] Then, addressing Sita, whose stomach was as flat as the palm of 
one’s hand, a raksasa woman called Ekajata spoke these words, her eyes 
red with rage: “The fourth of the six Prajapatis was the mind-born son of 
Brahma Prajapati, lord of creatures, well known as Pulastya. Pulastya’s 
mighty mind-born son was the great seer called Visravas, who was 
Prajapati’s equal in splendor. Ravana, who makes his foes cry out, is his 
son. Lovely in every limb, you really ought to be the wife of that lord of the 
raksasas, wide-eyed woman. Why do you not accept the advice that I have 
been giving you?” 

[9-14] Then a rdksasa woman named Haryata, rolling her eyes, which 
were like those of a cat, in her anger said these words: “You really should 
become the wife of the lord of the raksasas by whom even Indra, the king 
of the gods, and the thirty-three gods have been vanquished. How is it that 


you will not consent to be the wife of that mighty and powerful hero, who is 
proud of his strength and who never retreats in battle? Forsaking his 
beloved wife, deeply cherished and most fortunate of all his women, mighty 
King Ravana will make love with you alone. And abandoning his inner 
apartments—adorned with every sort of jewel and filled with a thousand 
women—Ravana will make love with you alone. He who has come to you 
in this way is the one who has often defeated the gods, great serpents, 
gandharvas, and danavas in battle. 

[15-19] “How then, vile creature, can you not desire to be the wife of 
great Ravana, the lord of the rdksasas, so richly endowed in every way? 
How is it, lady of the long eyes, that you do not yield to him in fear of 
whom the sun does not shine and the wind does not blow? In fear of him, 
fair-browed woman, the trees loose showers of blossoms, and the mountains 
and clouds release their waters according to his whim. Why is it, lovely 
one, that you do not set your heart on becoming the wife of Ravana, king of 
the raksasas, king of kings? We have spoken to you truthfully and properly, 
charming lady. You should accept what we have said, woman of the lovely 
smile; otherwise you shall die!” 


Sarga 22 

[1-4] The harsh raksasa women with their hideous faces approached Sita 
and harshly spoke these unpleasant words to her: “How is it, Sita, that you 
do not wish to live in his inner apartments? They are furnished with costly 
beds, and they ravish the hearts of all creatures. As a human female, you set 
great store in being the wife of a human. But you must turn your thoughts 
away from Rama, for you will never again belong to him. Lovely and 
blameless woman, as a human female, you are still yearning for that human 
Rama, a failure and a weakling who has lost his kingdom.” 

[S—7] Hearing what the radksasa women had said, lotus-eyed Sita, her 
eyes brimming with tears, spoke the following words: “This wicked thing, 
despised by everyone, that you have come together to urge upon me will 
never take hold in my mind. A human woman can never be a raksasa’s 
wife. You may all devour me if you like, but I will never do as you say. 
Whether he be downcast or cast out of the kingship, my husband remains 
my master!” 


[8—14] When they heard how Sita responded, the raksasa women were 
beside themselves with rage; and, as they had been so ordered by Ravana, 
they threatened her with harsh words. Hiding in the simsapda tree, the 
monkey Hanuman listened in silence as the raksasa women menaced Sita. 
Crowding in upon the trembling woman on every side, the raksasa women 
repeatedly licked their flaming-red and pendulous lips. In a towering rage, 
they quickly seized their battle-axes and said, “This woman does not 
deserve Ravana, lord of the rdksasas, for her husband!” Menaced by the 
fearsome raksasa women, that fair-faced woman moved under the simsapa 
tree, wiping away her tears. Surrounded by the raksasa women, wide-eyed 
Sita approached the simsapa tree and stood there overwhelmed by grief. 
But even though she was emaciated, her face downcast, and her garments 
soiled, the fearsome raksasa women went on menacing her from every side. 

[15—22] Then a deformed and fearsome-looking, sunken-bellied raksasa 
woman named Vinataé, whose very appearance bespoke her rage, spoke: 
“By now you have adequately demonstrated your love for your husband, 
Sita; but, auspicious woman, excess in anything leads to disaster. Bless you, 
Maithilt, I am pleased with you, for you have fully observed the rules of 
human conduct. But now you must heed the good advice that I am about to 
give you. You must accept Ravana, lord of all the raksasas, as your 
husband. For he is as valorous and handsome as Indra Vasava, lord of the 
gods. You must give up this insignificant human Rama and take refuge in 
Ravana, who is skillful and exceedingly generous and who speaks kindly to 
all creatures. Covering your body with fragrant ointments and adorning 
yourself with heavenly ornaments, you must, from this day forward, 
Vaidehi, become the queen of all the worlds, like the goddess Svaha, the 
consort of Agni, the god of fire, lovely woman, or Indra’s consort, the 
goddess Saci. What are you doing with this insignificant Rama, who is, in 
any case, as good as dead, Vaidehi? If you don’t do what I have told you, 
then all of us will eat you up this very moment!” 

[23-27] Then Vikata, a furious rdksasa woman with sagging breasts, 
raised her fists and addressed her, bellowing: “Wicked-minded Maithili, in 
our kindness and gentleness, we have put up with the many inappropriate 
things that you have said. Yet, still, you will not follow our timely and 
beneficial advice. Maithili, you have been brought to the far shore of the 
ocean, which no other can reach, and you have been placed in Ravana’s 


formidable inner apartments. Since you have been imprisoned in the house 
of Ravana and are guarded by us, not even Indra himself, the smasher of 
citadels, can rescue you. You must take my words to heart, Maithilt; I am 
giving you good advice. Enough of these streams of tears; give up your 
useless grieving. 

[28-32] “Choose joy and pleasure instead; give up your constant misery. 
Sita, you should enjoy yourself to your heart’s content with the king of the 
raksasas! Timid lady, you should know how transient is the youth of 
women. You should seize happiness before your own youth passes. Lady of 
intoxicating eyes, you should roam with the rdksasa king through his lovely 
gardens and mountain parks. Seven thousand women will be at your 
command, lovely one. You must accept Ravana, lord of all the raksasas, as 
your husband. Or else, Maithilt, if you do not do exactly as I have told you, 
I shall tear out your heart and eat it!” 

[33-37] Then another fierce-looking raksasa woman named Candodari 
said these words as she brandished a huge lance: “The moment I saw this 
woman that Ravana has brought here, her eyes darting like a doe’s and her 
breasts trembling with fear, I conceived a tremendous craving. I conceived a 
desire to eat her liver, spleen, wtpida, her heart with all its veins and arteries, 
her intestines, and her head.” Then a rdksasa woman named Praghasa said, 
“What are we waiting for? Let’s strangle this heartless woman! We will tell 
the king that the woman is dead, and without a doubt, he will tell us, “You 
may eat her!’ ” 

[38-42] Next a raksasa woman named Ajamukhi said: “Butcher her; 
then cut her all up into equal, bite-sized pieces. Then we can all have a 
share. I hate arguments! So quickly bring lots of things to drink and all 
kinds of garlands.” Then a raksasa woman named Sirpanakha said: “I 
agree with what Ajamukhi just said. So quickly bring wine, the banisher of 
every sorrow! Let us eat human flesh and dance before the goddess 
Nikumbhila.” Threatened in this fashion by those dreadful raksasa women, 
Sita, who was like a daughter of the gods, lost her composure and wept. 


Sarga 23 
[1-3] As the hostile raksasa women were harshly saying these many cruel 
things, the daughter of Janaka began to weep. When virtuous Vaidehi had 
been addressed in this fashion by the raksasa women, she replied to them, 


though she was terrified, in a voice choked with tears: “A human woman 
can never be a rdksasa’s wife. You can all go ahead and devour me if you 
like; still, I will never do as you say.” 

[4-9] Thus, Sita, who was like a daughter of the gods, afflicted with 
sorrow and menaced by Ravana, could find no refuge there in the midst of 
the raksasa women. Sita shook violently and seemed as if to shrink into 
herself, like a doe in the forest separated from her herd and beset by wolves. 
Steadying herself with a large, flowering branch of an asoka tree, she 
brooded sorrowfully on her husband, her heart broken. Brooding and 
bathing her full breasts with her flowing tears, she could not find an end to 
her sorrow. She fell down trembling like a plantain tree in a high wind, 
terrified of the raksasa women. She turned very pale. As Sita was trembling 
so violently, her long, thick braid shook as well, so that it looked like a 
writhing serpent. 

[10-14] Afflicted, overcome by grief, her mind overwhelmed with 
sorrow, Maithili sighed, shed tears, and lamented. Overcome by grief, the 
lovely woman cried out, “Oh Rama!” and then again, “Oh Laksmana! Oh 
Kausalya, my mother-in-law! Oh Sumitra! Since I have been able to survive 
even for a moment misery such as this—separated from Rama and harassed 
by these cruel raksasa women—the popular maxim that the pandits quote 
must be true indeed: ‘It is impossible for a man or a woman to die before 
the appointed time.’ Like a woman without a protector, this wretched 
woman, whose merit must be small, must surely perish, like a laden vessel 
struck by strong winds in the midst of the ocean. 

[15—20] “Unable to see my husband and fallen into the clutches of the 
rdksasa women, I am collapsing under my grief, like a riverbank undercut 
by water. How fortunate are those who are able to see my lord—his eyes 
like the inner petals of a lotus—who walks with the valorous gait of a lion 
and yet is so capable and soft-spoken. Separated from celebrated Rama, 
there is no way that I can survive any more than if I had consumed virulent 
poison. What kind of crime did I commit in a previous life that has made 
me experience such cruel and terrible suffering? Engulfed by this great 
sorrow, I wish to end my life. Guarded by these raksasa women, I will 
never see Rama again. How pathetic is this human state! How wretched to 
be under the power of another! Although I wish to, I cannot end my life.” 


Sarga 24 

[1-5] Speaking in this fashion, Janaka’s young daughter began to lament, 
her face cast down and covered with tears. Grieving like a woman 
possessed, or a madwoman, or a woman in a state of utter confusion, she 
rolled on the ground like a filly: “Despite Raghava’s vigilance, I was 
violently and forcibly abducted, wailing, by the raksasa Ravana, who can 
change his form at will. Fallen into the clutches of the rdksasa women, 
cruelly menaced, brooding, and overcome with terrible grief, I cannot go on 
living. Living among the rdksasa women without the great chariot-warrior 
Rama, life itself has no meaning for me, let alone wealth and jewelry. 

[6-10] “A curse upon me, ignoble and unchaste, in that, wretched 
creature that I am, I have survived for even a moment without him. What 
desire can I have for life or happiness without my beloved, that soft-spoken 
lord of all the sea-bounded earth? I shall cast off my body; let them cut it up 
or eat it. For without my beloved, I cannot long endure this suffering. I 
would not touch that night-roaming raksasa Ravana even with my left foot, 
much less fall in love with the despicable wretch! He must not understand 
that I have rejected him, nor can he be cognizant of what he really is and of 
his own lowly race, since, with his vicious nature, he tries to woo me. 

[11-14] “You can slice me, dice me, chop me up, or roast me in a 
blazing fire! I will still never obey Ravana; so what is the use of your 
prattlng on so long? Raghava is renowned, wise, capable, and 
compassionate. Therefore, I think that it must be the exhaustion of my good 
fortune that has made this virtuous man so pitiless. For why has he who 
single-handedly annihilated fourteen thousand raksasas in Janasthana not 
come for me? This rdksasa Ravana, who holds me captive, has very little 
strength. Surely my husband is capable of killing him in battle. 

[15—20] “Why then has Rama, who slew in battle that bull among 
rdaksasas Viradha in the Dandaka forest, not come for me? Granted, it is 
difficult to assault Lanka, which is situated in the middle of the ocean. Still, 
there is nothing in the world that can stop the flight of Raghava’s arrows. 
Why has Rama, so firm in his valor, not come to rescue his beloved wife, 
who has been carried off by a raksasa? I think that the older brother of 
Laksmana must not know that I am here. For if that mighty man knew it, 
would he then endure this outrage? For the king of the vultures, who knew 
that I had been abducted and might have so informed Raghava, was slain in 


battle by Ravana. It was a great deed that Jatayus performed in trying to 
rescue me, despite his advanced age, in single combat with Ravana. 

[21—24] “If Raghava had found out that I was here, then in his wrath, he 
would this very day rid the world of raksasas. He would wipe out the city 
of Lanka and dry up the mighty ocean. He would destroy the name and the 
reputation of that vile Ravana. There can be no doubt that just as I have 
been weeping, so will there be—in house after house—still greater weeping 
on the part of the raksasa women whose husbands have been slain. For 
Rama together with Laksmana will seek out Lanka and bring about the 
slaughter of the raksasas. For no enemy whom those two spy lives even for 
a moment. Indeed, soon this city of Lanka will resemble a cremation 
ground filled with flocks of vultures, its roads thick with the smoke of 
funeral pyres. 

[25-31] “In a very short time, I shall gain my heart’s desire. Your evil 
conduct foretells the downfall of you all. Evil portents such as are now seen 
in Lanka show that in a very short time the city will be stripped of its 
splendor. For it is certain that once the evil lord of the raksasas, Ravana, is 
slain, his unassailable citadel of Lanka will wither away like a young 
widow. Once its lord is killed, the city of Lanka, so rich in holy festivals, 
together with its raksasas, will resemble a beautiful woman whose husband 
has died. Very soon now I shall surely hear the sound of weeping raksasa 
maidens afflicted with grief in every house here. If only heroic Rama, the 
corners of his eyes bloodred, should learn that I am living in the house of 
Ravana, the citadel of Lanka would be consumed by his arrows: plunged 
into darkness, its splendor destroyed, its bulls among raksasas slaughtered. 

[32—36] “But the time that was allotted me by that cruel and vile Ravana 
has now all but elapsed. Now a great calamity arising from unrighteousness 
is about to befall these criminal raksasas, who do not know right from 
wrong. These flesh-eating raksasas simply do not understand proper 
conduct. Undoubtedly, this raksasa will have them fix me for his breakfast. 
Oh, in my great suffering, what shall I do without him—without seeing my 
handsome Rama, the corners of his eyes bloodred? If only there were 
someone here to give me poison; then, deprived of my husband, I would 
soon meet Vaivasvata, the god of death. 

[37-41] “Laksmana’s elder brother, Rama, must not know that I am 
alive. For if they knew, it is impossible that the two of them would not 


scour the earth for me. Surely the heroic elder brother of Laksmana has 
gone—out of grief for me—from here to the world of the gods, leaving his 
body behind on earth. How fortunate are those gods, gandharvas, perfected 
beings, and supreme seers who now can see Rama, my lotus-eyed lord. The 
wise royal seer Rama, who 1s desirous only of righteousness, is, in reality, 
the Supreme Soul. Perhaps he has no use for me as a wife. Generally people 
have affection only for those who are actually present. There is no love for 
those who are far away. But then again, it is only ingrates who diminish 
their affection in this way. Rama would never do so. 

[42-45] “Is it that I am completely devoid of good qualities, or is it just 
the exhaustion of my good fortune, that I, Sita, a young woman, should be 
bereft of Rama, who is deserving of only the finest things? It would be 
better for me to die than to live without the great hero Rama, tireless in his 
actions, destroyer of his foes. Or perhaps the two brothers, the foremost of 
men, have laid down their weapons and are wandering in the forest as forest 
dwellers, subsisting on roots and fruits. Or perhaps Ravana, the wicked lord 
of the rdksasas, has slain the heroic brothers Rama and Laksmana by means 
of some trick. 

[46-49] “At such a time as this, I can wish only to die, but even in such 
suffering, death is not permitted for me. Fortunate, indeed, are those great 
and blessed sages who are revered for their truthfulness, who have subdued 
their minds, and for whom there is neither pleasure nor aversion. Pleasure 
arises from pleasant things, great aversion from the unpleasant. Homage to 
those great ones who detach themselves from both! Abandoned here by my 
beloved, celebrated Rama, and fallen into the clutches of the wicked 
Ravana, I shall end my life.” 


Sarga 25 

[1-3] Addressed in so vehement a fashion by Sita, the radksasa women were 
beside themselves with rage. Some of them went hurrying to report to 
Ravana. The other dreadful-looking raksasa women closed in on Sita and 
once again began harshly to speak to her with the same ill-intentioned 
words: “Vile Sita, fixed in your evil ways, today—this very minute—the 
raksasa women will devour your flesh to their heart’s content.” 

[4-8] But, at that very moment, an elderly raksasa woman named 
Trijata, who had been sleeping, saw those vile creatures menacing Sita and 


said: “Eat yourselves, vile creatures! You shall never devour Sita, Janaka’s 
beloved daughter and the daughter-in-law of Dasaratha. I just now had the 
most frightening, hair-raising dream, which foretold the annihilation of the 
rdksasas and the triumph of this woman’s husband.” When the raksasa 
women, who had been beside themselves with rage, were addressed in this 
fashion by Trijata, they became frightened, and they all said these words to 
her: “Tell us what was it like, this dream of yours, that you had in the 
night.” 

[9-12] When Trijaté heard these words coming from the mouths of the 
raksasa women, she began to tell them about the dream she had had at 
daybreak: “I saw Raghava. He was riding in a celestial carriage made of 
ivory. Yoked to a thousand horses, it was moving through the sky. And in 
that dream I saw Sita as well. She was dressed in garments of white, and 
she stood on a white mountain surrounded by the sea. Rama and she were 
as inseparably united as the sun, bringer of light, and its radiance. Then I 
saw that Rama and Laksmana had mounted a great four-tusked elephant 
that looked like a mountain, and they were advancing. 

[13-17] “Then those two tigers among men, wearing garlands and 
clothing of white and blazing with their own inner power, were waiting in 
attendance upon Janaki. On the top of that mountain, Janaki mounted the 
back of that elephant, which was ridden through the sky by her husband. 
And I saw that lotus-eyed woman rise from her husband’s lap to stroke the 
sun and moon with her hands. That magnificent elephant, ridden by the two 
princes and wide-eyed Sita, was standing above Lanka. Then I saw Rama 
himself, riding with Laksmana in a chariot drawn by a yoke of eight white 
bulls. He was wearing garlands and clothing of white, and he was 
accompanied by his brother Laksmana and his wife, Sita. 

[18-21] “I also saw Ravana. He had just fallen from his flying palace, 
Puspaka, and was lying on the ground. His garments were black, and his 
head was shaved. A woman was dragging him along. Then he was traveling 
toward the south in a chariot yoked to donkeys. He was covered with red 
garlands and unguents, and he was plunging into a pool of mud. A black 
woman with red garments, her body smeared with mud, had lassoed ten- 
necked Ravana around the neck and was dragging him to the south, the 
direction of Yama, god of death. Then ten-necked Ravana mounted on a 


boar, Indrajit on a dolphin, and Kumbhakarna on a camel were all heading 
south. 

[22—25] “There was a vast assembly of raksasas there, noisy with the 
sound of singing and musical instruments. They were all drinking, and their 
garlands and garments were all red. Then I saw the lovely city of Lanka— 
filled with horses and chariots—its towers and archways crumbling, fall 
into the sea. All the raksasa women were there—drinking oil, dancing, and 
laughing loudly—in a Lanka now blackened by ash. Kumbhakarna and all 
the other bulls among the raksasas had put on red garments and had 
plunged into a pool of cow dung. 

[26-29] “Run away! Disappear! Raghava will recover Sita, and in a 
towering rage, he will destroy this city along with all the raksasas. Raghava 
will not be pleased with those who have reviled and threatened his 
cherished and beloved wife, who devotedly shared his forest exile. So you 
had better stop your cruel taunts and speak in a conciliatory fashion. We 
should entreat with Sita. That is what I think. An unhappy woman about 
whom one has a dream of this kind is sure to be freed from all her troubles 
and to attain supreme felicity. 

[30-33] “What is the use of all this talk, raksasa women? You must go 
and entreat with her whom you have been menacing, for a dreadful danger 
to the rdksasas has now arisen in the form of Raghava. Now only Maithili, 
the daughter of Janaka—and only if she is propitiated by our falling at her 
feet—can save the raksasa women from this grave danger. For I have not 
noticed even the slightest indication of any ominous signs anywhere on the 
person of this wide-eyed woman. I think that she has merely suffered a 
dimming of her radiance. This lady does not deserve to suffer; and she is 
the one I saw standing in the sky. 

[34-38] “I foresee the accomplishment of Vaidehi’s desires—the 
destruction of the lord of the raksasas and the victory of Raghava—to be at 
hand. Her eye as broad as a lotus petal is throbbing, and that is an omen that 
she will hear very welcome news. And well-bred Vaideht’s arm—yjust the 
left one—has begun to tremble spontaneously, its hairs bristling slightly 
with joy. Her unsurpassed left thigh, which resembles an elephant’s trunk, 
foretells by its trembling that Raghava will soon stand before her. And that 
bird, perched in its nest on the branch and joyously pouring forth its lovely 


sweet notes over and over again, seems, in uttering its words of warm 
welcome, to be repeatedly encouraging Sita.” 


Sarga 26 

[1-4] When Sita, so filled with pain, had heard the painful words of 
Ravana, lord of the raksasas, she was as terrified as the daughter of an 
elephant king attacked by a lion in the depths of the forest. Surrounded by 
the raksasa women and cruelly menaced by the words of Ravana, timorous 
Sita lamented, like a little girl abandoned in the midst of a desolate 
wilderness: “Virtuous folk in the world have a popular saying that there is 
no such thing as untimely death. Alas, it must be true if I, who lack all 
merit, have managed to survive even for a moment under such abuse. 
Devoid of happiness and filled with so much pain, truly my heart must be 
very hard indeed, since it has not shattered into a thousand pieces, like a 
mountain peak struck by lightning. 

[S5—8] “Surely suicide could not be reckoned as a crime in my case, since 
this creature—so hateful to my sight—is going to kill me anyway, while I 
am no more able to give him my affection than is a twice-born brahman 
able to teach a vedic mantra to a sudra. Surely if Rama, the lord of the 
world, does not come, the vile lord of the raksasas will soon dismember me 
with sharp knives, as a surgeon might a fetus in the womb. Alas, the two 
months allotted me, who have already suffered so long, will soon elapse! 
Then it will be for me, just as it would be for a thief, imprisoned and 
condemned to death for a crime against the crown, on the morning of his 
execution. Oh Rama! Oh Laksmana! Oh Sumitra! Oh mother of Rama, and 
my own mother as well! This luckless woman will perish like a ship 
foundering in a storm at sea. 

[9-14] “Those vigorous sons of the lord of men must have been killed on 
my account through the strength of that creature in the form of a deer, just 
as a pair of bulls or lions might be killed by a bolt of lightning. It must have 
been Kala himself in the guise of a deer who deluded hapless me at that 
time when, fool that I am, I sent away my husband—the elder brother of 
Laksmana—and the younger brother of Rama as well. Alas, Rama of the 
long arms, true to your vows! Alas, you whose face rivals the full moon! 
Alas, you benefactor and beloved of the whole world! You do not realize 
that I am to be slain by the raksasas. My taking you for my sole divinity, 


my long suffering, my sleeping on the ground, and my rigorous adherence 
to righteousness—all this—my utter devotion to my husband, has been in 
vain, like the favors men do for ingrates. All my righteous conduct has been 
in vain, and my exclusive devotion to my husband useless. For pale and 
emaciated, I cannot see you; I am cut off from you without hope for our 
reunion. Once you have carried out your father’s orders to the letter and 
have returned from the forest with your vow accomplished, you will, I 
think, make love with wide-eyed women, carefree, your purpose 
accomplished. 

[15-17] “But as for hapless me, Rama, after having loved you so long, 
given you all my heart—to my own undoing—and practiced my vows and 
penances in vain, I shall abandon my accursed life. I would quickly take my 
life with poison or some sharp weapon, but there is no one in the raksasa’s 
household to give me either.” Burning with grief and brooding constantly 
on all these things, Sita gathered her woven braid in her hand and said: “I 
shall at once hang myself by my woven braid and enter the presence of 
Yama, god of death.” 

[18-20] Thus did Sita lament over and over, fondly remembering Rama 
with all her heart. Then, trembling, her mouth gone dry, she approached the 
great blossoming tree. She whose every limb was soft approached the tree 
and took hold of one of its branches. Then she whose limbs were lovely 
began to think about Rama, R&ama’s younger brother, and her own family. 
And as she did so, many auspicious omens—well known in the world— 
appeared and inspired her with courage. They were omens such as had 
previously appeared and had been proven accurate. 


Sarga 27 
[1-4] Yet even as blameless and lovely Sita, afflicted and bereft of all joy, 
stood there reduced to such a state, her mind in utter dejection, auspicious 
omens appeared to her like dependents before a wealthy man. That fair- 
tressed woman’s lovely left eye—wide, white, black in the center, and 
fringed with curling lashes—began to tremble like a dark red lotus set 
trembling by a fish. Her left arm—so lovely, shapely, full, and round— 
which was fit for the finest aloe and sandalwood pastes and which had so 
long been caressed by her peerless beloved, now too began to tremble. And 
of her thighs, which pressed so close against each other, the lovely left one 


—full and resembling an elephant’s trunk—began to throb, foretelling that 
Rama would soon stand before her. 

[S—8] Then the auspicious and golden but slightly soiled garment of that 
bright-eyed woman—her limbs lovely and her teeth like the tips of jasmine 
buds—began to slip from its place. The fair-browed woman seemed to be 
restored to life by these and other auspicious signs she knew from before to 
be harbingers of good tidings, just as a seed—parched by wind and sun and 
nearly dead—revives with the rain. Her face—its lips like bimba fruit, its 
eyes, brows, bordering locks, and curling lashes lovely, and its teeth 
brilliant white—resembled the moon suddenly freed from the mouth of 
Rahu, demon of the eclipse. Her sorrow dispelled, her lethargy gone, her 
fever cooled, and her spirit restored by joy, the noble lady’s face lent her the 
same radiance as the cool-rayed, waxing moon lends the night in rising. 


Sarga 28 

[1-5] Now valorous Hanuman had fully overheard everything that had 
passed between Sita and Trijata as well as the threats of the radksasa women. 
As the monkey looked down upon that lady, who resembled a goddess in 
the Nandana gardens, several thoughts occurred to him: “I have at last 
found her whom many thousands and tens of thousands of monkeys are 
seeking in all directions. I have also seen whatever was to be seen by a 
well-trained spy moving about covertly to determine an enemy’s strength. I 
have now seen the relative strengths of the rdksasas and their citadel, as 
well as the power of Ravana, their lord. 

[6-9] “It is now fitting for me to console the wife of him who is 
immeasurable and compassionate to all creatures, for she is longing to see 
her husband. I must comfort her whose face is like the full moon, for she 
who has never before experienced suffering can see no end to this suffering 
of hers. It would be wrong of me to leave without having first comforted 
this lady, whose mind is overwhelmed by grief. For if I were simply to 
leave, the illustrious princess Janaki, seeing no salvation, might take her 
own life. 

[10-12] “It would also be proper for me to reassure the great-armed 
warrior whose face is like the full moon and who is yearning for the sight of 
Sita. But I cannot speak to her right in front of those night-roaming raksasa 
women. What then am I to do in this predicament? Still, if I do not comfort 


her through the remaining portion of the night, there can be no doubt that 
she will take her own life. 

[13-16] “And if Rama should ask me, ‘What message did Sita have for 
me?’ what could I possibly tell him if I had not spoken with that fair- 
waisted woman? If I were to return from here in haste without bringing a 
message from Sita, then—in his rage—Kakutstha might burn me up with 
his fiery glance. If that were the case, then my having engaged my master 
on Rama’s behalf and his coming here with his armies would be all in vain. 
So I shall remain here, waiting for some lapse in the vigilance of the 
raksasa women, at which point I may quietly comfort this woman, who is 
filled with so much sorrow. 

[17-21] “Since I am so very tiny and a monkey to boot, I had best speak 
Sanskrit, the language of humans. On the other hand, if I were to speak 
Sanskrit like a twice-born brahman, then Sita would take me for Ravana 
and be frightened. Still, I must speak comprehensibly to her in the language 
of the people, for there is no other way for me to reassure this blameless 
woman. When she sees what I look like and hears how I speak, Janaki, who 
has already been terrorized by the rdksasas, may become terrified once 
again. And if the virtuous, wide-eyed lady should become terrified, she 
might cry out, taking me for Ravana, who can change his shape at will. 

[22—27] “And if Sita should cry out, then that dreadful horde of raksasa 
women, like Yama, the ender of all things, himself, would rush here at once, 
armed with all manner of weapons. Then those hideous creatures would 
swarm all around me, trying their utmost to capture or kill me. If they 
should see me leaping among the trunks, limbs, and branches of these great 
trees, they would be filled with fear and apprehension. When they see my 
huge form as I race through this grove, the hideous raksasa women will be 
terrified. Those rdksasa women will then summon the rdksasas who are 
employed by the rdksasa lord in his household. Those terrifying creatures 
will come rushing swiftly in turn to join the fray with lances, arrows, 
swords, and various other weapons in their hands. 

[28—31] “If I were to be surrounded by the army of the radksasas, I could, 
in the fury of battle, utterly destroy it. But then I might not be able to reach 
the farther shore of the mighty ocean. On the other hand, a large number of 
those swift creatures might pounce on me and capture me. Then she would 
not get my message, for I would be a prisoner. Or these creatures, who 


delight in violence, might kill the daughter of Janaka. Then the entire 
mission of Rama and Sugriva would come to nothing. Janaki is now 
dwelling in this hidden and inaccessible country, which is surrounded by 
raksasas and completely isolated by the sea. 

[32—35] “If I were to be killed or taken in battle by the radksasas, I cannot 
think of anyone else who could help Rama to accomplish his mission. Even 
upon reflection, I can think of no monkey who could leap over the great sea 
—a hundred leagues across—if I were slain. True, I am capable of 
annihilating thousands of raksasas, but then I would not be able to reach the 
far shore of the mighty ocean. Then again, battle is an uncertain business, 
and I do not like uncertainty. For what intelligent person would 
unreflectingly engage in an affair whose outcome is uncertain? 

[36-40] “Such is the great drawback in my speaking to Sita. On the other 
hand, if I do not speak to her, Vaideht may take her own life. If the place 
and time are not propitious or if the agent is injudicious, even well- 
conceived plans can come to nothing like darkness at sunrise. Even a firm 
decision as to what ought or ought not be done can come to nothing. For 
messengers who think they are clever can destroy an undertaking. How can 
the failure of the mission be avoided? How can I avoid making a blunder? 
How can I ensure that my leaping over the ocean will not prove to have 
been in vain? How might she hear what I have to say without becoming 
terrified?” When he had reflected in this fashion, wise Hanuman reached a 
decision. 

[41-44] “If I speak about her husband, Rama, tireless in action, then I 
will not frighten her, for her mind will be absorbed in thoughts of him. If I 
speak words that are auspicious and in keeping with righteousness 
concerning celebrated Rama, foremost of the Iksvakus, then in speaking 
these sweet words, I shall be able to get her to hear me out. I shall tell her 
everything in such a way that she believes me.” Thus demonstrating in 
many ways his concern for the wife of the lord of the universe, noble 
Hanuman—still hidden within the branches of the tree—began to speak 
sweetly and truthfully. 


Sarga 29 
[1-4] When he had deliberated in all these different ways, the great monkey 
spoke these sweet words within range of Vaidehi’s hearing: “There once 


was a king named Dasaratha, a master of chariots, elephants, and horses. He 
was pious in conduct, greatly renowned, honorable, and glorious. Born in a 
line of universal emperors, he was equal in strength to Indra, smasher of 
citadels. He was devoted to nonviolence, magnanimous, merciful, and truly 
valorous. He was the chief of the House of Iksvaku, and he was both 
prosperous and the increaser of prosperity. He was a bull among kings and 
very majestic. He was marked with all the signs of kingship. Happy and a 
giver of happiness, he was renowned throughout the four-cornered earth. 

[5—9] “His beloved eldest son—whose face was like the moon, the lord 
of stars—was named Rama. He was learned and was the foremost among 
all bowmen. That scorcher of his enemies was the guardian of his own 
conduct and of his kinsmen. He was the guardian of all creatures and of 
righteousness itself. On the orders of his aged father, steadfast in 
truthfulness, that hero went into exile in the forest accompanied by his wife 
and his brother. There Janaki was abducted by Ravana in his rage at hearing 
that Rama, while out hunting in the deep forest, had killed Khara and 
Diisana and effected a slaughter in Janasthana. And now I have found her, 
for she is just as I heard Rama describe her in respect to her beauty, her 
complexion, and her splendor.” 

[10—12] When he had spoken these words, that bull among monkeys fell 
silent. But as for Janaki, she was greatly astonished to hear them. That 
timorous lady of the beautiful, curling tresses turned her face, framed by her 
flowing hair, upward and gazed at the simsapa tree. Looking sideways, up, 
and down, she spied at last the inconceivably wise son of the wind god and 
minister of the lord of the monkeys. He looked like the rising sun. 


Sarga 30 
[1-8] Her thoughts in a whirl, the lady spied a monkey hidden among the 
branches. He was soft-spoken and humble. Seeing that best of tawny 
monkey standing humbly before her, lovely Maithili thought, ““This must be 
a dream!” Upon seeing him, she completely lost consciousness and seemed 
almost as if dead. When, after a long time, she had regained consciousness, 
the wide-eyed lady thought: “I have just now had a horrible dream! A 
monkey in a dream is held by all the sdastras to be inauspicious. May no evil 
befall Rama, Laksmana, or my father, King Janaka! But this cannot be a 
dream! For afflicted as I am with grief and sorrow, I cannot sleep. And there 


is no rest for me, so long as I am separated from him whose face is like the 
full moon. I am tormented by my love for him, my every thought is of him, 
and, from my incessant brooding upon him, I see and hear him constantly. I 
think this must be some hallucination, but then I reason with my mind, 
‘What is the basis for this? Such a thing has no substance.’ But this creature 
who is addressing me has a clearly perceptible form. I pay homage to 
Brhaspati, lord of speech, along with Indra, wielder of the vajra; to self- 
existent Brahma, and to Agni, eater of oblations. Let what this forest 
creature has said in my presence prove true and not otherwise.” 


Sarga 31 
[1-3] Placing his cupped hands to his head, mighty Hanuman, son of 
Maruta, then addressed Sita in a sweet voice: “Who are you, blameless lady, 
your eyes like lotus petals, who stand here in a garment of worn silk 
clinging to a branch of this tree? Why do tears of sorrow pour from your 
eyes, like water dripping from two lotus petals? 

[4-10] “Which one of the gods, asuras, great serpents, gandharvas, 
raksasas, yaksas, or kinnaras are you, lovely one? Or are you one of the 
Rudras, Maruts, or Vasus, fair-faced woman? Lovely lady, you seem to me 
to be a divinity. Can you be Rohini, foremost of heavenly bodies, excellent 
and endowed with every virtue, who—separated from your lord, the moon 
—has fallen from the world of the gods? Or, black-eyed woman, are you 
not auspicious Arundhati, who has annoyed her husband Vasistha through 
anger or foolishness? Fair-waisted woman, can it be that you are grieving 
for a son, a father, a brother, or husband who has passed from this world to 
the next? I have observed your figure and the characteristic signs on your 
body, and I have concluded that you must be the queen of some lord of the 
earth and the daughter of a king. Bless you. Please tell me, since I am 
asking, if you are that Sita whom Ravana carried off by force from 
Janasthana?” 

[11-14] Hearing these words, Vaidehi, who was thrilled by the mention 
of Rama’s name, replied to Hanuman, who was still up in the tree: “My 
name is Sita. I am the daughter of the great Janaka Vaideha and the wife of 
wise Rama. For twelve years I lived in Raghava’s house, enjoying all 
human pleasures and having everything that I could possibly want. Then— 


in the thirteenth year—the king, along with his preceptors, undertook the 
consecration of that heir to the Iksvaku dynasty as king. 

[15-18] “But while the preparations for Rama’s consecration were under 
way, Queen Kaikeyi said these words to her husband: ‘Henceforth I shall 
take neither food nor drink. If Rama is consecrated, that will mark the end 
of my life. If, foremost of kings, what you promised when you were pleased 
with me is not to prove false, Raghava must go to the forest.’ When the 
king, who was always true to his promise, heard those cruel and unwelcome 
words of Queen Kaikeyi and remembered granting her boons, he fainted. 

[19-22] “Then, weeping, the elderly king—so firm in his adherence to 
the code of truthfulness—had to beg his eldest, glorious son for the 
kingdom. That majestic prince immediately accepted his father’s words 
with all his heart, for they were far more important to him than his own 
consecration. He then gave voice to his acceptance. Truly valorous Rama 
only gives, he never takes. And he would never speak unkindly, even to 
save his life. The glorious prince cast aside his costly garments, abandoned 
the kingship wholeheartedly, and consigned me to the care of his mother. 

[23-27] “But leading the way before him, I at once set forth to be a 
forest dweller. For without him life, even in heaven, would have no charm 
for me. But even before that, illustrious Saumitri, delighter of his friends, 
had adorned himself in barkcloth garments in order to accompany his elder 
brother. Firm in our vows, adhering strictly to our lord’s command, we 
entered that impenetrable wilderness, which none of us had ever seen 
before. It was while that prince of immeasurable might was living in the 
Dandaka forest that I, his wife, was abducted by the wicked rdksasa 
Ravana. He has set for me two months as a grace period. At the end of the 
two months, I must die!” 


Sarga 32 
[1-6] When Hanuman, leader of the troops of tawny monkeys, heard Sita, 
who had been so overwhelmed by sorrow after sorrow, he responded to her 
with these comforting words: “My lady, I am a messenger who has come to 
you at the bidding of Rama. Rama is well, Vaidehi, and inquires about your 
well-being. My lady, Dasarathi, foremost among those who know the vedas 
and who has mastered the divine weapon of Brahma as well as the vedas, 
inquires about your well-being. And your husband’s beloved follower, 


immensely powerful Laksmana, himself tormented by grief, bows his head 
in obeisance to you.” When the lady heard that those two lions among men 
were well, her whole body trembled with joy, and she spoke to Hanuman: 
“Indeed, it seems to me that the popular saying, ‘Joy will eventually come 
to a person who lives, even if it takes a hundred years,’ is true.” 

[7-12] Through their meeting in this fashion, both of them experienced 
extraordinary delight. Then, trusting in each other, they engaged in 
conversation. Hearing the words of Sita, so downcast with sorrow, 
Hanuman, leader of the troops of tawny monkey, began to draw nearer. But 
the closer Hanuman came, the more Sita began to suspect that he was really 
Ravana, thinking to herself: “Oh what a stupid thing I have done to tell him 
all of this! Surely this must be Ravana, who has taken on another form.” 
Emaciated from grief, that woman of flawless limbs then let go of the 
branch of the asoka tree and collapsed to the ground. The great-armed 
monkey prostrated himself before the daughter of Janaka, but—once more 
overcome with fear—she could not look at him. 

[13—16] When at last Sita, her face like the moon, saw him making his 
obeisance, she heaved a deep sigh and in her sweet voice addressed the 
monkey: “If you are, in fact, Ravana, master of illusion, employing illusion 
to further torment me, then it is not right. Surely you are the same Ravana I 
saw in Janasthana, the one who had abandoned his natural appearance and 
taken on that of a wandering ascetic. Night-roaming raksasa, you who can 
change your shape at will, it is not right for you to further torment me now 
that I am disconsolate and emaciated from fasting. 

[17-20] “But if you have really come here as a messenger of Rama, then 
bless you. I would like to question you further, best of monkeys, for I love 
to hear about Rama. Please speak further about the virtues of my beloved 
Rama. You steal away my heart, gentle monkey, as the current of a river 
does the riverbank. Oh! How delightful is this dream in which I—so long 
ago abducted—now see a forest creature sent by Raghava. If I could only 
see heroic Raghava and Laksmana—even in a dream—lI should not give 
way to despair. But even my dreams have been horrible. 

[21-24] “But I do not think this is a dream. For no one who sees a 
monkey in a dream experiences good fortune; and good fortune seems now 
to be at hand for me. Can it be that this is some mental delusion or some 
hallucination? Or can it be, perhaps, some manifestation of mental disorder, 


or perhaps just a mirage? On the other hand, this cannot be a mental 
disorder or a delusion with the symptoms of mental disorder; for I clearly 
perceive both myself and this forest creature.” After thus considering all 
aspects of the situation, Sita concluded—on the basis of the rdksasas’ 
ability to change their forms at will—that this must indeed be the king of 
the rdksasas. 

[25—29] Once she had come to this conclusion, the slender-waisted 
daughter of Janaka, Sita, would not even reply to the monkey. Realizing 
what she was thinking, Hanuman, son of Maruta, tried to encourage her 
with words that would be welcome to her ears: “That great man, under the 
shadow of whose arms the world is protected, is as brilliant as the sun and 
as beloved by all creatures as the moon. Like the god Vaisravana, he is the 
king of all the world. He is as valorous as glorious Visnu and as truthful and 
sweetly spoken as the god Brhaspati, lord of speech. He is as handsome, 
charming, and majestic as Kandarpa, the god of love incarnate. He directs 
his anger and his weapons only at those who deserve them. He is the 
foremost chariot-warrior in the world. 

[30-33] “You will soon witness the punishment of him who lured 
Raghava out of the ashram through the ruse of a deer and abducted you 
when the place was deserted. It is he who has sent me as a messenger to 
your side. That is why I have come. Afflicted with misery in separation 
from you, he now inquires about your well-being. That mighty man will 
soon kill Ravana in battle with arrows loosed in anger and blazing like fire, 
the purifier. Great-armed Laksmana, mighty enhancer of Sumitra’s joy, also 
respectfully salutes you and inquires after your welfare. 

[34-39] “Rama also has an ally, my lady, the monkey Sugriva, the king 
over all the monkey leaders. He too inquires after your welfare. Rama 
thinks of you continually and so do Laksmana and Sugriva. You are lucky 
to be alive, Vaidehi, after falling into the clutches of the raksasa women! 
Very soon you will see Rama, the great chariot-warrior Laksmana, and 
Sugriva of immeasurable strength standing in the midst of tens of millions 
of monkeys. I am the monkey Hanuman, a minister of Sugriva. I have leapt 
across the great ocean and entered Lanka. Relying on my own valor, I have 
come to see you and in so doing have placed my foot on the head of wicked 
Ravana. I am not what you think I am, my lady. Don’t be afraid! You must 
believe me when I speak to you.” 


Sarga 33 

[1-4] After hearing that account of Rama from that bull among monkeys, 
Vaidehi spoke soothing words in a sweet voice: “Where did you come into 
contact with Rama? How do you know Laksmana? How can there be a 
relationship between men and monkeys? Tell me once again, monkey, of 
the characteristic marks of Rama and Laksmana so that sorrow shall not 
overwhelm me. What are his form and figure like? What are his thighs like 
and his arms? Tell me about Rama and all about Laksmana as well.” 

[5—9] When Hanuman, son of Maruta, had been addressed in this fashion 
by Vaidehit, he began to describe Rama accurately: “Ah Vaideht! Even 
though, lotus-eyed woman, you have the good fortune to know all this, still 
you ask me about your husband’s form and that of Laksmana. Wide-eyed 
lady, now listen as I describe the distinguishing marks of Rama and 
Laksmana, which I have observed. Rama has eyes like lotus petals, and he 
ravishes the hearts of all creatures. He was born endowed with beauty and 
skill, daughter of Janaka. He is like the sun in splendor, the equal of the 
earth in forbearance; he is Brhaspati’s equal in intelligence, the equal of 
Indra Vasava in fame. 

[10-14] “He is the protector of all living beings and the protector of his 
own kinsmen. He is the guardian of his own conduct and of righteousness. 
He is a scorcher of his foes. Lovely lady, Rama is the guardian of the four 
classes of society. He is both the establisher and enforcer of the norms of 
social behavior. He is radiant and profoundly worshiped. He is firm in his 
vow of continence. He knows how to help the virtuous and how to perform 
the vedic rites. He is well versed in the science of governance, and he 
worships the brahmans. He is learned and possessed of fine character. He is 
humble, yet a scorcher of his foes. He is well versed in Yajurveda and 
highly respected by those who know the vedas. He is well grounded in the 
vedas and their subsidiary sciences, and in the science of arms. 

[15-19] “His shoulders are broad and his arms are massive. His neck is 
like a conch shell and his face is beautiful. His collarbone is set deep in 
muscle, his eyes pleasantly reddish. Everyone has heard of Rama, my lady. 
His voice resounds with the sound of a war drum. His complexion is 
smooth and dark, and he is valorous. His proportions are perfect, and his 
limbs well formed and symmetrical. Three parts of his body are firm, three 
are pendant, three are even, and three are prominent. His body is marked by 


three creases. Three parts of his body are depressed, and four are short. His 
head is marked by three whorls. He has four marks on his thumb, his body 
has four lines, he is six feet in height, and four parts of his body are 
symmetrical. His fourteen pairs of body parts are symmetrical; he has four 
pronounced teeth and a fourfold gait. His lips, jaw, and nose are prominent. 
Five of his body parts are glossy, and eight are extended. Ten of his body 
parts resemble lotuses, and ten are large. He is pervaded by the three 
qualities. Two parts of his body sparkle. Six parts of his body protrude, and 
nine are slender. Raghava fully experiences the three goals of man. 

[20-25] “He is majestic and utterly devoted to truth and righteousness. 
He is devoted to the accumulation of wealth and its gracious dispensation. 
He knows the proper divisions of time and place, and he is soft-spoken to 
everyone. His unvanquished brother Saumitri, born of a different mother, is 
just like him in affection, appearance, and virtues. When the two of them 
were roaming the land in search of you, they met the monkey lord, 
handsome Sugriva, who, dethroned by his elder brother and afflicted with 
fear of him, had taken shelter on the densely forested slopes of Mount 
Rsyamtka. We were in the service of Sugriva, the king of the tawny 
monkeys—always true to his promises—who had been cast out of the 
kingdom by his elder brother. Wearing barkcloth garments and bearing 
magnificent bows, those two heroes then came to the charming region of 
Mount Rsyamika. 

[26-30] “Upon seeing the two tigers among men armed with bows, that 
bull among monkeys was stupefied with terror, and he went leaping up to 
the summit of the mountain. Still remaining on that peak, the lord of the 
monkeys swiftly sent me on alone to meet the two of them. Acting on 
Sugriva’s orders, my hands cupped in reverence, I approached those two 
lordly tigers among men who were so well endowed with beauty and 
auspicious marks. When I had acquainted them with the situation, they were 
pleased. So placing them on my back, I brought those bulls among men to 
that spot. I told great Sugriva the truth about them. Then, as a result of their 
conversation, great affection arose between them. 

[31-34] “The lord of the tawny monkeys and the lord of men—both 
glorious—consoled each other in conversation about what had earlier 
befallen each of them. First, the elder brother of Laksmana consoled 
Sugriva, who had been banished by his enormously powerful brother, 


Valin, on account of a woman. Next, Laksmana told the monkey lord 
Sugriva of the grief experienced by Rama, tireless in action, over losing 
you. When the monkey lord had heard the words uttered by Laksmana, his 
radiance paled, like that of the many-rayed sun eclipsed by a planet. 

[35-41] “The leaders of the troops of tawny monkeys then brought 
Rama the masses of jewelry that had adorned your limbs but had been 
thrown to the ground when you were being carried off by the raksasa. They 
eagerly displayed them all, but they did not know where you had gone. 
When those ornaments, which had fallen with a jingling sound and which I 
myself had gathered up, were presented to Rama, he fainted. Placing those 
lovely ornaments in his lap, that godlike monarch wept bitterly. As he 
looked at them, weeping and grieving over and over again, those ornaments 
only further inflamed the fire of Dasarathi’s grief. Although the great man 
lay there for a long time stricken with grief, I managed with great effort and 
various encouraging words to revive him. Gazing on those costly ornaments 
and showing them to us again and again, Raghava together with Saumitri 
gave them into the keeping of Sugriva. 

[42-46] “Raghava is burning with anguish at not being able to see you, 
noble lady, just like a volcano with the great fire that constantly blazes 
within it. Sleeplessness, grief, and anxiety burn great Raghava on your 
account, just as do fires a fire shrine. Raghava has been profoundly shaken 
by his sorrow over not seeing you, as a great and lofty mountain is shaken 
by a mighty earthquake. Since he cannot see you, princess, he no longer 
takes any pleasure in the enchanting woodlands, rivers, and waterfalls 
among which he wanders. But Raghava, that tiger among men, will swiftly 
get you back, daughter of Janaka, once he has slain Ravana, his allies, and 
his kinsmen. 

[47-49] “For at that very same time, Rama and Sugriva made a pact 
together to kill Valin and to search for you. Quickly killing Valin in battle, 
Rama made Sugriva lord over all the hosts of apes and tawny monkeys. 
And that, my lady, is how the union between Rama and Sugriva came 
about. Know that I am Hanuman, their emissary, who have come here. 

[50-56] “Once Sugriva had acquired a kingdom of his own, he 
summoned all the great and mighty tawny monkeys and dispatched them in 
all the ten directions for your sake. Those mighty monkeys, resembling 
lordly mountains, journeyed all over the earth at the command of Sugriva, 


lord of the monkeys. Valin’s fortunate son, that tiger among monkeys, 
mighty Angada, set out with one-third of the army. But we got lost in the 
mighty Vindhya mountain range, and many days and nights passed while 
we were consumed with grief. At last, since we had lost all hope of 
accomplishing our mission and because of the passing of our allotted time 
and our fear of the monkey king, we resolved to end our lives. After 
searching forests, inaccessible mountains, hills, and mountain streams 
without finding the lady’s location, we resolved to end our lives. Angada 
was deeply immersed in an ocean of grief, mourning your loss, Vaideht, the 
slaying of Valin, our undertaking to fast unto death, and the death of 
Jatayus. 

[57-61] “Then, just when we had lost all hope because of our master’s 
command and desired only to die, a huge and powerful bird came there as if 
for the purpose of our mission. It was Sampati, king of the vultures and 
brother of the vulture king Jatayus. When he learned that his brother had 
been slain, he spoke these words in anger: ‘Who slew my younger brother? 
Where was he killed? I wish you would tell me this, great monkeys.’ 
Angada told him, just as it had happened, about the great slaying of Jatayus 
—on your account—in Janasthana by a terrifying raksasa. Sampati, the son 
of Aruna, was deeply grieved to learn of the slaying of Jatayus; and he told 
us that you, fair-hipped woman, were living in the abode of Ravana. 

[62-65] “When we heard those delightful words of Sampati, we leaping 
monkeys, gratified, delighted, and eager to find you, set out at once under 
the leadership of Angada. And as the army of tawny monkeys despaired at 
the sight of the ocean, I put aside my terrible fear and leapt one hundred 
leagues. That night, I entered Lanka, which was filled with raksasas, and 
there I saw Ravana and you, so crushed by grief. Now I have told you 
everything just as it happened, blameless woman. Please speak to me, my 
lady, for I am a messenger of DaSarathi. 

[66-72] “You must realize, my lady, that I—a minister of Sugriva and 
the son of Pavana the wind god—have made this effort on Rama’s behalf 
and have come here on your account. Your Kakutstha, foremost of all those 
who bear weapons, is well, as is Laksmana, who bears auspicious signs and 
is always engaged in pleasing his elder brother. I am dedicated to the 
welfare of your mighty husband, my lady, and I have come here alone at the 
behest of Sugriva. I am able to take on any form at will. Roaming about 


with no one to assist me, I managed to cover the entire southern region, 
eager to pick up your trail. Fortunately, I shall now be able to end the 
suffering of the soldiers, those tawny monkeys grieving over your loss, with 
the news that I have found you. Fortunately, my lady, my leap over the 
ocean has not been in vain. Fortunately, I shall acquire great fame for 
having found you. Soon mighty Raghava will slay the raksasa lord Ravana, 
his allies, and his kinsmen and take you back. 

[73-75] “Vaidehi, there is a mountain called Kauraja, foremost of 
mountains, from which the tawny monkey Kesarin proceeded to Mount 
Gokarna. On the instructions of the divine seers, that great monkey, my 
father, slew Sambasadana at the holy bathing spot at the shore of the sea, 
the lord of rivers. Through the agency of the wind god, I was born to that 
monkey’s wife, O Maithill. | am Hanuman, renowned throughout the world 
for my feats. It was in order to inspire your trust, Vaidehi, that I enumerated 
the virtues of your husband.” 

[76-80] Although Sita was drawn with grief, she was reassured by these 
plausible explanations. Also, through the force of these adequate tokens of 
identification, she understood that he was indeed a messenger. Janaki then 
experienced unequaled delight, and in her happiness she shed tears of joy 
from her eyes with their curling lashes. The lovely face of that wide-eyed 
woman—its long eyes all red and white—lit up, like the moon, the lord of 
stars, when released from Rahu, demon of the eclipse. For she realized that 
the monkey was none other than Hanuman. Hanuman then spoke further to 
that lovely woman: “After that mighty monkey had slain the asura 
Sambasadana in battle at the command of the great seers, Maithili, I was 
born as a monkey, a son of the wind god and equal to him in power.” 


Sarga 34 

[1-2] Hanuman, the immensely powerful son of Maruta, humbly addressed 
further words to Sita in order to inspire her confidence: “I am a monkey, 
virtuous woman, a messenger of wise Rama. My lady, look at this ring 
marked with Rama’s name. Take heart, bless you, for your troubles will 
soon be at an end.” 

[3-7] Taking her husband’s ring and examining it, Janaki was as joyous 
as if she had rejoined her husband. Her lovely face—its long eyes all red 
and white—lit up with joy, like the moon, the lord of stars, when released 


from Rahu, demon of the eclipse. Then that shy young woman, delighted at 
the message from her husband and deeply gratified at hearing such good 
news, praised the great monkey: “You must be valiant, capable, and wise, 
best of monkeys, since you have been able to breach the stronghold of the 
raksasas single-handedly. You are to be greatly praised for your valor, for in 
leaping you have crossed the mighty ocean, a hundred leagues in breadth, 
the lair of sea monsters, as easily as if it were a puddle in a cow’s hoofprint. 

[8-13] “I do not think you are any ordinary monkey, bull among 
monkeys, since you have neither fear nor even the slightest agitation with 
regard to Ravana. Since you have been sent by celebrated Rama, you are 
worthy of conversing with me, best of monkeys. Unassailable Rama would 
not send someone who was untested or whose valor he did not know, 
especially not to me. What a blessing that Rama—trighteous and devoted to 
truth—and mighty Laksmana, increaser of Sumitra’s joy, are well. But if 
Kakutstha is indeed well, then why in his rage does he not burn up the 
ocean-girdled earth, as does the cosmic fire that arises at the end of the 
cosmic era? Those two heroes are certainly capable of subduing even the 
gods, but still I see no reversal of my misfortunes. 

[14-18] “I trust that Rama is not deeply distressed. I trust that he is not 
suffering. I trust that the foremost of men is taking all necessary action. I 
trust that he is not depressed or agitated and that he is not confused as to 
what he should do. I trust that the king’s son is making all human efforts. I 
trust that he has recourse to the twofold and threefold strategies as well as 
the single strategy. I trust that the scorcher of his foes remains friendly 
toward his allies and eager to conquer his enemies. I trust that he is 
acquiring allies and that others seek him out to be their ally. I trust that his 
allies are helpful to him and that they always treat him with deference. I 
trust that the king’s son always seeks the grace of the gods, and I trust that 
he relies on human efforts as well as destiny. 

[19-23] “I trust that Raghava has not stopped loving me because I am so 
far away. I trust that he will rescue me from this nightmare. Rama was 
always accustomed to happiness and never to sorrow. I trust that now, 
having experienced this terrible unhappiness, he does not collapse. I trust 
that he has been continually receiving news that Kausalya, Sumitra, and 
Bharata are all well. I trust that Raghava, who deserves the highest honor, 
has not been overwhelmed with grief on my account. | trust that he has not 


had a change of heart. I trust that he will rescue me. I trust that on my 
account Bharata, so devoted to his brother, will send a vast and formidable 
army under the protection of his ministers—its pennants flying. 

[24—28] “I trust that the majestic lord of the monkeys Sugriva too will 
come on my account, accompanied by heroic tawny monkeys with teeth 
and claws for weapons. I trust that heroic Laksmana, increaser of Sumitra’s 
joy and a master of divine weapons, will scatter the raksasas with a hail of 
arrows. | trust that I will soon see Ravana, his allies, and his kinsmen slain 
by Rama in battle with some terrifying divine weapon. I trust that, saddened 
by grief without me, Rama’s face—whose color is that of gold and whose 
fragrance that of the lotus—will not fade like a lotus when its pond dries up. 
I trust that he who showed no fear, no grief, nor any agitation when he 
renounced the kingship in the name of righteousness and who led me into 
the wilderness on foot can sustain such stoicism in his heart. 

[29-30] “No one is dearer to him than I or even as dear: not his mother, 
his father, or anyone else. Emissary, I wish to live only so long as I can hear 
news of my beloved.” When the beautiful lady had uttered those words—so 
meaningful and so pleasant in substance—to that best of monkeys, she 
paused so that she might once more hear his charming words, which 
concerned Rama’s mission. 

[31-35] When the son of the wind god, Maruti, whose power was 
fearsome, had heard Sita’s words, he touched his hands—cupped in 
reverence—to his head and replied: “Lotus-eyed Rama does not know you 
are here. Once Raghava hears what I have to say, he will come at once. 
Bringing with him a vast army consisting of troops of apes and tawny 
monkeys and rendering the sea—imperturbable abode of Varuna— 
motionless with a torrent of arrows, Kakutstha will rid the city of Lanka of 
its raksasas. Rama will kill anyone who may get in his way, whether it be 
the gods and the asuras or even Mrtyu himself. For, beset by the sorrow of 
not being able to see you, noble lady, Rama can no more find peace than 
can an elephant harried by a lion. 

[36—38] “My lady, I swear to you by Mount Dardara, by roots and fruits, 
and by the mountains Malaya, Vindhya, Meru, and Mandara, that you will 
once again see Rama’s handsome face—with its beautiful eyes, its lips like 
bimba fruit, and its lovely earrings—resembling the full moon rising. Soon, 


Vaidehi, you will see Rama seated on Mount Prasravana, like Indra of the 
hundred sacrifices seated at the very summit of heaven. 

[39-44] “Raghava takes no meat, nor does he drink honey-wine. He 
restricts himself to boiled rice and the foods prescribed for forest ascetics, 
and even that only at every fifth mealtime. His mind is so completely fixed 
on you that he does not even brush the flies, mosquitoes, insects, and snakes 
away from his body. Rama is constantly obsessed with brooding, constantly 
absorbed in his grief, completely under the power of love. He cannot think 
of anything else. Rama almost never sleeps, but even when that best of men 
does fall asleep, he wakes up murmuring, ‘Sita,’ in a sweet voice. 
Whenever he sees some fruit or flower or anything else that women like, he 
sighs and calls out for you over and over again, crying, ‘Alas, my darling!’ 
In constant agony, my lady, the great prince, firm in his ascetic vows, calls 
out to you, crying, ‘Sita!’ He is making every effort to get you back.” 

[45] With her grief dispelled by hearing the news of Rama but made 
equal to his by hearing of his suffering, the daughter of Janaka Vaideha 
resembled a night at the very beginning of autumn when the moon is partly 
obscured by the last remnants of the rain clouds. 


Sarga 35 

[1-4] Upon hearing those words, Sita, her face like the full moon, spoke in 
turn to Hanuman with words that were sensible and in keeping with 
righteousness: “What you have said to me, monkey, that Rama has had no 
change of heart but that he is constantly absorbed in his grief, is like nectar 
mixed with poison. Whether a man enjoys immense power or suffers the 
most dreadful calamities, fate ties him with its rope and drags him. Surely 
the destiny of living creatures is inescapable, best of leaping monkeys. Just 
see how Saumitri, Rama, and I have been confounded by calamity. 

[S—8] “When will Raghava, like a shipwrecked sailor swimming 
exhausted in the sea, reach the farther shore of his sorrow? When will my 
lord destroy the raksasas, kill Ravana, uproot Lanka itself, and see me 
again? You must tell him, ‘Make haste!’ For I shall live only until my 
allotted year has elapsed. It is now the tenth month; only two more remain, 
leaping monkey, for that was the period allotted me by cruel Ravana. 

[9-13] “His brother Vibhisana made strenuous efforts to persuade him to 
give me back, but he would not agree to that. Ravana does not choose to 


give me back, even though he has fallen under the power of fate, and 
Mrtyu, god of death, stalks him in battle. All this was related to me by 
Vibhisana’s eldest daughter, the maiden Anala herself, who was sent by her 
mother, O monkey. A wise, learned, and elderly bull among rdksasas, 
Avindhya, who is steadfast and a person of character, urged upon Ravana 
that Rama would wreak destruction upon the raksasas. But even though 
that wicked creature holds Avindhya in high esteem, he would not heed his 
beneficial words. 

[14—18] “I would expect, best of tawny monkeys, that my lord will soon 
come for me, for my heart is pure and his virtues are numerous. Monkey, 
Raghava is endowed with energy, bravery, strength, kindness, competence, 
valor, and power. Since, even without his brother, he slew fourteen 
thousand rdksasas in Janasthana, which of his foes would not tremble? That 
bull among men cannot be daunted by adversities, for I know his resolution 
as well as Saci, the daughter of Puloman, knows the resolution of Sakra. 
Surely that sun, maker of day, in the form of heroic Rama, with a hail of 
arrows for his fierce rays, will dry up that water in the form of his rdksasa 
foes, monkey.” 

[19-25] After Sita, emaciated with grief on account of Rama, had 
finished speaking in this fashion, her face was bathed with tears. The 
monkey Hanuman then said to her: “As soon as Raghava hears what I have 
to say, he will come here leading a vast army of apes and tawny monkeys. 
But better still, I myself shall free you from this raksasa and from this 
misery this very minute. Just climb onto my back, blameless woman. | shall 
place you on my back and jump across the ocean; for I am strong enough to 
carry Lanka itself, including Ravana. This very instant, Maithili, I shall bear 
you to Raghava on Mount Prasravana, just as the sacred fire bears the burnt 
offering to Sakra. This very moment, Vaidehi, you will see Laksmana and 
also Raghava, who is filled with the same determination that Visnu had with 
regard to slaying the daityas. For with regard to finding you, that mighty 
man in his ashram is as full of determination as is Indra, smasher of 
citadels, when seated on the head of the king of elephants. 

[26—29] “Please climb onto my back, my lady. Do not disdain to do so, 
lovely one. For you must long to be united with Rama as much as does 
Rohini with the hare-marked moon. Please climb on my back and traverse 
the sky and the sea, conversing, as it were, with the moon as does Suvarcala 


with the sun, her lord. Not one of the inhabitants of Lanka will be able to 
follow my path, lovely lady, once I set forth, taking you away from here. 
Just see, Vaidehi; without a doubt I shall lift you up and fly off into the sky 
in exactly the same fashion as I arrived.” 

[30-32] When Maithili heard those astonishing words of the tawny 
monkey Hanuman, her every limb was filled with joy and wonder, but she 
replied to him: “Hanuman, how can you even think of carrying me such a 
great distance? I think your monkey nature is showing, leader of the troops 
of tawny monkeys. How can you, bull among leaping monkeys, imagine 
that with your tiny body you could carry me from here into the presence of 
my lord, the lord of men?” 

[33-36] Upon hearing Sita’s words, fortunate Hanuman, son of Maruta, 
thought: “The first thing she does is insult me! The black-eyed lady does 
not know my power and my strength. Therefore, Vaidehi must see the form 
I can take at will.” Thinking thus, Hanuman, best of leaping monkeys, 
crusher of his foes, began to reveal his true form to Vaideht. Leaping down 
from the tree, that wise bull among monkeys began to grow in order to 
inspire confidence in Sita. 

[37-40] Then the bull among monkeys, resembling Mount Meru or 
Mount Mandara and shining with the splendor of a blazing fire, stood there 
before Sita. With his red face and his fangs and claws of adamant, the 
fearsome and powerful tawny monkey, who resembled a mountain, said this 
to Vaideht: “I am capable of carrying off all of Lanka, including its hilly 
and wooded tracts, its palaces, ramparts, and gateways, and its lord himself. 
Make up your mind, my lady! Give up this disdainful attitude! Vaidehi, you 
must free Rama and Laksmana from their sorrow.” 

[41-44] When Janaka’s daughter, her wide eyes like lotus petals, saw 
that Maruta’s flesh-and-blood son now resembled a mountain, she said to 
him: “Now I realize your strength and power, great monkey, your motion, 
which is like the wind’s, and your wondrous energy like that of fire. How 
could any other, any ordinary being, reach this country here on the far shore 
of the immeasurable ocean, O bull among monkeys? I realize that you are 
capable of making the journey and of carrying me, but it is necessary too, 
that you carefully consider what might bring about the swift fulfillment of 
your mission. 


[45-48] “It would not be appropriate for me to go with you, best of 
monkeys. For your speed—like that of the wind—might make me faint. 
Then, too, I might fall from your back in fear as you sped along up there in 
the sky, high up above the ocean. If I were to fall helpless into the ocean, 
filled with whales, sharks, and large fish, I would soon become a choice 
morsel for those creatures of the deep. I cannot go with you, destroyer of 
your enemies. For burdened with a woman, you would doubtless be placed 
in danger. 

[49-52] “Moreover, seeing me carried off, the raksasas, fearsome in 
their valor, would pursue us on the orders of wicked Ravana. And 
surrounded by those heroic warriors, armed with lance and war hammer, 
you yourself, hero—burdened by a woman because of me—would be 
placed in danger. All those many raksasas up there in the sky would be 
armed, and you would be weaponless. How would you then be able both to 
fight them and protect me? Besides, while you were engaged in fighting 
with those raksasas, cruel in their actions, I might well be overcome by 
terror and fall from your back, best of monkeys. 

[53-56] “Then again, those fearsome, huge, and powerful rdksasas 
might somehow or other manage to defeat you in battle, best of monkeys. 
Or perhaps I might fall while you were looking the other way, engaged in 
battle. Then those wicked raksasas might catch me as I fell and take me 
back again. Or they might snatch me from your hands or even kill me. For 
victory and defeat in battle are well known to be uncertain. Then, too, under 
the menace of these rdksasas, I might just die. In that case, best of tawny 
monkeys, your effort would have been fruitless. 

[57-61] “Granted, you alone are capable of killing all the raksasas. But 
then, since you would have killed them, Raghava’s reputation would be 
diminished. Then again, the raksasas might conceal me in some hidden 
place where neither Raghava nor the tawny monkeys would ever find me. 
Your undertaking on my behalf would then have proved futile. It would be 
much better if Rama were to accompany you. The very life of great 
Raghava depends on me, as do the lives of his brothers and of your king’s 
family, great-armed one. For if Rama and Laksmana were to lose hope of 
finding me, then, emaciated with pain and grief, they, as well as all the apes 
and tawny monkeys, would end their lives. 


[62—63] “I cherish my devotion to my husband above all else, monkey. 
Therefore, best of monkeys, I would never willingly touch another’s body 
even with my foot. True, I was forced to touch the body of Ravana. But 
what was I to do, powerless and helpless as I was without my lord? 

[64-68] “It would be more fitting for Rama if he were to take me away 
from here himself after having first killed ten-necked Ravana and his 
raksasas. For I have both heard about and witnessed the valorous feats of 
that great man who crushes his foes in battle. Not even the gods, 
gandharvas, great serpents, nor rdksasas are a match for Rama in battle. 
Who could withstand mighty Raghava when he is accompanied by 
Laksmana and armed with his splendid bow? For blazing like a wind- 
whipped fire, the eater of oblations, he is equal in valor to Indra Vasava. 
Who, foremost of monkeys, could withstand Raghava, crusher of his foes in 
battle? For when, together with Laksmana, he, like an earth-supporting 
elephant in rut, takes up his position, he resembles the sun—his arrows for 
rays—at the end of a cosmic era. Please bring my lord here quickly, best of 
monkeys, along with Laksmana and the leaders of the monkey troops. 
Please, best of tawny monkeys, make me happy, for I have long been 
emaciated with grief over Rama.” 


Sarga 36 

[1-5] When the eloquent tiger among monkeys heard the words that Sita 
had spoken, he was delighted by them, and he responded to her with 
eloquence: “What you say is quite appropriate, lovely lady. It befits a 
woman’s nature and suits the modest demeanor of virtuous women. Truly, a 
woman is incapable of crossing the vast ocean, a hundred leagues in 
breadth, even by clinging on to me. And the second reason you offer, 
modest Janaki, that you cannot touch any man other than Rama, is 
particularly appropriate for you as the wife of that great man, my lady. 
What woman other than you, my lady, could utter such a speech? 

[6-10] “Kakutstha shall hear without omission everything that you have 
said and done in my presence. I only said what I did along with its many 
supporting arguments out of desire to accomplish what is good for Rama, 
my heart melting with love, my lady. I said it on account of the 
inaccessibility of Lanka, the virtual impossibility of crossing the great 
ocean, and because of my own capability. I wanted to bring you back 


together with the kinsman of the Raghus immediately, and so I said all this 
out of love and devotion for my master and for no other reason. If you do 
not dare to go with me, blameless woman, then please give me some means 
of identification that Raghava would recognize.” 

[11-13] When Sita, who was like the daughter of the gods, had been 
addressed in this fashion by Hanuman, she replied in a soft voice, its 
syllables choked with tears: “You can tell my beloved of an incident that 
will serve as a perfect means of identification. It took place when I was 
living in the ascetics’ ashram situated in the region that lies in the 
northeastern foothills of Mount Citrakita not far from the Mandakini River. 
That region is abundantly provided with roots, fruits, and water; and it is 
filled with the ashrams of perfected beings: 

[14-17] “ ‘Once, after amusing myself in the parkland groves so fragrant 
with every kind of blossom, I sat down, dripping with water, in your lap. 
Then, in turn, the elder brother of Bharata fell asleep in my lap. Then a 
crow, hungry for flesh, pecked at me. I picked up a clod of earth and tried to 
drive him off. But that crow, an eater of offerings, would not go away. 
Greedy for food, he went on tearing at me and would not leave my flesh 
alone. 

[18-22] “ ‘When, in my anger at that bird, I was trying to tighten the 
fastenings of my garment, you happened to see me just when my clothes 
had fallen open. Since you made fun of me, I was both angry and 
embarrassed; but since that rapacious crow was still tearing at me, I came to 
you. Since I was exhausted, I once more sat on your lap as you sat there. 
You were amused, but I was still angry, and so you mollified me. Then, my 
lord, you noticed that I had been angered by the crow as I sat there, my face 
awash with tears, slowly wiping my eyes. Breathing hard in your anger like 
a hissing snake, you said: “O lady whose thighs resemble an elephant’s 
trunk, who has wounded you between your breasts? Who is toying with an 
enraged serpent, its jaws agape?” 

[23—26] “ ‘Then, glancing about you, you spied that crow as he perched 
there watching me, his sharp claws dripping blood. They say that that crow 
—foremost of flying creatures, who swiftly moved about the earth and was 
equal to the wind in swiftness—was the son of Sakra. Rolling your eyes in 
anger, you, a great-armed warrior and foremost among the wise, made a 
harsh decision with respect to the crow. You then plucked a blade of darbha 


grass from your mat and infused it with the power of Brahma’s divine 
weapon. Like the blazing fire of universal destruction, it blazed up fiercely 
in the bird’s direction. 

[27-31] “ ‘Then you hurled that flaming blade of grass at the crow. 
Pursued by it, the crow fled from one end of the earth to the other, traveling 
over this whole world in search of safety. Spurned by his father, all the 
gods, and the great seers, he traversed the triple universe before finally 
taking refuge with you. And as he lay there, fallen to the ground, seeking 
refuge with you who are fit to grant it, Kakutstha, you spared him in your 
compassion, although he deserved to die. Finding no shelter among all the 
worlds, he came to you alone for refuge. Then you said to him who had 
come, dejected and remorseful, to you: “The divine weapon-spell of 
Brahma may never be loosed in vain. Now you tell me what is to be done.” 
It put out the crow’s right eye. 

[32-36] “ ‘After he had made his obeisance to you and King Dasaratha, 
you dismissed him, and he returned to his abode. For my sake you loosed 
Brahma’s divine weapon-spell against a mere crow. How is it then, lord of 
the earth, that you are so indulgent with him who has taken me from you? 
Have pity on me by making a heroic effort, bull among men. It was you 
yourself who told me that compassion was the highest form of 
righteousness. I know you to be mighty, energetic, and powerful. You are as 
boundless, imperturbable, and unfathomable as the ocean. Indeed, you are 
the lord of the earth and seas, the equal of Indra Vasava himself. Since you 
are the foremost master of divine weapon-spells and possess strength and 
power, why, Raghava, do you not employ your divine weaponry against the 
raksasas?’ 

[37-42] “Even the great serpents, gandharvas, asuras, and the hosts of 
Maruts are unable to withstand the crushing force of Rama in battle. If that 
mighty man has even the least concern for me, why does he not destroy the 
raksasas with his sharp arrows? Or else, why does not Laksmana, the 
mighty and heroic scorcher of his foes, rescue me on his brother’s orders? If 
those tigers among men, whose power is equal to that of Vayu and Indra, 
are truly unassailable even by the gods, why then do they ignore me? Surely 
I must have committed some grave offense since those scorchers of their 
foes, although well able to rescue me, do not do so. On my behalf, you must 
bow your head and give my respectful salutation to him whom wise 


Kausalya bore to be the lord of the earth; and you must inquire as to his 
health. 

[43-49] “On my behalf and in my own words, you must inquire about 
the welfare of Rama’s beloved Laksmana, who is always so gentle, so 
upright, and so competent. For it was Laksmana—in whom Sumitra has a 
fine son—who renounced his garlands, all his jewels, his beloved and 
beautiful women, as well as the lordship—so hard to obtain—of the broad 
earth, and who, after honoring and propitiating his mother and father, 
followed Rama. And it was he—that righteous, handsome, wise, and great- 
armed hero with the shoulders of a lion—who out of love gave up all 
pleasures and followed his brother Kakutstha in order to protect him in the 
forest. Heroic Laksmana, who always treated Rama like a father and 
behaved toward me as toward a mother, did not know that I was being 
abducted. That prince, who served his elders, is fortunate, powerful, and a 
man of measured speech. He is like my father-in-law himself, and he is 
foremost in the service of others. Indeed, Rama’s brother Laksmana was 
always dearer to him than I. That mighty man bore whatever burden was 
placed upon him, so that whenever Raghava would see him, he would cease 
to miss the old king. 

[50-52] “You must repeatedly say to my heroic lord Rama: ‘I shall live 
only for one more month, son of Dasaratha. I cannot live beyond this 
month. I swear this to you by truth itself. You must rescue me, my hero, 
whom wicked Ravana has imprisoned through deceit, just as Kausiki was 
rescued from the underworld Patala.’ ” Then, taking out an exquisite, 
heavenly hair ornament she had kept wrapped in her garment, Sita gave it to 
Hanuman with the words, “You must give this to Raghava.” 

[53-56] The heroic monkey took that unsurpassed and magnificent gem 
and placed it on his finger, for he could not put it on his arm. After taking 
that magnificent jewel, the extraordinary monkey respectfully saluted Sita, 
reverently circumambulated her, and then stood humbly at her side. Filled 
with immense joy at having found Sita, he stood there only with his body, 
for he had already traveled in his heart to Rama. When he had taken hold of 
that precious and magnificent gem that the daughter of King Janaka had so 
cunningly concealed, Hanuman, his mind relieved like that of someone 
who, having been buffeted by winds on a mountaintop, was now free of 
them, made ready to return. 


Sarga 37 

[1-4] As Sita handed the jewel to Hanuman, she said: “Here is a means of 
identification that Rama can easily identify. When heroic Rama sees this 
jewel, it will remind him of three people: my mother, King Dasaratha, and 
myself. Now, best of tawny monkeys, as you have once more been roused 
to action, you should consider what to do next with regard to your mission. 
You are the one essential actor in the prosecution of this affair, best of 
tawny monkeys. So it is up to you to decide what course of action will bring 
an end to my suffering.” 

[S—11] Maruti, fearsome in his valor, promised that he would do so. 
Then, bowing his head to Vaideht, he made ready to depart. Realizing that 
he was about to leave, the lady Maithili, her voice choked with tears, 
addressed the monkey, son of Maruta the wind god: “Hanuman, you must 
report that I am well to Rama and Laksmana as well as to Sugriva, his 
ministers, and all the senior monkeys. You must arrange things in such a 
way that great-armed Raghava will rescue me from this ocean of suffering. 
Hanuman, you must speak in such a way that glorious Rama will save my 
life; for, by means of such a speech, you will acquire great righteousness. If 
Dasarathi constantly hears from you the words I have uttered—inciting him 
to action—he will increase his manly efforts to get me back. When Raghava 
hears the words of my message from you, that hero will duly arrange things 
so that his valor can be put to good use.” 

[12-16] When Hanuman, son of Maruta, heard those words of Sita, he 
touched his hands—cupped in reverence—to his head and said the 
following words: “Soon Kakutstha will come here accompanied by the 
foremost of the apes and tawny monkeys. After he has defeated his enemies 
in battle, he will put an end to your sorrow. For I know of no one among 
mortals, asuras, or even the immortal gods who would dare to stand before 
him when he lets fly his arrows. He is able to withstand the sun god, 
Parjanya the rain god, or even Vaivasvata Yama—the lord of death himself 
—1in battle, especially if it is for your sake. He has it in mind to conquer the 
sea-bounded earth; and Rama will achieve victory for your sake, delighter 
of Janaka.” 

[17-22] When Janaki had heard these words—so fitting, truthful, and 
well spoken—she highly approved of them. She honored that speech, for it 
was filled with love for her husband. Gazing at him over and over again as 


he stood ready to depart, she spoke once more, animated by her high regard 
for him: “Stay another day if you please, heroic tamer of your foes. When 
you have rested in some concealed spot, you can depart tomorrow. If only 
you would stay, mighty monkey, your presence would provide hapless me a 
moment’s respite from my profound sorrow. For once you have departed, 
tiger among tawny monkeys, even if only to return, it is doubtful whether I 
shall survive. Have no doubt about this. My grief at not being able to see 
you, monkey, would only further torment me, only inflaming the sorrow of 
someone already stricken with sorrow after sorrow. 

[23-26] “Moreover, heroic lord of the tawny monkeys, there is still one 
serious doubt that hovers before me regarding your allies, the apes and 
tawny monkeys. Just how will the troops of apes and tawny monkeys and 
the two sons of the best of men cross the impassable ocean? Three creatures 
alone possess the power to fly here over the ocean: Garuda Vainateya, 
yourself, and Maruta. Therefore, heroic monkey, what means do you 
foresee for accomplishing this impossible undertaking? You are the 
foremost of those who know how to accomplish things. 

[27-30] “Granted, you are fully capable of carrying out this mission all 
by yourself, slayer of enemy heroes, and this accomplishment of yours 
would bring you glory. But only if Rama with his entire army were to 
recover me after defeating Ravana in battle and then return in triumph to his 
own city, would my reputation be restored. And if Kakutstha, that tormentor 
of enemy armies, were to fill Lanka with his own troops and take me away, 
that would be worthy of him. Therefore, you must arrange it in such a way 
that the great battle hero demonstrates valor that is worthy of him.” 

[31-35] When Hanuman had heard these meaningful, beneficial, and 
reasonable words, he continued with the remaining portion of his own 
speech: “The foremost of the leaping monkeys, Sugriva, the mighty lord of 
apes and tawny monkeys, has made a firm resolve on your behalf, my lady. 
That nemesis of the rdksasas will soon be here, accompanied by billions of 
monkeys, Vaideht. The tawny monkeys under his command are imbued 
with valor, strength, and great power; and they move with the swiftness of 
thought. Their movement—upward, downward, or toward any side—cannot 
be impeded; and those creatures of measureless power do not shrink from 
even the greatest tasks. 


[36-40] “Following the path of the wind, those enormously energetic 
creatures have many times reverently circumambulated the earth with its 
oceans and mountains. All the forest-dwelling monkeys are equal, if not 
superior, to me. Not a single one of those who attend Sugriva is inferior to 
me. If I managed to get here, how much easier it will be for those who are 
more powerful still. After all, one does not send out the best one has to run 
errands. Lesser folk are sent for that purpose. So enough of this misery, my 
lady! Banish your grief. The leaders of the troops of tawny monkeys will 
reach Lanka in a single bound. Mounted on my back, those two immensely 
powerful lions among men, resembling the newly risen sun and moon, will 
soon come for you. 

[41-45] “Once heroic Rama and Laksmana, the foremost of men, have 
come here, they will together destroy the city of Lanka with their arrows. 
Once Raghava, the delight of the Raghus, has slain Ravana and his hosts, he 
will return to his own city, lovely woman, taking you with him. So take 
heart, bless you, and look forward to that time. For very soon you will see 
Rama blazing like fire. Once the lord of the raksasas 1s killed along with his 
sons, ministers, and kinsmen, you will be reunited with Rama, as is Rohini 
with the hare-marked moon. Soon, my lady Maithili, you will reach the end 
of your sorrow. Very shortly you will see Ravana struck down by Rama.” 

[46—49] Thus did Hanuman, the son of Maruta, comfort Vaidehi. Then, 
turning his thoughts to his departure, he once more addressed Vaideht: “You 
will soon see Raghava, an accomplished slayer of his foes, and you will 
also see Laksmana standing at the gates of Lanka, bow in hand. Soon you 
will see those heroic monkeys assembled here as well. Their weapons are 
their fangs and claws, their valor is that of lions and tigers, and they 
resemble elephant lords. My lady, you will see countless troops of those 
extraordinary monkeys, like clouds upon a mountain, roaring on the peaks 
of Lanka’s Mount Malaya. 

[50-53] “For Rama, pierced to the vitals by the fearsome arrow of 
Manmatha, the god of love, can no more find peace than can an elephant 
harried by a lion. So you must not weep in grief, my lady. Don’t let your 
heart be sad. For in your husband you have such a protector as does Saci in 
her lord Sakra. Who is greater than Rama? Who is the equal of Saumitri? It 
is those two brothers, like Agni and Maruta, who are your refuge. You will 
not have to remain very long now, my lady, in this savage land, infested by 


hosts of raksasas. It won’t be long now before the coming of your beloved. 
Just be patient until the moment when I meet him.” 


Sarga 38 

[1-5] When Sita, who was like a daughter of the gods, had heard the words 
of the great son of the wind god, she replied to him in words addressed to 
her own interest: “I am as refreshed at seeing you, sweet-spoken monkey, as 
is the earth—its crops half grown—on receiving rain. Please act with such 
kindness toward me that I, so full of love, may once more touch that tiger 
among men with these limbs, wasted with grief. Please, foremost of the 
hosts of tawny monkeys, give this means of identification to Rama and 
remind him of the blade of grass he hurled at the crow in his anger—taking 
out one of its eyes—and say: “You must surely remember the tilaka mark of 
red mineral powder that you placed on my forehead when my regular tilaka 
mark had been rubbed off. 

[6-11] “ ‘How can you, who are as mighty as great Indra or Varuna, 
tolerate the abduction of Sita and her living among the raksasas? In looking 
at this heavenly hair ornament, which I have guarded so carefully, I have 
experienced as much joy in my affliction as if I had been gazing upon you 
yourself, my blameless lord. I am sending you this splendid jewel, born of 
the sea. Now filled with the bitter yearning of grief, I cannot go on living. It 
is only for your sake that I have endured these unbearable torments and the 
bloodcurdling words of the terrible raksasa women. I shall live for only one 
more month, subduer of your foes; beyond that month I cannot live without 
you, son of the king. The king of the raksasas is dreadful, and the way he 
looks at me is far from pleasant. If I should learn that something had 
happened to you, I could not live another moment.’ ” 

[12-17] When powerful Hanuman, son of Maruta, had heard those 
piteous words that Vaidehi had spoken so tearfully, he said: “I swear to you, 
my lady, that Rama is distracted in his grief for you. With Rama 
overwhelmed with grief, Laksmana too is suffering. Still, somehow or 
other, I have found you. So this is not the time to grieve. Lovely woman, in 
a very short time, you will see the end of your sorrows. The two princes, 
those blameless tigers among men, making every effort to find you, will 
reduce Lanka to ashes. The two Raghavas will slay cruel Ravana and all his 
kinsmen in battle and then take you to their own city, wide-eyed lady. But 


please, blameless lady, give me some additional means of identification that 
Rama will recognize and that will bring him still greater joy.” 

[18—19] She replied: “But Hanuman, I have already given you a perfect 
means of identification: my hair ornament. Once Rama sees it, he will 
believe what you tell him, heroic monkey.” Majestic Hanuman, foremost 
among the leaping monkeys, took that superb jewel; then, bowing his head 
to the lady, he prepared to depart. 

[20-24] As she watched that immensely powerful bull among tawny 
monkeys increasing his size as he gathered his strength to leap, Janaki, 
dejected, her face awash with tears, spoke to him in a voice choked with 
tears: “Hanuman, you must inform those lionlike brothers as well as 
Sugriva, his ministers, and all the monkeys that I am well. You must 
arrange things in such a way that great-armed Raghava will rescue me from 
this ocean of suffering. When you see Rama, you must tell him of the 
terrible, crushing force of my grief and about the threats of the rdksasas. 
May you have a safe journey, heroic tawny monkey.” The monkey was 
delighted at heart to receive the princess’s message, for he had 
accomplished his purpose. Then, reflecting that some small thing still 
remained to be done, he traveled north in his heart. 


Sarga 39 
[1-6] Honored by her with words of praise, the monkey set forth, but as he 
left that spot, he began to think: “I have found the black-eyed lady. But 
some small thing still remains to be done. In this case, aside from the first 
three strategies, the fourth alone presents itself. Conciliation does not yield 
good results in the case of rdksasas, nor are gifts appropriate in the case of 
those who have amassed great wealth. Dissension can have no effect on 
people who are proud of their strength. Physical force alone presents itself 
to me in this case. Indeed, no resolution other than physical force will be 
possible in this matter. However, if a few of their champions were to be 
killed somehow or other in battle right now, then the raksasas might be 
made more pliant. If a person who is entrusted with a specific mission 
accomplishes other things without compromising his principal mission, then 
that person is truly worthy of undertaking such a mission. Many means 
must be undertaken to accomplish even the most trivial task. And only he 


who understands this multiplicity of means is truly capable of effectively 
accomplishing his purpose. 

[7-12] “If now, having accomplished my primary objective, I could 
make a clear determination of the strength of the enemy’s forces compared 
to our own before returning to the home of the lord of leaping monkeys, I 
would then have fully carried out my master’s orders. How can I most 
easily start a violent battle right now between the raksasas and myself so 
that ten-faced Ravana will throw his most powerful forces against me in 
combat? Here is a grove belonging to that vicious monster. It is 
magnificent, and it resembles Indra’s Nandana grove itself. For it 1s 
delightful to the eye and the heart, and it is filled with every sort of tree and 
climbing vine. I shall destroy it as thoroughly as a fire destroys a dry forest. 
When it has been devastated, Ravana will be furious. Then the lord of the 
raksasas will send forth a great army equipped with tridents and iron spears 
and including cavalry, chariots, and elephants. There will be a huge battle. 
When I meet in battle with those rdksasas, fierce in their valor, I will 
destroy the force sent forth by Ravana, for my valor is unstoppable. Then, I 
can easily proceed to the abode of the monkey king.” 

[13-17] Then Maruti, furious and terrifying in his valor, began to smash 
down the trees with the enormous force of his thighs like a raging gale. In 
this fashion, heroic Hanuman devastated the ladies’ park, which was 
teeming with impassioned birds and filled with every kind of tree and 
climbing vine. Once its trees had been smashed, its ponds ruined, and the 
crests of its hills ground to dust, that grove looked most unpleasant. Its 
vine-covered pavilions and its picture galleries wrecked, its great serpents, 
wild animals, and deer scattered, and its grottoes and cottages torn down, 
that extensive grove was utterly ruined. Once the great monkey had done 
this thing—so unwelcome to the mind of that great king—he stationed 
himself, blazing with splendor, at the gateway, eager to do battle all alone 
against many powerful foes. 


Sarga 40 
[1-4] At the shrieking of birds and the sound of trees being smashed, all the 
inhabitants of Lanka grew frantic with fear. Terrified beasts and birds fled 
screeching, and dire omens appeared to the raksasas. Their sleep disturbed, 
the raksasa women with their hideous faces saw the devastated grove and 


the great and heroic monkey. Seeing them, the great-armed monkey, whose 
power and strength were enormous, took on a colossal form that terrified 
the rdksasa women. 

[S—7] When the raksasa women saw the mighty monkey with his huge 
body resembling a mountain, they asked the daughter of Janaka: “Who is 
that? Whose is he? Where is he from? Why has he come here? Why were 
you talking with him? Tell us, fortunate and wide-eyed woman, you need 
have no fear. Why was he talking with you, black-eyed lady?” 

[8—10] But virtuous Sita, whose every limb was lovely, only said: “How 
should I know anything about these rdksasas, who change their form at 
will? You are the ones who ought to know who he 1s and what he is going to 
do! Without a doubt, no one but a snake knows how a snake walks. I too am 
afraid of him! I don’t know who he is. Who is he? I thought some rdksasa, 
who could change his form at will, had come here.” 

[11-16] When the raksasa women heard Vaidehi’s words, they quickly 
split up. Some remained there, while others went to report the matter to 
Ravana. The rdksasa women with their hideous faces approached Ravana 
and began to tell him about the fearsome and hideous monkey: “Your 
majesty, a monkey with a fearsome body and immeasurable strength was 
talking with Sita in the middle of the asoka grove. But although we 
questioned doe-eyed Sita Janaki intensively, she would not tell us anything 
about that tawny monkey. He may be a messenger of Indra Vasava or of 
Kubera Vaisravana. He might even have been sent by Rama in his eagerness 
to search for Sita. With his marvelous form, he has utterly devastated your 
charming ladies’ park, all filled with flocks of different animals. 

[17-21] “Apart from the place where Sita is, there is no part of it that he 
has not destroyed. We don’t understand whether this was in order to spare 
Sita or simply because he got tired. But then, how could such a creature 
tire? He must have spared her intentionally. For he has spared the big 
simsapa tree—the one filled with beautiful sprouts and blossoms—where 
Sita always stays. You must order a harsh punishment for this fierce 
creature who has conversed with Sita and destroyed the grove. Who, lord of 
the raksasa hosts, would dare speak to Sita, whom you have already 
married in your heart, unless it be someone who wishes to die?” 

[22—25] When Ravana, lord of the raksasas, heard the words of the 
rdksasa women, rolling his eyes in rage, he flared up like the sacrificial fire 


when oblations are made. The immensely powerful lord then commanded a 
company of rdksasas called the kimkaras—heroes like himself—to capture 
Hanuman. Eighty thousand swift kimkaras, armed with mallets and war 
hammers, poured out of the palace. They had huge bellies and enormous 
fangs; their appearance was frightful, and their strength was great. They 
were all eager for battle and intent on capturing Hanuman. 

[26-30] When they came upon the monkey sitting on the gateway, they 
rushed toward him with tremendous speed, like moths toward a flame. They 
assaulted that outstanding monkey with various maces, gold-banded clubs 
of iron, and arrows blazing like the sun. But majestic and powerful 
Hanuman, who looked like a mountain, beat his tail on the ground and let 
loose a mighty roar. As they gazed upon Hanuman—towering above them 
like a great cloud at sunset—the sound of his bellowing filled them with 
fear and apprehension. But putting aside their apprehension because of their 
master’s command, the rdksasas attacked the monkey from all sides with 
various terrifying weapons. 

[31-36] Completely surrounded by those mighty warriors, powerful 
Hanuman seized a fearsome iron beam that was attached to the gateway. 
Grasping that beam and belaboring the night-roaming raksasas, he 
resembled Garuda, son of Vinata, when he seizes a writhing serpent. Then 
heroic Maruti flew through the sky, wielding the beam. After killing the 
kimkara raksasas, the heroic son of Maruta, still eager for battle, perched 
himself once more on the gateway. A few of the rdksasas who had stood 
apart in their terror of him reported to Ravana that all the Aimkaras had 
been slain. When the king learned that that mighty company of raksasas 
had been destroyed, he rolled his eyes in rage and sent forth Prahasta’s son, 
who was unequaled in valor and invincible in battle. 


Sarga 41 
[1-4] When Hanuman had slain the kimkaras, he fell to thinking: “I have 
devastated the grove, but I have not destroyed its domed palace. Therefore, 
I shall destroy this palace in the same fashion.” Reflecting thus in his mind, 
Hanuman exhibited his strength in leaping to the top of the domed palace, 
as lofty as the summit of Mount Meru. Thus did the foremost of tawny 
monkeys Hanuman, son of Maruta, ascend. When the invincible monkey, 
blazing with splendor, had scaled that lofty domed palace, he resembled 


Mount Pariyatra. Taking on a colossal form, Hanuman, son of Maruta, 
clapped his upper arms in challenge; and the sound of it filled Lanka. 

[S—9] At the great and deafening sound of that clapping, birds fell from 
the sky. Then, in a loud voice, he proclaimed: “Victory to the champion 
Rama and to mighty Laksmana! Victory to King Sugriva whom Raghava 
protects! I am a servant of Rama, the lord of Kosala, who is tireless in 
action. I am Hanuman, son of Maruta, and the destroyer of enemy armies. 
Once I start hurling thousands of boulders and trees, not even a thousand 
Ravanas could make a force strong enough to oppose me in battle. I shall 
devastate the city of Lanka and reverentially salute Maithilt. Then, my 
mission accomplished, I shall depart under the very noses of the raksasas.” 

[10-14] When that bull among tawny monkeys, perched on that palace, 
had spoken in this fashion to the palace guards, he bellowed with a dreadful 
sound, terrifying the raksasas. At that tremendous sound, a hundred huge 
palace guards issued forth holding various weapons—darts, swords, and 
battle-axes—and surrounded Maruti. A huge host of raksasas swirled 
around that best of tawny monkeys, like a great whirlpool in the waters of 
the Ganges. At that, the son of the wind god grew furious and took on a 
fearsome form. Great and mighty Hanuman, son of Maruta, forcibly ripped 
out one of the palace’s columns—all inlaid with gold—and whirled that 
hundred-edged weapon about him. 

[15-18] Once he had slain the hundred rdksasas, as Indra slew the 
asuras with his vajra, the majestic monkey, high in the air, said these 
words: “Thousands of huge and powerful monkey lords—just like me— 
have been sent forth, obedient to the command of Sugriva. Sugriva will 
come here with hundreds, tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands, and 
even tens of millions of such monkeys to slaughter you all. Since you have 
locked yourselves in enmity with the great lord of the Iksvakus, you, 
Ravana, and the city of Lanka are doomed.” 


Sarga 42 
[1-5] Then, at the command of the rdksasa lord, Prahasta’s mighty son, 
huge-fanged Jambumalin, went forth wielding his bow. His garments and 
garlands were red; he wore a floral chaplet and splendid earrings. He was 
huge and fierce. His eyes were rolling wildly, and he was invincible in 
battle. He went forth with his huge bow—resembling the bow of Sakra— 


and its splendid arrows. As he twanged it with great force, its sound was 
like that of a thunderclap. The deafening sound of that great bow’s 
twanging filled the heavens and all directions at once. When Hanuman, 
endowed with tremendous force, saw him approaching in a chariot drawn 
by donkeys, he was delighted and he roared. 

[6-10] Then, with his keen arrows, great-armed Jambumalin struck the 
great monkey Hanuman, who stood on top of the gateway. He struck the 
monkey lord in the face with a half-moon-headed arrow, in the head with a 
barbed arrow, and in the arms with ten arrows of iron. Struck by that arrow, 
his face, which was naturally red, looked like a red lotus in full bloom 
struck by the rays of the autumnal sun, bringer of light. Struck by the 
arrows of the rdksasa, the great monkey was enraged. Then he spied an 
enormous boulder lying beside him. Tearing it loose with tremendous force, 
the mighty monkey hurled it with all his might. But the raksasa, likewise 
enraged, smashed it with ten arrows. 

[11-14] When mighty Hanuman, whose power was so fierce, saw that 
his effort had failed, he uprooted a sala tree and whirled it about him. 
Mighty Jambumélin, seeing the mighty monkey whirling the sala tree about 
him, fired off a huge number of arrows. He cut that sd/a tree to pieces with 
four arrows and hit the monkey with five more in the arm. With a single 
arrow he struck him in the chest and in the hollow of the chest with ten 
more. His body full of arrows, Hanuman was filled with a towering rage; 
and, seizing that same iron beam, he flailed it about him violently. 

[15-19] Whirling the beam with tremendous speed, the monkey, whose 
speed was tremendous and who was filled with the intoxication of his 
strength, brought it down on Jambumalin’s mighty chest. His head, his 
arms, his knees, his bow, his chariot, his donkeys, even his arrows were 
completely obliterated. Struck with such violence, the great chariot-warrior 
Jambumalin fell to the ground, his limbs and ornaments reduced to dust. 
When Ravana learned that Jambumalin as well as the mighty kimkaras had 
been slain, he was furious and his eyes grew red with rage. When the 
mighty son of Prahasta had been killed, the lord of night-roaming rdksasas, 
his eyes red and rolling with rage, immediately ordered out his minister’s 
sons, who were endowed with tremendous strength and valor. 


Sarga 43 


[1-5] Urged on by the lord of the rdksasas, the seven sons of his minister, 
shining with the radiance of the seven-flamed fire, went forth from the 
palace. They were mighty and armed with bows, and they were 
accompanied by a vast army. They were masters of divine weapons—the 
foremost among such masters—and each was eager to surpass the others. 
They were mounted in huge chariots with golden trappings, covered with 
flagstaffs and pennants, and drawn by horses. They made a sound like the 
thunder of storm clouds. Twanging their bows—resplendent with burnished 
gold—those immeasurably powerful warriors in their excitement looked 
like storm clouds shot with lightning. But their mothers as well as their 
friends and kinsmen, who knew that the kimkaras had been killed, were 
frantic with grief. 

[6-10] Bedecked with ornaments of burnished gold, each one trying to 
outrun the others, they rushed at Hanuman, who stood his ground on the 
gateway. Releasing showers of arrows, their chariots making deep rumbling 
sounds, those bulls among raksasas, sons of chaos, charging, resembled 
storm clouds pouring torrents. Covered by those showers of arrows, 
Hanuman’s form became obscured like that of a mighty mountain in a 
torrential downpour. Moving swiftly, the monkey managed to evade both 
the arrows and the chariot charges of those mighty warriors as he raced 
through the clear sky. Toying with those bowmen in the sky, mighty 
Hanuman resembled Lord Maruta, the wind god, playing with rainbow- 
crossed clouds in the heavens. 

[11-16] Then, with a mighty roar that terrified that vast army, mighty 
Hanuman charged the raksasas. That scorcher of his foes struck some of 
them with his open hand; others he kicked with his feet; still others he hit 
with his fist, while he rent others with his claws. The monkey smashed 
some of his enemies with his chest, others with his thighs, while he knocked 
still others to the ground with the sound of his roaring alone. After they had 
all fallen to the ground, dead, their whole mighty army, panic-stricken, fled 
in all directions. Elephants trumpeted discordantly. Horses fell to the 
ground. The earth was littered with chariots—their seats, flagstaffs, and 
parasols shattered. When the mighty and heroic monkey, fierce in his valor, 
had slain those arrogant raksasas, he returned to the gateway, eager to fight 
more of them. 


Sarga 44 

[1-4] When Ravana learned that his minister’s sons had been slain by the 
great monkey, he formulated a new plan, keeping his feelings well hidden. 
Then ten-necked Ravana issued the following orders to his five field 
marshals—Virtipaksa, Yupaksa, the rdaksasa Durdhara, Praghasa, and 
Bhasakarna—all of whom were powerful, skilled in political strategy, 
impetuous as the wind in battle, and eager to capture Hanuman: “Go forth, 
all you field marshals, and take a large corps of cavalry, chariots, and 
elephants with you. You must defeat that monkey. 

[S—8] “But you must be very careful when you confront this forest 
creature, and you must adopt strategies that are appropriate to the time and 
place. Judging by what he has done, I think that this is no monkey! By all 
means, he must be some great being, endowed with tremendous strength. 
Or else Indra must have created him through the power of his asceticism in 
order to destroy us. Together, all of you and I have conquered the gods, 
asuras, and great seers along with the great serpents, yaksas, and 
gandharvas. It 1s inevitable that they will try to cause us some trouble. 
Undoubtedly, that is what this is. You must seize him by force. 

[9-14] “And you should not underestimate this tawny monkey of fierce 
valor. For I have seen swift and exceedingly valorous monkeys before— 
tawny monkeys such as Valin, Sugriva, mighty Jambavan, General Nila, 
and others, such as Dvivida and the rest. But even they did not have such 
awesome speed, power, valor, cunning, endurance, and the ability to change 
form at will. You must understand that this is some great being who has 
taken on the appearance of a monkey. Therefore, you must make an 
extraordinary effort if you are to vanquish him. I grant you that the 
inhabitants of all the three worlds—including Indra, the gods, the asuras, 
and mortals—would be insufficient to stand against you on the battlefield. 
Still, a person skilled in strategy who desires victory in battle will make 
every effort to protect himself; for success in battle is fickle.” 

[15-19] Accepting their master’s instructions, all those swift and mighty 
generals, whose splendor equaled that of Agni, eater of oblations, set forth. 
They were amply provided with chariots, rutting war-elephants, swift 
horses, and all manner of troops and sharp weapons. Then those mighty 
warriors spied the great monkey, who, garlanded with the rays of his own 
splendor, was blazing like the rising sun. Great in speed, power, strength, 


cunning, energy, size, and ability, he sat there on the gateway. The moment 
they saw him, they positioned themselves all around him and then attacked 
him from every side with all manner of fearsome weapons. 

[20—26] Durdhara struck him in the head with five bright iron arrows. 
Sharp and yellow tipped, they resembled lotus petals. Pierced in the head by 
those five arrows, the monkey leapt into the air roaring, so that he made the 
directions resound. Mounted in his chariot, powerful and valiant Durdhara 
advanced with his bow at the ready, showering him with many hundreds of 
arrows. The monkey drove him off as he showered his arrows into the air, 
just as the wind god Maruta drives back a storm cloud with its showers at 
the end of the rainy season. Harried by Durdhara, the swift son of the wind 
god roared and began to grow once more. Suddenly leaping high into the 
air, the tawny monkey fell with tremendous force onto Durdhara’s chariot 
like a great bolt of lightning upon a mountain. Abandoning his chariot, its 
eight horses killed, its axle and shaft splintered, Durdhara fell to the ground 
and yielded up his life. 

[27-30] When unassailable Virtipaksa and Yupaksa, subduers of their 
foes, saw him fallen to the ground, they were filled with fury and leapt to 
the attack. And as they leapt to the attack, they both struck the great-armed 
monkey on the chest with war hammers as he stood there in the clear sky. 
Bearing the brunt of the full force of those forceful raksasas, the mighty 
monkey, equal in valor to Suparna, leapt once more to the ground. The 
monkey son of Pavana the wind god rushed to a sd/a tree and, tearing it up 
by its roots, slew both of those mighty rdksasas. 

[31-35] Then, realizing that the three of them had been killed by the 
swift tawny monkey, exceedingly powerful Praghasa attacked him. Mighty 
Bhasakarna in a rage seized his lance. Then the two of them—side by side 
—faced the glorious tiger among monkeys. Praghasa attacked the best of 
monkeys with his sharp-tipped lance, as did the rdksasa Bhasakarna with 
his lance. His limbs wounded by the two of them and his fur smeared with 
blood, that monkey equaled the newly risen sun in radiance. He was filled 
with fury. Hanuman, mighty elephant among monkeys, then tore off a 
mountain peak along with its deer, beasts of prey, and trees, and killed the 
two rdksasas. 

[36-39] Once he had killed those five generals, the monkey destroyed 
the remainder of their armies. The monkey destroyed them as did thousand- 


eyed Indra the asuras, smashing horses with horses, elephants with 
elephants, warriors with warriors, and chariots with chariots. The roads of 
the countryside all around were blocked with slain elephants and horses, 
slaughtered rdksasas, and great chariots with their axles splintered. After 
the mighty monkey had slain the mighty field marshals in battle along with 
their troops and mounts, he returned to the gateway for a moment’s respite, 
like Kala after the destruction of all creatures. 


Sarga 45 

[1-6] When the king learned that Hanuman had slaughtered his five field 
marshals along with their followers and mounts, he cast his glance upon 
Prince Aksa, who had never suffered a wound and was eager and ready for 
battle. Prompted by that glance, the valorous prince sprang up with his 
gold-inlaid bow in the assembly hall, like the purifying sacrificial fire 
flaring up through the oblation poured by eminent twice-born brahmans. 
Mounting his great chariot, which—with its spreading fretwork of 
burnished jambunada gold—shone with the splendor of the newly risen 
sun, maker of day, that mighty bull among rdaksasas, the sons of chaos, went 
forth against the great tawny monkey. His chariot was adorned with 
burnished jambiinada gold. It was covered with pennants, and its flagstaff 
was adorned with gems. It was splendidly yoked with eight fine horses, 
swift as thought. He had won it by long application to ascetic practice. It 
was unassailable by either gods or asuras, and its passage could not be 
impeded. It was fully equipped, and it moved through the air with the 
splendor of the sun. With quivers and eight swords fastened in place, it 
looked beautiful. It had javelins and iron cudgels arrayed in rows. Gleaming 
with every accoutrement, its golden ropes as brilliant as the moon and sun, 
maker of day, the chariot resembled the sun itself. Mounting it, that prince, 
whose valor was equal to that of the gods, set forth. 

[7-11] Filling the sky and the earth—along with all its mountains—with 
the sound of his horses, elephants, and great chariot, the prince, 
accompanied by his troops, approached the powerful monkey as he sat on 
the gateway. Approaching the seated monkey—like the fire of universal 
destruction at the end of the cosmic era when all creatures are destroyed— 
Aksa, his glance that of a lion, was both amazed and apprehensive. He 
stared at him with a respectful gaze. Assessing the great monkey’s power 


and his valor when confronted with enemies, as well as his own strength, 
the mighty son of the king summoned all his strength, as does the sun at 
winter’s end. As he reflected on his valor, he was roused to fury. Then, 
steadfast and of focused mind, he took up his position and incited 
Hanuman, invincible in battle, to combat with three sharp arrows. Grasping 
his bow and with arrow in hand, high-spirited Aksa gazed upon the haughty 
monkey and saw that he had banished all fatigue and was revitalized for the 
conquest of his foes. 

[12-15] Swift in his valor, wearing a golden necklace and armlets and 
beautiful earrings, he attacked the monkey. Then an incomparable struggle 
between the two of them took place, frightening even the gods and asuras. 
Witnessing that battle between the monkey and the prince, the earth cried 
out, the sun grew dim, the winds ceased to blow, the mountains shook, the 
heavens thundered, and the oceans seethed. Then the mighty warrior, adept 
at aiming, nocking, and loosing his arrows, struck the monkey’s head with 
three swift and fair-faced arrows fletched with gold and resembling 
venomous serpents. Bleeding from those arrows that had struck him in the 
head simultaneously, the monkey, covered with his own blood, his eyes 
rolling, resembled the newly risen sun. With those arrows protruding like 
rays, he looked like the ray-garlanded sun. 

[16-19] Observing the son of the great king with his splendid bow and 
weapons raised in battle, the foremost minister of the king of the monkeys 
rejoiced and began to increase in size in his eagerness for combat. In his 
towering fury, filled with power and strength, he resembled the ray- 
garlanded sun when it touches the peak of Mount Mandara. Then he began 
to consume Prince Aksa along with his troops and mounts with the flames 
issuing from his fiery eyes. Then that raksasa, Aksa, in the form of a storm 
cloud—his bow in place of Indra’s rainbow and his arrows in place of 
torrents—swiftly loosed his arrows in battle against that lord of tawny 
monkeys, who looked like a mountain, just as a storm cloud releases its 
torrents upon a great mountain. Observing Prince Aksa with his fierce valor 
in battle and his great power, strength, energy, and arrows in battle, the 
monkey, whose power was equal to that of a thundercloud, roared with 
delight. 

[20—24] In his youthfulness and overconfidence in his own prowess, the 
prince, his eyes red as blood, rushed in a towering fury upon that monkey, 


who was unequaled in combat. He was like a bull elephant rushing toward a 
vast pitfall concealed by grass. Struck by the arrows that the prince loosed 
with such force, Maruti roared with a sound like a storm cloud thundering 
and leapt into the sky, looking dreadful through the flailing of his arms and 
legs. But even as he leapt upward, the mighty and valorous leader of the 
raksasas, foremost of chariot-warriors, pursued him in his chariot, 
showering him with arrows, as a storm cloud does a mountain with showers 
of hailstones. Nevertheless, the mighty monkey, whose valor was fearsome 
in battle, moved along the path traveled by the wind, dodging his arrows. 
He moved like the wind itself, swift as thought, among the arrows. 
Observing Aksa with an admiring glance as, bow in hand and eager for 
battle, he covered the sky with all kinds of splendid missiles, the son of 
Maruta fell to thinking. 

[25-29] His chest pierced with arrows by that great and outstanding 
prince, the great-armed monkey, knowing full well how extraordinary was 
this feat, roared and reflected on Aksa’s prowess in battle: “This mighty 
warrior, whose radiance is that of the newly risen sun, maker of day, has 
performed a magnificent feat quite unlike that of a youngster. I do not care 
to kill one who is so splendid in every exploit of battle. This great warrior is 
truly great in battle and in valor. He is well focused and can withstand 
anything in combat. There is no doubt that the sages as well as yaksas and 
great serpents honor him for the ever-increasing excellence of his feats in 
battle. His spirit exalted by his valor and energy, he stands directly before 
me and sizes me up. Indeed, the valor of this impetuous warrior might well 
cause the hearts of even the gods and asuras to quail. If I do not take him 
seriously, he will surely get the better of me, for his valor in battle is 
increasing. I have really no choice but to kill him, for one cannot ignore a 
spreading fire.” 

[30-33] Reflecting thus on the power of his foe and settling his own plan 
of action, the great monkey, valorous and powerful, rushed forward, 
resolved to kill him. There in the path traveled by the wind, the mighty 
monkey son of Pavana the wind god slew Aksa’s eight swift steeds—well 
trained in maneuvering and able to bear heavy loads—with blows of his 
palm. Next Aksa’s great chariot, struck with the palm of the minister of the 
king of the monkeys, fell from the sky in defeat, its seat smashed, its shaft 
detached, and its horses slain. Abandoning his chariot, the great chariot- 


warrior, armed with his bow and sword, flew up into the sky, just as a seer 
who has acquired fearsome power through the practice of asceticism might 
leave his body and rise up to the abode of the gods. 

[34-39] But the monkey, whose speed and power were like those of 
Maruta, gradually caught up with him as he moved through the sky— 
frequented by Garuda, king of birds, the wind god Anila, and perfected 
beings—and seized him firmly by his feet. Whirling him around thousands 
of times as Garuda, the lord of birds, might whirl a great snake he had 
seized, the foremost of monkeys, his father’s equal in power, hurled him 
forcefully to the ground in battle. Slain by the son of Vayu, the raksasa fell 
to the earth. His arms, thighs, hips, and neck were broken; he was oozing 
blood; his bones and eyes were mutilated. His joints were separated and his 
tendons strewn about. In crushing him against the ground, the great monkey 
greatly terrified the lord of the raksasas. When the prince had been slain, 
the great seers—who follow the orbits of the heavenly bodies and rigidly 
observe their vows—celestial beings, yaksas and great serpents, and the 
gods along with Indra who had assembled there gazed upon the monkey 
with great awe. When the mighty monkey had slain Prince Aksa of the 
bloodred eyes, whose splendor was like that of the son of Indra, wielder of 
the vajra, he returned to the gateway for a moment’s respite like Kala after 
the destruction of all creatures. 


Sarga 46 
[1-6] When Prince Aksa had been slain by Hanuman, Ravana, the great 
lord of the rdksasas, steadied his mind. Then, in his anger, he issued orders 
to Indrajit, who was like Indra himself, saying: “You are an expert in divine 
weapons and are foremost among those who bear weapons. You have 
brought great sorrow upon even the gods and asuras. Your exploits have 
been witnessed by Indra and the gods, and you have amassed divine 
weapons by propitiating Grandfather Brahma. After experiencing the power 
of your divine weapons in battle, neither the asuras nor the hosts of Maruts 
nor anyone else in all the three worlds has escaped affliction. You are 
protected by the strength of your own arms and guarded by the power of 
your austerities. You fully understand all distinctions of time and place, and 
you are highly intelligent. There is nothing you cannot accomplish through 
your exploits in battle; there is nothing you cannot accomplish through your 


wise counsel. No one in all the three worlds is ignorant of your native 
strength and the strength of your divine weapons. The power of your 
austerities, your valor in battle, and the power of your divine weapons are 
equal to my own. Thus, when I think of you in the press of battle, my mind, 
assured of attaining its object, does not despair. 

[7-12] “All the Aimkaras have been slain and so have my five field 
marshals, the mighty sons of my minister, and the raksasa Jambumialin. 
Your beloved brother Prince Aksa has been slain as well. But in none of 
them did I place the trust I place in you, subduer of your foes. Observing 
this monkey’s great strength—so cunningly employed—his power, and his 
valor, and considering your own strength, you must exert force 
commensurate with your own power. You are the foremost of experts in 
divine weapons; reflecting on your own strength and that of your enemy, 
you must act in such a way that when you leave here and encounter him, 
destroyer of your foes, the destruction of our forces will be avoided. It is 
not really the best of strategies for me to send you out, but it is one that is 
sanctioned by warriors who follow the prescribed rules of royal statecraft. 
During the battle you must remember your expertise in the various 
weapons, subduer of your foes, and you must truly desire victory in battle.” 

[13—16] When he had heard his father’s words, that warrior—his power 
like that of the gods, the sons of Daksa, and his courage unfailing— 
reverently circumambulated his lord and prepared his mind for battle. Then 
Indrajit set forth to war, filled with energy, eager for battle, and greatly 
honored by his dear companions. The majestic son of the raksasa king, his 
eyes like lotus petals, set forth, overflowing with energy like the sea on the 
days of spring tide. Like Indra himself, Indrajit mounted his chariot. 
Unstoppable, it was yoked with four lions with sharp, white fangs. They 
were matched in their paces and swift as Garuda, the king of birds. 

[17-21] Mounted in his chariot, the great chariot-warrior, foremost of 
bowmen, master of weapons, and the best of those familiar with divine 
weapons, proceeded swiftly to the place where Hanuman was. The heroic 
tawny monkey was overjoyed when he heard the rumbling of his chariot 
and the twanging of his bowstring. Adept in battle, Indrajit, holding his 
enormous bow and keen-tipped arrows, advanced toward Hanuman. As he 
set forth for battle, arrows in hand, eager for combat, the directions all grew 
dark, and fierce beasts cried out in different voices. Then the great seers, 


who follow the orbits of the heavenly bodies, along with the great serpents, 
yaksas, and perfected beings, assembled there, as did flocks of birds, 
covering the sky and crying in great delight. 

[22—26] Seeing Indrajit swiftly approaching in his chariot, the powerful 
monkey let loose a mighty roar and grew still larger. But Indrajit, mounted 
in his heavenly chariot, armed with his magnificent bow, made his weapon 
resound with a roar as loud as a thunderbolt. Then the two of them—the 
monkey and the son of the raksasa lord—met. Both were immensely 
powerful, both enormously strong, and both fearless in battle. They were as 
fixed in their enmity as are the great gods and asuras. As he moved along 
the path of his father the wind god, immeasurable Hanuman, grown to an 
enormous size, evaded the impact of the arrows of that mighty chariot- 
warrior and bowman honored in battle. Meanwhile, Indrajit, the mighty 
slayer of enemy heroes, loosed long, splendidly feathered arrows with sharp 
and broad heads and nocked with gold. Their impact was like that of the 
vajra. 

[27-29] Hearing the rumbling sound of his chariot, the beating of the 
battle drums—mrdangas, bheris, and patahas—and the sound of his bow 
being drawn, Hanuman leapt up once more. The great, tawny monkey sped 
through the spaces between that celebrated marksman’s arrows, spoiling his 
aim. Sometimes Hanuman, son of the wind god, would stand directly in 
front of his arrows only to stretch out his arms and leap out of the way. 

[30-36] The two of them, both endowed with enormous power and adept 
in feats of battle, waged a magnificent duel that enthralled the minds of all 
creatures. The raksasa could find no opening on Hanuman’s part nor could 
Maruti find any on the part of that great warrior. And so, when the two of 
them—their valor equal to that of the gods—met, they found each other 
equally invincible. Since his arrows—even when they hit their mark—were 
falling in vain, the great warrior focused his thoughts in deep concentration 
and fell to brooding. The son of the raksasa king came to a decision 
concerning the foremost among the heroic tawny monkeys. Realizing that it 
was impossible to kill him, he thought: “How might the monkey be 
rendered immobile so that he can be captured?” The enormously powerful 
hero, foremost of experts in divine weapon-spells, then directed the divine 
weapon of Grandfather Brahma toward that best of tawny monkeys. 
Recognizing that it was impossible to kill him, great-armed Indrajit, who 


knew the science of divine weapons, captured the son of Maruta with his 
divine weapon. Once the raksasa had bound him with that divine weapon- 
spell, the monkey was immobilized and he fell to the ground. 

[37-42] Realizing that he was bound by a divine weapon—although he 
felt not even the slightest pain through the power of the Lord—that heroic 
tawny monkey then recalled the grace that had been shown him by 
Grandfather Brahma. Recognizing that this was Brahma’s divine weapon, 
invoked with spells belonging to that self-existent god, Hanuman recalled 
the boon he had been granted by Grandfather Brahma, thinking: “Because 
of the power of Brahma, father of the worlds, I am unable to free myself 
from the bondage of this divine weapon. Indeed, it is incumbent upon me to 
submit to the bondage of the self-existent god’s divine weapon when it is 
used in such a fashion.” Reflecting upon the power of that divine weapon 
and on the kindness Grandfather Brahma had shown him, and considering 
that he would momentarily be able to free himself, the monkey submitted to 
the will of the Grandfather, thinking: “Even though I am bound by this 
divine weapon, I feel no fear, for I am under the protection of Grandfather 
Brahma, great Indra, and the wind god. Moreover, I foresee one great 
advantage in my being taken by the rdksasas: a parley with their lord. So let 
my enemies capture me.” 

[43-48] Having resolved this matter after due consideration, the slayer 
of enemy heroes kept perfectly still. But he roared as the various foes who 
now rushed upon him seized him violently and reviled him. Seeing that 
subduer of his foes immobilized, the raksasas bound him with ropes of 
hemp and stout strips of bark. Hanuman submitted to this violent capture 
and bondage at the hands of his powerful enemies, having concluded that 
the lord of the raksasas would desire to see him out of curiosity. The 
moment that mighty monkey was bound with strips of bark, he was released 
by the divine weapon, for the bondage of divine weapon-spells cannot 
coexist with any other bondage. As soon as mighty Indrajit realized that the 
best of monkeys, now bound with strips of bark, had been released by the 
divine weapon, he began to worry, even though the monkey, now bound by 
other means, still seemed to be under the power of the divine weapon, 
thinking: “Alas! My great feat has been rendered futile. The raksasas have 
not taken into consideration the way these mantras work. Once a divine 


weapon has been counteracted, no other can be deployed. We are all in 
grave peril.” 

[49-54] But Hanuman did not realize that he had been released by the 
divine weapon. And so, tormented by his bonds, he was dragged along by 
the raksasas. Beating the monkey with sticks and fists, the cruel raksasas 
dragged him into the presence of their lord. Then Indrajit, realizing that the 
heroic and powerful tawny monkey had been freed from the divine weapon, 
showed him—bound as he was with strips of bark—to the king and his 
courtiers. The rdksasas then began to tell Ravana, king of the raksasas, 
about the magnificent monkey they had bound there like an elephant in rut. 
A discussion arose among the mighty rdaksasas there: “Who is he?” “To 
whom does he belong?” “Where has he come from?” “What is his 
mission?” “Who is his master?” Meanwhile, some of the other rdksasas 
there, in a rage, said to one another: “Kill him!” “Burn him!” “Eat him!” 

[55-59] After they had traversed the road, the great monkey suddenly 
saw the king’s palace, adorned with great jewels, and he saw the lord of the 
rdaksasas, his senior retainers at his feet. Immensely powerful Ravana spied 
the foremost of monkeys as he was dragged to and fro by the hideous 
raksasas. At the same time, the foremost of monkeys saw the lord of the 
rdksasas, who resembled the blazing sun in power and radiance. Ten-faced 
Ravana glared at the monkey, his eyes rolling and red with rage. Then he 
directed his foremost counselors who were seated there, noble of lineage 
and exemplary in conduct, to question him. When they had questioned him 
in due order regarding his mission, its purpose, and the instigator of that 
purpose, the monkey began his response by saying: “I have come here as an 
emissary from the lord of the tawny monkeys.” 


Sarga 47 
[1-5] Hanuman, fearsome in his power, his eyes red with anger, then gazed 
upon the lord of the raksasas, amazed at his exploit. Then Hanuman gazed 
upon the immeasurably splendid lord of the raksasas, who sat before him 
like a rain-charged thundercloud resting on the peak of Mount Meru. With 
his priceless, glittering, golden crown set with masses of pearls, he was 
luminous and resplendent. He wore exquisite, golden jewelry made up 
largely of priceless gems and fastened with diamond pins. They seemed to 
be creations of the imagination. He was clothed in costly silks and covered 


with red sandalwood paste. His body was beautifully adorned with various 
lovely designs. 

[6-8] With his ten large and beautiful heads, each with red eyes, 
terrifying appearance, large, sharp, and shining fangs, and pendulous lips, 
that powerful hero was as splendid as Mount Mandara, its peaks filled with 
various savage beasts. Resembling a mass of black collyrium and with a 
sparkling necklace—its principal gemstone like the full moon—strung 
across his chest, he looked like a thundercloud crossed by a bright line of 
flying balaka cranes. With their coating of fine sandalwood paste, their 
armlets tightly fastened, and their bracelets flashing, his muscular arms 
resembled five-headed serpents. 

[9-14] He was seated on a great and splendid crystal throne. It was 
exquisite, adorned with jeweled fastenings and covered with a magnificent 
cushion. He was closely attended by young women exquisitely ornamented, 
who stood all around him with yak-tail fly whisks in their hands. He sat 
surrounded by four rdksasas arrogant in their power. Skilled in counsel, 
they were his counselors: Durdhara, Prahasta, the radksasa Mahaparsva, and 
the counselor Nikumbha. Surrounded by all of them, he resembled the earth 
surrounded by the four seas. Attended by still other highly intelligent 
counselors, skilled in counsel, and by all his ministers, he resembled the 
lord of the gods attended by the gods. 

[15—20] Filled with the greatest wonder, Hanuman could not take his 
eyes off the raksasa lord, even though the raksasas, whose strength was 
terrifying, were belaboring him. As he gazed upon the radiant lord of the 
raksasas, Hanuman was dazzled by his splendor, and he thought: “Oh what 
beauty! What steadfastness! What strength! What splendor! Truly, the king 
of the raksasas is endowed with every virtue! If this mighty rdksasa lord 
were not so unrighteous, he could be the guardian of the world of the gods, 
Indra included. Because of that, all beings, even the gods and danavas, fear 
him, for he is capable in his wrath of reducing the whole world to one vast 
sea.” Such were the wise monkey’s various thoughts as he gazed upon the 
grandeur of the raksasa king, immeasurable in his power. 


Sarga 48 
[1-3] When great-armed Ravana, who makes the worlds cry out, saw that 
yellow-eyed monkey standing before him, he was seized with a towering 


rage. His eyes reddened with rage, the king addressed these profound and 
purposeful words—well suited to the occasion—to Prahasta, foremost of 
his counselors: “Ask this evil creature where he comes from, what his 
purpose is, and what is the meaning of his destroying my grove and 
menacing the rdksasa women.” 

[4-9] Upon hearing Ravana’s words, Prahasta said this: “Take heart, 
bless you, you need have no fear, monkey. If Indra has sent you to the 
abode of Ravana, then tell the truth; do not be afraid, monkey, you will be 
released. Have you taken on this handsome form and entered our city as an 
agent of Kubera Vaisravana, or of Yama, the god of death, or of Varuna, the 
lord of the waters? Or perhaps you are a messenger dispatched by Visnu, 
who is desirous of conquering me, for only your appearance is that of a 
monkey, not your power. You must speak truthfully, monkey, and then you 
will be set free. But if you speak falsely, you will be put to death. Now then, 
tell us your purpose in entering the realm of Ravana.” 

[10-16] Addressed in this fashion, the foremost of tawny monkeys 
replied to the lord of the raksasa hosts: “I am no agent of Sakra, Yama, or 
Varuna. I have no alliance with the lord of wealth, Kubera, nor have I been 
sent by Visnu. This is my natural form; I am a monkey who has come here. 
Since it is so difficult to obtain an audience with the lord of the rdksasas, I 
destroyed the raksasa king’s grove in order to get one. Then those powerful 
raksasas came, spoiling for a fight. I only fought back in self-defense. It is 
impossible for even the gods and asuras to bind me with bonds or divine 
weapons; for such is the boon that I received from Grandfather Brahma 
himself. But in my desire to see the king, I submitted to the divine weapon. 
When I was tightly bound by the raksasas, the divine weapon released me. 
You must know that I am a messenger of the immeasurably powerful 
Raghava. Please, my lord, listen to my beneficial words.” 


Sarga 49 
[1-3] Looking straight at mighty, ten-faced Ravana, the great and mighty 
tawny monkey, unafraid, spoke this sensible speech: “I have come to your 
country on the orders of Sugriva. Lord of the raksasas, your brother, the 
lord of the tawny monkeys, inquires after your well-being. Now listen to the 
advice of your brother, great Sugriva. His words, consistent with 


righteousness and polity, will be for your benefit both in this world and in 
the next: 

[4-7] “ ‘There was a king named Dasaratha, rich in chariots, elephants, 
and horses. He was a kinsman—like a father—of all the people and equal in 
splendor to the lord of gods. His eldest son was his favorite. On the orders 
of his father, that great-armed prince went into exile in the Dandaka forest. 
There that powerful man—whose name is Rama—followed the path of 
righteousness along with his brother Laksmana and his wife, Sita. Then 
Sita, his wife—daughter of the great King Janaka of Videha and devoted to 
her husband—got lost in the woods. 

[8—13] “ ‘Searching for the queen, the prince and his younger brother 
reached Mount Rsyamiika, where they encountered Sugriva. The latter 
promised Rama that he would search for Sita, while Rama declared that he 
would secure the kingdom of the tawny monkeys for Sugriva. Slaying Valin 
in battle, Prince Rama installed Sugriva in the kingship as the lord of the 
hosts of apes and tawny monkeys. True to his promise and intent upon the 
search for Sita, Sugriva, lord of the tawny monkeys, dispatched the tawny 
monkeys in all directions. Hundreds, thousands, and millions of tawny 
monkeys are searching for her in all directions, down below and even up in 
the sky. Those heroic tawny monkeys are possessed of enormous strength. 
They are swift, and nothing can hinder their progress. Some are like Garuda 
Vainateya and others like the wind god.’ 

[14—18] “As for me, my name is Hanuman, and I am Maruta’s flesh-and- 
blood son. It is for Sita’s sake that I have come here, anxious to find her, 
swiftly leaping the ocean, a hundred leagues in breadth. You, sir, are learned 
in righteousness and polity and have hoarded up a great treasure of 
asceticism. A wise man like you should not be holding the wife of another 
man against her will. Wise persons such as yourself are not given to actions 
that are contrary to righteousness, fraught with manifold dangers, and 
utterly self-destructive. For who, even among the gods and asuras, could 
possibly withstand the arrows loosed by Laksmana and directed by the 
wrath of Rama? There is no one in all the three worlds, your majesty, who 
can transgress against Raghava and then find happiness. 

[19-22] “So you must heed this advice—beneficial in the past, present, 
and future and conforming to righteousness and polity—and give Janaki 
back to the lord of men. For I have now accomplished here what was well- 


nigh impossible: I have found the queen. Raghava now must be the judge as 
to what action remains to be taken hereafter. I have seen Sita, so wholly 
given over to grief, whom you took without realizing that she is like a five- 
headed serpent. It is no more possible for her to be confined, even by the 
gods and asuras together, than it would be for heavily poisoned food, once 
eaten, to be assimilated through the power of digestion. 

[23-28] “Moreover, it is not right that you should destroy the fruits of 
your righteousness—acquired through your long austerity—and your great 
longevity as well. Now, sir, you may be relying on the invulnerability at the 
hands of the gods and asuras that you have secured for yourself through 
your austerities. There was, however, a major exception with regard to that. 
For Sugriva is not a god, an asura, a human, a rdksasa, a gandharva, a 
yaksa, nor a serpent. Raghava is a human, while Sugriva is a lord of tawny 
monkeys. How, then, will you save your life, your majesty? The fruits of 
righteousness may not coexist with those of unrighteousness. Each one 
gives rise to its own fruits; and righteousness is unable to outweigh 
unrighteousness. There is no doubt that you, sir, have reaped the fruits of 
your earlier righteousness. But you must now swiftly suffer the 
consequences of your unrighteousness. 

[29-33] “Since you know about the slaughter in Janasthana, the killing 
of Valin, and the alliance between Rama and Sugriva, you must now know 
what would be best for you. I could, of course, destroy Lanka along with its 
horses, chariots, and elephants all by myself; but that is for Rama to decide. 
For Rama made a solemn vow in the presence of the hosts of apes and 
tawny monkeys to annihilate his enemies who had assaulted Sita. Even 
Indra himself, the smasher of citadels, could not insult Rama and then find 
happiness—what then to say of any other, especially a person such as you? 
For you should realize that she whom you know as Sita and keep here under 
your control is really Kalaratri—the dark night of universal destruction— 
who will bring ruin to all of Lanka. 

[34-36] “So you had best take thought for what is best for you and take 
off the noose of Kala—embodied in the form of Sita—that you have placed 
upon your own shoulders. Otherwise, you shall witness your city, along 
with its streets and its palaces, crushed by the wrath of Rama and consumed 
by the blazing power of Sita.” When unrivaled, ten-headed Ravana had 
heard these eloquent but unwelcome words, his eyes rolled with rage, and 


he ordered the execution of the great monkey who had uttered them so 
fearlessly. 


Sarga 50 

[1-4] When Ravana had heard those words of the great monkey, he was 
beside himself with anger and ordered his execution. But when wicked 
Ravana had ordered the execution of one who had duly declared himself to 
be an emissary, Vibhisana did not approve of it. Seeing that the lord of the 
raksasas was enraged and considering the nature of what he had ordered to 
be done, Vibhisana, who was always committed to proper conduct, reflected 
as to what he should do. Having come to a decision in this matter, the 
conqueror of his foes soothingly paid his respects to his elder brother. Most 
skilled with words, he addressed these highly beneficial words to him: 

[S—9] “Your majesty, the execution of this monkey would not become 
you. For, mighty king, it would be both contrary to righteousness and 
censurable from the point of view of the conduct of worldly affairs. 
Undoubtedly, he has proved to be a great enemy. For he has wrought 
unparalleled offense. Nonetheless, the virtuous do not advocate killing an 
emissary. Moreover, there are many other punishments ordained for 
emissaries. Mutilation, flogging, shaving the head, and branding—these are 
the punishments that are prescribed in the case of an emissary. But I have 
never heard of killing an emissary. How could a person like you, sir, whose 
mind has been trained in matters of righteousness and polity and who 
resolves matters through weighing what is proper and what is not, permit 
himself to come under the sway of anger? The truly strong control their 
anger. There is no one, mighty king, who is your equal in the exposition of 
righteousness, the conduct of worldly affairs, or grasping the meaning of 
the sastras. For in such matters, you surpass all the gods and asuras. 

[10-13] “Moreover, I can see no advantage whatever in killing this 
monkey. Let your rod of punishment fall instead upon those who have sent 
him. Whether he is good or evil, he has been sent by others. Expressing the 
intentions of others, entirely under their control, a messenger never 
deserves death. Then, too, your majesty, if he is killed, I cannot think of any 
other flying creature here who could subsequently go back to the far shore 
of the ocean. Therefore, conqueror of enemy citadels, you should not bother 


to kill him. Instead, sir, you should exert yourself with respect to Indra and 
the gods. 

[14—17] “Moreover, if he is killed, O warrior so fond of war, I can think 
of no other emissary who could incite those two ill-mannered princes to 
battle, for they are very far away. And so, delighter of hearts, 1t would not 
be proper for you, who are unconquerable even by the gods and asuras, to 
deprive the raksasas, those sons of chaos, who are powerful, courageous, 
and spirited, of an opportunity for battle. For you have more than ten 
million troops intent on your welfare. They are the foremost of all those 
who bear arms: valiant, well disciplined, born in highly virtuous families, 
spirited, and well fed. So let a few of them set out at once at your command 
with a portion of your army. Once they have captured those two stupid 
princes, they will have established your power over your foes.” 


Sarga 51 
[1-4] When mighty ten-necked Ravana had heard his brother’s words, so 
well suited to the time and place, he made this reply: “You have spoken 
well, sir. To kill a messenger is indeed reprehensible. However, some 
punishment other than death must be inflicted upon him. It is said that the 
tail is the monkeys’ most cherished possession. Therefore, let his be set 
alight immediately. Once his tail is burning, let him go. Then let all his 
kinsmen and relations, his friends and those dear to him, see him dejected 
and drawn by the disfigurement of his tail.” 

[S—9]| Then the lord of the raksasas commanded: “Let the raksasas lead 
him through every crossroads of the city with his tail ablaze.” Hearing his 
words, the rdaksasas, brutal in their anger, wrapped Hanuman’s tail in worn- 
out cotton rags. As his tail was being wrapped, the great monkey began to 
grow, as might a fire, eater of oblations, on reaching dry fuel in the 
woodlands. Drenching his tail with oil, they set fire to it. His very being 
consumed with rage and indignation, his face resembling the rising sun, 
Hanuman struck down the raksasas with his blazing tail. 

[10-14] When the cruel raksasas began to bind him once again, the 
foremost of the heroic tawny monkeys came to a decision that was well 
suited to the moment: “Of course these rdksasas are incapable even of 
binding me, for I could break these bonds, leap up, and kill them. Indeed, I 
am a match for all the rdksasas in battle. Still, I must endure all of this in 


order to please Rama. | still must scout out Lanka once again, for—due to 
the arrangement of its defensive works—I could not see it clearly at night. I 
absolutely must view Lanka by morning light. So let the raksasas afflict me 
to their heart’s content with additional bonds and by setting my tail on fire 
too. It doesn’t bother me at all.” 

[15-19] Then, in great delight, the raksasas seized that powerful and 
great bull among monkeys, who gave no sign of his emotions, and they set 
forth. Cruel in their actions, the raksasas led him through the city, filling it 
with the sounds of conches and bheri drums and making it resound with 
their shouting. As the great monkey Hanuman was led about the great city 
of the rdksasas, he observed the splendid mansions. The monkey saw 
enclosed yards, well-proportioned squares, crossroads, and main roads 
crowded with houses. In the squares, at the crossroads, and along the royal 
highway, all the raksasas proclaimed the monkey to be a spy. 

[20—22] Once the tip of Hanuman’s tail was in flames, the hideous-eyed 
raksasa women informed the queen of that unwelcome news: “Sita, that 
red-faced monkey with whom you were conversing is being led about with 
his tail in flames.” Hearing those cruel words, which grieved her as much as 
her own abduction, Vaidehit was inflamed with grief, and she prayed to 
Agni, the eater of oblations. 

[23-27] She was intent upon the welfare of the great monkey, and so the 
large-eyed woman prayed devoutly to Agni, the eater of oblations: “If I 
have been obedient to my husband, if I have practiced austerity, if I have 
been a perfectly devoted wife, then may you be cool for Hanuman. If wise 
Rama still has any compassion for me and if any good fortune remains to 
me at all, then may you be cool for Hanuman. If that righteous man knows 
that my conduct has been virtuous and that I long to be reunited with him, 
then may you be cool for Hanuman. If the noble great-armed Sugriva—true 
to his vows—is going to rescue me from this misery, then may you be cool 
for Hanuman.” 

[28-33] Then the fierce-flamed fire began to burn gently with its flames 
swirling in an auspicious clockwise motion as if to assure the fawn-eyed 
woman of the monkey’s safety. As his tail was burning, the monkey 
thought: “Why is it that this blazing fire does not completely engulf me? It 
appears to have enormous flames, but still it does me no harm. It is as if a 
mantle of frost had settled on the tip of my tail. On the other hand, it is clear 


that this must be some miracle, wrought by Rama’s power, such as I 
witnessed in the form of the mountain when I was leaping over the ocean, 
the lord of rivers. If even the ocean and wise Mainaka exhibit such urgency 
on Rama’s behalf, what would fire not do for him? Agni, the purifier, is not 
burning me because of his friendship with my father, Raghava’s power, and 
Sita’s compassion.” 

[34-39] That elephant among monkeys went on musing in this fashion 
for a while. Then the great monkey sprang up forcefully and roared. 
Scattering the raksasa throng, the majestic son of the god of wind reached 
the city gate, which was as high as a mountaintop. That self-possessed 
monkey grew to the size of a mountain and then suddenly became 
exceedingly small once again so that he slipped free of his bonds. Once 
free, the majestic monkey resumed his mountainous appearance. Glancing 
about him, he spied the beam attached to the gate. Great-armed Maruti 
seized that beam, adorned with black iron, and once again began to 
massacre all the guards. Once he had killed them, that monkey, whose valor 
was so fierce in battle, gazed out once more over Lanka. Wreathed in the 
flames that were blazing on his tail, he resembled the blazing sun wreathed 
in its rays. 


Sarga 52 

[1-5] His desire now accomplished but his determination only heightened, 
the monkey gazed out over Lanka and considered what further action he 
might undertake, thinking: “Now what else remains for me to do here 
whereby I may inflict still greater pain upon these raksasas? Thus far, I 
have destroyed the grove, killed the most powerful raksasas, and wiped out 
part of the army. All that remains is the destruction of the citadel itself. 
Once the citadel is destroyed, my labors will have reached a favorable 
conclusion. By putting just a small additional effort into this task, my labors 
will be truly successful. It would be most fitting for me to gratify the fire 
god, bearer of oblations, who is blazing so brightly on my tail, with these 
splendid mansions.” 

[6-11] Then the great monkey, his tail ablaze, moved about the rooftops 
of Lanka, like a storm cloud crossed by lightning. Hanuman let loose a fire 
that was like the flames of K4la’s fire. Fanned by the wind, the swift and 
powerful fire, eater of oblations, grew greater and blazed up like the K4ala’s 


fire. The wind drove the blazing fire through the houses. Thus the vast, 
bejeweled palaces with their fretwork of gold and their masses of pearls 
came crashing down. They crashed to the ground, their lofty terraces 
shattered, just as the mansions of perfected beings might fall from the 
heavens once their merit was exhausted. 

[12-17] Hanuman saw streams of molten metal flowing from a palace. 
Varied in hue, they were filled with diamonds, coral, lapis, pearls, and 
silver. Just as fire is never sated with firewood and straw, so too Hanuman 
was not sated with killing the lords of the raksasas. Overwhelmed by the 
power of HanumAan’s wrath, the city of Lanka, engulfed in the flames of the 
fire, the eater of oblations, its heroes slain and its soldiers scattered, was 
devastated as if by a curse. Wise Hanuman scanned Lanka. Marked 
everywhere by brightly blazing flames of fire, the eater of oblations, its 
rdksasas in a State of terror, agitation, and despair, the city resembled the 
earth overwhelmed by the wrath of the self-existent Lord. When he had 
slain many rdksasas, devastated the grove with its numerous trees, and 
unleashed fire among the mansions of the raksasas, the great monkey 
turned his thoughts to Rama. Once he had set all of Lanka ablaze, that great 
monkey, foremost of the tawny monkeys, put out the fire on his tail in the 
ocean. 


Sarga 53 

[1-5] But as he surveyed the blazing city of Lanka lying in ruins, its hosts 
of raksasas panic-stricken, the monkey Hanuman began to worry. He was 
seized by a great anxiety and filled with self-reproach as he thought: “What 
on earth have I done in burning Lanka? How fortunate are those great and 
outstanding men who manage to check their rising anger with their minds, 
just as the blazing fire is checked by water. If Lanka has been burned, then 
surely so has the lady Janaki, and thus, unknowingly, I have wrecked my 
master’s mission. That purpose for the sake of which I undertook this effort 
has been ruined, since, in burning Lanka, I failed to protect Sita. 

[6-10] “Without a doubt, the mission I had undertaken was all but 
accomplished when, carried away by my anger, I completely wrecked it. It 
is evident that Janakt has been killed, for I can see no part of Lanka that has 
not been burned. The entire city has been reduced to ashes. If I have ruined 
this mission through my own stupidity, I will gladly lay down my life right 


here and now. Should I throw myself into the fire this instant or, perhaps, 
into the great mare’s-head fire beneath the sea, or should I, perhaps, offer 
my body to the creatures living in the sea? For how could I face alive the 
lord of the tawny monkeys or those two tigers among men after completely 
ruining their mission? 

[11-16] “Indeed, through the fault of giving way to anger, I have 
demonstrated the unstable nature of monkeys, which is well known 
throughout the three worlds. Damn that passionate nature—so unstable and 
out of control—on account of which I failed to protect Sita though I was 
fully capable of doing so. If Sita is lost, then those two will die. If those two 
die, Sugriva will perish along with his kinfolk. When Bharata, who dotes 
upon his brothers, hears of that, how will that righteous man and Satrughna 
possibly survive? Once the extremely righteous House of Iksvaku is gone, 
all the people will be oppressed by grief and remorse. Therefore I—bereft 
of good fortune, stripped of the benefits of righteousness and statecraft, my 
mind overwhelmed by the fault of anger—will clearly have destroyed the 
whole world.” 

[17-23] But as he brooded in this fashion, there appeared omens such as 
he had directly witnessed before, and he began to think once more: “On the 
other hand, that auspicious lady, lovely in every limb and protected by her 
own blazing energy, cannot have died; for fire cannot prevail against fire. 
For indeed, fire, the purifier, has no power to touch the wife of that 
righteous man of measureless power for she is protected by her own 
virtuous conduct. It is certain that because of Rama’s power and Vaidehi’s 
virtue, the bearer of oblations, fire, whose very function is to burn, did not 
burn me. How could she, the darling of Rama’s heart and a goddess to his 
three brothers—Bharata and the rest—perish? If fire, whose very function is 
to burn and who overpowers everything, did not burn my tail, how could it 
consume that lady? Because of her asceticism, her truthfulness, and her 
complete devotion to her husband alone, she might burn fire, but fire could 
never burn her.” 

[24-28] As Hanuman was musing thus upon the queen’s perfect 
righteousness, he heard the voices of the great celestial bards crying: “What 
an extraordinary feat Hanuman has accomplished in letting loose this 
powerful, terrifying, and irresistible fire in the lair of the raksasas. It strikes 
us as a wonder—truly a miracle—that although the city of Lanka has been 


consumed along with its towers, ramparts, and archways, Janaki has not 
been burned.” Then, by virtue of those omens whose efficacy he had 
already witnessed, those highly persuasive reasons, and those words of the 
seers, Hanuman became delighted at heart. So having accomplished the 
object of his desire and having determined that the princess was unharmed, 
the monkey resolved to see her face-to-face once more before making his 
return journey. 


Sarga 54 

[1-5] Respectfully greeting Janak1t, who had remained under the simsapa 
tree, Hanuman said: “Thank god I have found you here unharmed.” Gazing 
steadfastly at Hanuman, who was on the point of departing, she spoke 
words to him that were filled with her love for her husband: “Granted, you 
are fully capable of carrying out this mission all by yourself, slayer of 
enemy heroes, and this accomplishment of yours would bring you glory. 
But if Kakutstha, that tormentor of enemy armies, were to fill Lanka with 
his own troops and take me away, that would be worthy of him. Therefore, 
you should arrange it in such a way that the great battle hero demonstrates 
valor that is worthy of him.” 

[6-8] When Hanuman had heard these meaningful, courteous, and 
reasonable words, he continued with the remaining portion of his own 
speech: “Soon Kakutstha will come here accompanied by the foremost of 
the apes and tawny monkeys. After he has defeated his enemies in battle, he 
will put an end to your sorrow.” When he had consoled Vaidehi in this 
fashion, Hanuman, son of Ma§aruta, set his mind on departure and 
respectfully saluted her. 

[9-13] Then, anxious to see his master, the tiger among monkeys and 
crusher of his foes climbed splendid Mount Arista. It was covered with dark 
forest groves graced with tall padmaka trees and was filled with sala trees, 
palms, asvakarnas, and bamboo. It was adorned with spreading canopies of 
blossoming creepers; it was filled with herds of various beasts; and it was 
ornamented with exposed veins of metallic ore. It abounded with many 
waterfalls and was impassable because of its heaps of huge boulders. It was 
frequented by great seers, yaksas, gandharvas, kinnaras, and great serpents. 
It was dense with trees and creepers, and its caves harbored prides of lions. 
It was haunted by numerous tigers. It had sweet roots and fruit trees. 


[14—18] Such was the mountain that the great and exceedingly powerful 
leaping monkey climbed, driven by excitement and hastening to see Rama. 
Crushed under the soles of his feet, the boulders on the lovely mountain 
slopes shattered noisily and were reduced to dust. When he had ascended 
that lordly mountain, the great monkey began to grow in his eagerness to 
cross from the southern to the northern shore of the salt sea. Once the 
mighty son of Pavana the wind god had climbed the mountain, he beheld 
the terrifying ocean, the abode of fish and serpents. Like Maruta the wind 
god himself rushing through the sky, that tiger among tawny monkeys, the 
wind god’s son, set out from the south to the north. 

[19-21] Crushed by the monkey, the great mountain and all its 
inhabitants emitted a loud roar. Its peaks trembling and its trees falling, it 
sank back into the earth. Ripped up by the force of his thighs, the 
blossoming trees fell to the ground, shattered, as if they had been struck by 
Sakra’s weapon. One could hear a dreadful roaring, which seemed as if to 
pierce the heavens, of mighty lions crushed deep in their caves. 

[22—26] Vidyadhara women flew up suddenly from the mountain, their 
garments disordered and slipping, their jewelry in disarray. Huge, powerful, 
and highly venomous serpents with tongues of flame coiled themselves as 
their heads and necks were crushed. Kinnaras, great serpents, gandharvas, 
yaksas, and vidyadharas abandoned that flattened mountain and flew up 
into the sky. Crushed by that powerful monkey, the majestic mountain, lofty 
with its forested peaks, sank into the underworld called Rasatala. That 
mountain—ten leagues across and thirty high—had now become level with 
the ground. 


Sarga 55 
[1-6] Tireless Hanuman sailed across the lovely, shining, and boundless 
sky. With the moon for its white lotus, the sun for its karandava birds, the 
constellations Tisya and Sravana for its sweet-voiced kadambas, the clouds 
for its seaweed and bordering meadows, the constellation Punarvasu for its 
sea monster, the planet Mars for its mighty shark, the celestial elephant 
Airavata for its great island, the constellation Svati for the splashing of its 
hamsas, diverse winds for its swelling waves, moonbeams for its cool 
waters, and serpents, yaksas, and gandharvas for its blossoming water lilies 
and lotuses, the sky resembled the ocean. As the great and majestic flying 


monkey Hanuman moved through the abode of Maruta, he seemed to 
devour the heavens, to scratch the moon, the lord of stars, to drag along the 
sky with its constellations and sun’s orb, and to drag in his wake its massed 
clouds. Tinted white, pink, blue-black, red, green, and purple, the huge 
clouds looked beautiful. 

[7-11] Constantly entering and emerging from the massed clouds, he 
resembled the moon alternately hidden and revealed. Roaring with a mighty 
roar so that he sounded like the thundering of a cloud, the mighty monkey 
sped once more over the middle of the ocean. Caressing great fair-peaked 
Mount Mainaka, the powerful and swift monkey sped along like a arrow of 
iron loosed from a bow. When he had almost arrived, that bull among tawny 
monkeys spied great Mount Mahendra, which resembled a cloud, and he 
roared. Hearing the sound of his roaring all around them, all the monkeys, 
anxious to see their comrade, were filled with eager expectation. 

[12—16] Then Jambavan, foremost of tawny monkeys, his heart thrilled 
with joy, summoned all the tawny monkeys and said these words: “By all 
means that is Hanuman, who must have accomplished his mission; of this 
there can be no doubt. For if he had not accomplished his mission, his roar 
would not sound like that.” When the tawny monkeys heard the sound of 
great Hanuman’s roar and the sound of the pumping of his arms and thighs, 
they were delighted, and they leapt up on every side. Leaping from treetop 
to treetop and from mountain peak to mountain peak in their excitement, 
they gathered together in their eagerness to see Hanuman. In their delight 
the monkeys in the treetops grasped the blossoming branches and shook 
them, as one might wave brightly colored clothing. 

[17-23] When all the monkeys saw that great monkey rushing toward 
them like a massive storm cloud, they stood with their hands cupped in 
reverence. The swift monkey, who looked like a mountain, landed on the 
thickly forested summit of Mount Mahendra. Then all the bulls among 
monkeys, delighted at heart, gathered around great Hanuman. Gathering 
around him who had returned unhurt, they were filled with the greatest 
delight, and their faces lit up with joy. The tawny monkeys honored that 
best of tawny monkeys, the son of Maruta, with gifts of roots and fruits. 
Some of those bulls among monkeys cried out in their delight, while others 
chattered. Still others fetched tree branches in their excitement. The great 


monkey Hanuman made obeisance to his respected elders, Jambavan and 
the rest, and to Prince Angada. 

[24-27] When the two of them had paid homage to him who was worthy 
of homage and the monkeys had honored him, courageous Hanuman tersely 
reported: “I have found the queen.” Then, taking Angada, the son of Valin, 
by the hand, he sat down in a charming wooded spot on Mount Mahendra. 
With great excitement, Hanuman said to those bulls among monkeys: “I 
have found her, Janaka’s daughter, in a grove of asoka trees. That young 
and blameless lady is being guarded by horrendous raksasa women. 
Wearing a single braid of hair, weak with fasting, soiled, emaciated, her hair 
matted, she is desperate for the sight of Rama.” 

[28-31] When the monkeys heard Méaruti’s all-important words 
beginning with “I have found her,” which were like nectar to them, they 
were all overjoyed. Some of those powerful monkeys roared; others 
howled. Some bellowed and others chattered, while still others bellowed in 
return. Some of those elephants among monkeys in their excitement raised 
their thick, long, curving tails aloft and beat them on the ground. Still other 
monkeys leapt down from mountain peaks and in their excitement hugged 
Hanuman, who resembled a bull elephant. 

[32-34] After Hanuman had spoken, Angada responded with these 
excellent words there in the midst of the heroic tawny monkeys: “Monkey, 
there is none to equal you in strength and courage; for you have returned 
after leaping the wide ocean. Thank heaven you have found the queen, 
Rama’s illustrious wife. Thank heaven Kakutstha will now give up the grief 
born of his separation from Sita.” 

[35-38] Then those monkeys, surrounding Angada, Hanuman, and 
Jambavan, sat down on large boulders in great delight. All those great 
monkeys—anxious to hear of his jumping over the ocean, his observations 
of Lanka, and his encounters with Sita and Ravana—then stood with hands 
cupped in reverence, gazing expectantly at Hanuman’s face. Surrounded by 
so many monkeys, majestic Angada sat there, like the lord of the gods in 
heaven attended by the divinities. With renowned Hanuman and illustrious 
Angada, his armlets bound fast upon his arms, seated joyfully upon it, the 
vast and lofty mountain peak was ablaze with splendor. 


Sarga 56 


[1-5] There on the summit of Mahendra, the mighty tawny monkeys, 
Hanuman and the rest, experienced the greatest delight. Then, in great 
excitement, Jambavan asked that great monkey, the delighted son of the 
wind god, for an account of his mission, asking: “How did you find the 
queen? How is she doing there? How has cruel, ten-faced Ravana been 
treating her? You must tell us everything truthfully, great monkey. Once we 
have heard how things stand, we shall consider how best to proceed. Since 
you are prudent, you must explain to us those things that we are to relate 
when we return and those things we had best withhold.” 

[6-11] Instructed thus by Jambavan, Hanuman, his fur bristling with 
excitement, replied after first bowing his head in homage to Queen Sita: 
“You yourselves saw me leap into the sky from the summit of Mount 
Mahendra, anxious and intent upon reaching the southern shore of ocean. 
As I was flying along, I encountered what appeared to be a dreadful 
obstacle. For I spied a ravishing and celestial, golden mountain peak. Since 
it stood there obstructing my path, I took that mountain for an obstacle. 
Therefore, as I approached that great, celestial, golden mountain, I formed 
in my mind the resolution that I must smash it. When I, with my tail, struck 
the peak of that great mountain, as radiant as the sun, it shattered into a 
thousand pieces. 

[12-17] “Realizing how determined I was, the great mountain spoke 
sweetly to me, delighting my heart with the words, ‘My son!’ And he said: 
‘My name is Mainaka, and I dwell in the ocean. You should regard me, who 
am a friend of Matarisvan, the wind god, as your paternal uncle. Long ago, 
my son, when the great mountains had wings, they ranged at will over the 
earth, causing obstruction everywhere. When the great god Indra, chastiser 
of Paka, heard about the mountains’ behavior, he cut off their wings by the 
thousands with his vajra. But, my child, I was saved from that fate by your 
father, great Maruta, who cast me into the sea. Moreover, subduer of your 
foes, I must exert myself to assist Rama, for he is the foremost of those who 
uphold righteousness, and he is great Indra’s equal in valor.’ 

[18—21] “When I had heard the words of great Mount Mainaka and had 
informed him of my mission, my mind was filled with eagerness to 
proceed. Granted leave by great Mainaka, I embarked upon the remainder 
of my journey at full speed. I traveled swiftly on my way for a long time 
until I spied the goddess Surasa, mother of great serpents. In the middle of 


the ocean, that goddess addressed me, saying: “You were destined by the 
gods to be my food, best of tawny monkeys. Therefore, I shall devour you, 
for you have long been ordained for this fate.’ 

[22—26] “When I had been addressed in this fashion by Surasa, I stood 
with hands cupped in reverence, bowing. My face gone pale, I replied with 
these words: ‘Majestic Rama Dasarathi, scorcher of his foes, entered the 
Dandaka forest with Sita and his brother Laksmana. His wife, Sita, was 
carried off by wicked Ravana. I am a messenger traveling to her by the 
command of Rama. You who dwell within his realm should assist him. Or, 
if you prefer, I will enter your mouth after I have seen Maithili and tireless 
Rama; this I solemnly promise you.’ 

[27-33] “But when I had addressed her in this fashion, Surasa, who 
could take on any form at will, replied: ‘No one can escape me, for such is 
my boon.’ At the time that I was addressed in this fashion by Surasa, I was 
ten leagues in height. But in an instant, I grew still larger. She then opened 
her mouth to a size commensurate with mine. But when I saw her mouth 
open wide, I made my body very small. At that moment, as I was no larger 
than a thumb, I swiftly flew into her mouth and came out at once. Then the 
goddess Surasa in her true form addressed me: ‘You may depart at your 
pleasure, gentle, foremost of tawny monkeys, for the accomplishment of 
your purpose. You must reunite Vaidehi with great Raghava. May you be 
happy, great-armed monkey; I am pleased with you.’ Praised by all beings 
with cries of ‘Well done! Well done!’ I leapt up like Garuda into the vast 
sky. 

[34-39] “Suddenly—though I could not see anything—my shadow was 
caught. Since I had lost my momentum, I scanned the ten directions, but I 
could not find what was obstructing my progress. Then this thought 
occurred to me: ‘What in the world could present such an obstacle to my 
progress and yet have a form I cannot see?’ And as I was worrying about 
this, I cast my eyes below me. Then I spied a frightful raksasa woman lying 
on the waters. Seeing me immobilized but unafraid, the frightful creature 
addressed these ominous words to me, laughing loudly: ‘Where do you 
think you’re going, you big ape? I’m famished and you’re my favorite food. 
Fill up my body, which has long been deprived of food.’ ‘Very well,’ I said, 
assenting to her words. But then I made my body swell up to a size much 
greater than that of her mouth. 


[40-43] “Her huge and frightful mouth opened wide in order to devour 
me. But she had no conception of who I was or of the transformations of 
which I was capable. Then, in the space of an instant, I contracted my 
gigantic form, tore out her heart, and I flew up into the sky. When I had torn 
out her heart, that frightful creature, huge as a mountain, fell back into the 
salt sea, flinging wide her arms. Then I heard the perfected beings, who 
travel through the sky along with the celestial bards, crying, ‘The frightful 
raksasa woman Simhika was quickly slain by Hanuman.’ 

[44-47] “When I had killed her, I once more turned my thoughts to my 
dangerous mission. Then, after traveling a very great distance, I saw the 
southern shore of the ocean—tresplendent with its mountains—where the 
city of Lanka stands. After the sun, maker of day, had set, I entered the 
citadel, the lair of the raksasas, unnoticed by those rdksasas, terrifying in 
their valor. Then, after searching the whole night for the fair-waisted 
daughter of Janaka, I entered Ravana’s inner apartments; but still I did not 
find her. Unable to find Sita in Ravana’s palace, I had come up against an 
ocean of sorrow, the farther shore of which I could not discern. 

[48-52] “As I was grieving, I spied a splendid private park enclosed 
within a high, golden wall. Leaping over that wall, I saw a grove of many 
trees. In the middle of a grove of asoka trees, there stood a huge simsapa 
tree. Climbing that, I spied a golden grove of plantains. Not far from the 
simsapa tree, I saw a fair young woman whose eyes were like lotus petals 
but whose face was gaunt with fasting. Like a doe surrounded by tigresses, 
she was surrounded by cruel and hideous rdksasa women, who fed on flesh 
and blood. 

[53—56] “When I saw that woman in such a state, I understood her to be 
Rama’s blameless wife. So I remained there in the simsapd tree, watching. 
Suddenly I heard a deep and tumultuous noise mingled with the jingling of 
ladies’ belt ornaments and anklets coming from the direction of Ravana’s 
dwelling. Greatly alarmed by this, I shrank back into the simsapd tree like a 
bird into a dense thicket. Then mighty Ravana and his wives approached the 
place where Sita stood. 

[57-59] “When fair-hipped Sita saw the lord of the rdksasa hosts, she 
drew up her thighs and covered her ample breasts with her arms. Falling 
with his head at her feet, ten-necked Ravana addressed Sita in her great 
misery, saying: “You must bestow your affections upon me. But if, in your 


pride, haughty Sita, you do not accept me by the end of two months, I shall 
drink your blood.’ 

[60-63] “Hearing these words of wicked Ravana, Sita became furiously 
angry and responded with these excellent words. ‘How is it, most 
despicable of raksasas, that your tongue does not fall out when you utter 
unspeakable things to the wife of immeasurably powerful Rama, the lord of 
the House of Iksvaku, and the daughter-in-law of DaSaratha? What great 
heroism you have displayed, you low-born sinner, carrying me off in my 
husband’s absence and slipping away unseen by that great man! You are not 
the equal of Rama; you are not even fit to be his slave! For Raghava is 
godlike, truthful, and praiseworthy in battle.’ 

[64-68] “When ten-faced Ravana was addressed in this fashion with 
Janaki’s harsh words, he flared up suddenly in anger like the flames of a 
funeral pyre. Rolling his fierce eyes and raising his right fist, he was on the 
point of killing Maithili, when the women broke into lamentation. Then that 
wicked rdksasa’s principal wife, Mandodari, emerged from the midst of the 
women and restrained him. She spoke sweet words to him who was 
tormented by the god of love: ‘What do you want with Sita, you who are 
equal in might to great Indra? Make love with me right now! Janaki is no 
better than I. My lord, make love right here with the daughters of the gods, 
gandharvas, and yaksas. What do you want with Sita?’ 

[69-72] “Then the mighty night-roaming rdksasa, suddenly aroused by 
all those women together, was led to his palace. When ten-headed Ravana 
had gone, the hideous-faced raksasa women continued to threaten Sita with 
cruel and frightful words. But Sita Janaki paid no heed to their words, and 
all their threats had no effect on her. Leaving off their futile ranting, those 
flesh-eating raksasa women reported to Ravana that Sita’s resolution was 
formidable. 

[73-76] “Their hopes dashed, they abandoned their efforts. Stationing 
themselves around her on every side, they succumbed to sleep. Once they 
had fallen asleep, Sita, in her great misery, devoted to her husband’s welfare 
and despondent, lamented piteously and gave herself up to her grief. Seeing 
Sita’s dreadful situation, I quietly mused but could not shake off my 
anxiety. Then I devised a means whereby I might converse with Janaki: I 
began to extol the dynasty of the House of Iksvaku. 


[77-82] “When the queen heard me recite those words, sanctified by the 
names of those royal seers, she answered me, blinded by her tears: ‘Who 
are you? How and why have you come here, bull among monkeys? What is 
the nature of your friendship with Rama? Please tell me that.” When I had 
heard those words of hers, I said these words: ‘My queen, your husband, 
Rama, has as his ally Sugriva, the mighty and valorous lord of the monkeys, 
whose valor is fearsome. Know that I am his servant Hanuman. I have come 
here dispatched by your husband, tireless Rama. The majestic tiger among 
men, Dasarathi himself, gave me this signet ring as a token of identification 
for you, illustrious lady. I wish to do what you command, my queen. What 
must I do? I can take you back to Rama and Laksmana. What is your 
reply?’ 

[83-89] “When she had heard that and reflected upon it, Sita, the delight 
of Janaka, said: ‘Let Raghava destroy Ravana and then take me back 
himself.’ Bowing my head to the noble and blameless queen, I asked her for 
some token that would delight Raghava’s heart. Addressed in that fashion, 
the fair-hipped lady in great agitation gave me a splendid jewel and 
entrusted me with a message. Bowing to the princess, with a focused mind, 
I reverently circumambulated her with my thoughts intent on my return 
here. Reaching some decision in her mind, she replied further: ‘Hanuman, 
please relate my tale to Raghava. You must do so in such a way that when 
Rama and Laksmana hear it, those two heroes will come at once with 
Sugriva. Otherwise, I have but two months more to live. Then Kakutstha 
will never see me again, and I will die with no one to protect me.’ 

[90-95] “When I heard those piteous words, anger overcame me; and I 
perceived at once that there remained an additional task for me to do. Then 
my body began to expand until it resembled a mountain. Spoiling for a 
fight, I began to devastate the grove. Awakening, the hideous-faced raksasa 
women saw that the stand of trees had been destroyed and that its birds and 
beasts were confused and terrified. When they saw me in the grove, they 
gathered together from here and there, and they quickly went off as a group 
to report to Ravana, saying: ‘Mighty king, a wicked monkey, not realizing 
your power, has destroyed your inaccessible grove. Lord of kings, you must 
immediately order the death of this malicious creature so that he may be 
destroyed; for he has done you an injury.’ 


[96-100] “When he heard that, the lord of the raksasas dispatched the 
raksasas known as kimkaras, who were obedient to his will and virtually 
invincible. But with an iron beam, I slew eighty thousand of them, all of 
them armed with lances and war hammers, there in that wooded tract. The 
survivors among them fled at top speed and reported to Ravana that I had 
annihilated his troops. Then I had an idea and scaled a domed palace. After 
killing with a column the hundred raksasas stationed there, in my rage I 
completely smashed that palace, the finest in Lanka. 

[101-104] “Then Ravana ordered out Jambumélin, the son of Prahasta. 
But with that dreadful iron beam, I annihilated that powerful raksasa, 
expert in combat, along with his retinue. When Ravana, lord of the 
raksasas, heard about that, he sent forth the very powerful sons of his 
minister, accompanied by an army of foot soldiers. But with that same iron 
beam I led them all to the house of Yama, the lord of the dead. Learning 
that his minister’s sons, fleet-footed in battle, had been slain, Ravana sent 
forth his five heroic generals, but I annihilated them all, along with their 
troops. 

[105-109] “Then ten-necked Ravana sent forth to battle his mighty son 
Aksa along with many raksasas. But I seized the prince, Mandodari’s son— 
expert in combat and armed with a sword and shield—as he leapt up into 
the sky. Whirling him around a hundred times, I smashed him. Learning 
that Aksa had been smashed as soon as he had arrived, ten-faced Ravana, in 
a towering rage, ordered out his second son, named Indrajit, who was 
powerful and invincible in battle. Once I had rendered that bull among 
rdksasas and his whole army powerless in battle, I experienced the greatest 
delight. For it was with the greatest confidence that Ravana had sent forth 
that mighty, great-armed warrior and his heroic troops all puffed up with 
pride. 

[110-114] “But then he swiftly bound me with the divine weapon of 
Brahma, after which the rdksasas tied me up with ropes. They captured me 
and led me into the presence of Ravana. When he saw me, wicked Ravana 
spoke with me. Interrogated about my coming to Lanka and the killing of 
the raksasas, I responded that I had done it all for Sita’s sake, saying: ‘I 
came to your palace, my lord, because I was anxious to find her. I am the 
monkey Hanuman, Maruta’s flesh-and-blood son. Know that I am a 


monkey, a messenger of Rama, and a minister of Sugriva. It is as Rama’s 
messenger that I have come before you. 

[115-117] “ ‘Listen, lord of the rdksasas, to the message that I will 
convey to you. The lord of the tawny monkeys addresses these temperate 
words to you. They are in keeping with righteousness, profit, and pleasure 
and are as beneficial as wholesome food. Sugriva says: “While I was living 
on Mount Rsyamika with its abundant trees, Raghava, valorous in battle, 
became my ally. Your majesty, Rama said to me, ‘A rdksasa has abducted 
my wife. Please make a pact with me in order to assist me in this regard.’ 

[118-122] “ * “Then, witnessed by Agni, Lord Raghava and Laksmana 
forged an alliance with me, Sugriva, whose kingdom Valin had usurped. 
After killing Valin in battle with a single arrow, Rama made me—a lord of 
leaping monkeys—king of the monkeys. We must wholeheartedly assist 
him; and so, in keeping with righteousness, I have dispatched a messenger 
to you. Sita must be brought at once and delivered to Raghava before the 
powerful tawny monkeys exterminate your army. For who does not know of 
old about the power of the monkeys who are summoned into the presence 
of the gods?” 

[123-127] “ ‘Thus has the king of the monkeys addressed you.’ When I 
had spoken to Ravana in this fashion, he glared at me in rage as if he would 
burn me up with his very glance. Then the rdksasa, cruel in his actions, 
ordered that I be put to death. But his wise brother, Vibhisana by name, 
entreated with the king of the radksasas on my behalf, saying: ‘The 
execution of an emissary is not sanctioned in the treatises on kingship, 
rdksasa. An emissary bearing a beneficial message must convey it 
accurately. O you whose valor is unequaled, even when an emissary has 
committed some grave offense, then, according to the sastras, only 
disfigurement is sanctioned, never execution.’ 

[128—132] “When Vibhisana had addressed him in this fashion, Ravana 
gave this order to the rdksasas: ‘Burn his tail at once.’ Hearing his order, 
they wrapped my tail completely with cotton rags and ropes of hemp. When 
they had made the bonds secure, the raksasas, terrifying in their strength, 
set fire to my tail while beating me with staves and fists. Although I was 
bound with many bonds and leashed by the rdksasas, I was so eager to see 
the city by day that I felt not the slightest discomfort. While I was bound 


and engulfed in flames, those heroic rdksasas loudly proclaimed my crimes 
along the royal highway and at the city gates. 

[133-135] “Once again shrinking my body’s colossal size, I freed myself 
from my bonds and resumed my natural size. Seizing an iron beam, I slew 
those raksasas. Then I swiftly leapt up onto the city gate. With my blazing 
tail, I calmly burned down the city with its turrets and gateways, just as the 
fire that ends a cosmic era consumes all creatures. 

[136-140] “But no sooner had I burned down Lanka when anxiety 
gripped me: ‘In burning down Lanka, I must, no doubt, have burned Sita.’ 
Just then, I heard the words—their every syllable auspicious—of celestial 
bards announcing astonishing news: ‘Janaki has not been burned!’ Only 
when I had heard those marvelous words, did the situation become clear to 
me. Then, after I had seen VaidehI once more, she dismissed me. For the 
sake of Sugriva’s commitment, I have accomplished all this through the 
power of Raghava and the great energy of you all. I have reported to you 
everything just as 1t happened there. Now we must do whatever remains to 
be done here.” 


Sarga 57 
[1-3] When Hanuman, son of Maruta, had related all of this, he began once 
more to utter excellent words: “It is because of Sita’s virtuous character that 
the perseverance of Rama, the alacrity of Sugriva, and my great leap have 
all proved fruitful. Sita’s virtuous character, you bulls among leaping 
monkeys, is worthy of a noble lady. With the power of her austerities, she 
could uphold the worlds or, if angered, burn them up. 

[4-7] “By all means, Ravana, the lord of the raksasas, must be 
enormously powerful, since his body was not destroyed by the power of her 
austerities when he touched her. Even a flame touched with one’s hand 
would not do what the daughter of Janaka could do were she to be suffused 
with anger. The virtuous lady was standing miserably at the foot of a 
simsapa tree in the midst of wicked Ravana’s asoka grove. Surrounded by 
raksasa women, drawn with grief and suffering, she was devoid of 
radiance, like the crescent moon occluded by a line of clouds. 

[8—10] “Devoted to her husband alone and disdaining Ravana, arrogant 
in his power, fair-hipped Janaki Vaidehit remains a prisoner. Devoted to 
Rama with her whole heart, virtuous Vaidehi can think of no one else but 


Rama, just as Paulomi could think of no one but Indra, the smasher of 
citadels. Devoted to her husband’s welfare, Sita is clad in that same single 
garment; covered with dirt, her body is wretched with grief and suffering. 

[11-17] “I found her there in the women’s grove, in the midst of hideous 
rdksasa women, who menaced her constantly. Dejected, her hair in a single 
braid, she thinks only of her husband. She sleeps on the ground; and her 
body has grown so pale that she resembles a lotus pond at the onset of 
winter. Her purpose utterly averse to that of Ravana, she had resolved to 
die. Still, with great difficulty, I managed to inspire confidence in that fawn- 
eyed woman. I managed to converse with her and to reveal to her all that 
had occurred. When she heard about the alliance between Rama and 
Sugriva, she was delighted. Her virtuous conduct is unshakable, and her 
supreme devotion is fixed upon her husband. Ten-faced Ravana must be 
great indeed, if these alone cannot destroy him. Still, Rama will be but the 
mere instrument of his destruction. Such is the condition of virtuous Sita, 
given over utterly to her sorrow. Now then, let us do everything that must 
be done to remedy it.” 


Sarga 58 

[1-4] Hearing these words of Hanuman, Angada, V4lin’s son, said: “Given 
the present situation as reported to you, sirs, it would be appropriate for us 
—with the consent of all the principal monkeys, Jambavan and the rest—to 
appear before the two sons of the king with Vaideht. I myself am fully able 
swiftly to destroy the citadel of Lanka single-handedly, including its hosts 
of raksasas, and to kill mighty Ravana. How much more easily, then, might 
I do so with the assistance of such heroic, powerful, accomplished, and 
capable leaping monkeys, skilled in the use of weapons and eager for 
victory? 

[S—8] “I myself will destroy Ravana in battle, along with his troops, his 
retinue, his sons, and his brothers. And even if I should encounter in battle 
the divine weapons of Indrajit, the conqueror of Sakra—those blinding 
missiles of Brahma, Indra, Rudra, Vayu, and Varuna—I shall destroy them 
and annihilate the raksasas. If I have your permission, sirs, my valor will 
subdue Ravana. The unending and incomparable hail of boulders I shall 
release would kill even the gods in battle; how much more easily would it 
kill those night-roaming raksasas! 


[9-11] “The ocean might exceed its shore, and Mount Mandara might 
tremble. But no army of enemies could ever make Jambavan waver in 
battle. The monkey hero, the son of Vayu, is capable of destroying the 
raksasa leaders of all the raksasa hosts all by himself. Mount Mandara 
itself would shatter from the impact of the thighs of Panasa or great Nila; 
how much more easily would mere rdksasas be destroyed! 

[12-16] “Name anyone—even among the gods, the asuras, the yaksas, 
the gandharvas, the mighty serpents, and the mighty birds—who can 
oppose Mainda or Dvivida in battle. These two outstanding leaping 
monkeys, the sons of the ASvins, possess enormous speed. They are filled 
with the greatest pride and are arrogant because of their boon from 
Grandfather Brahma. For long ago, in order to honor the Asvins, Brahma, 
the Grandfather of all the worlds, conferred upon them the incomparable 
boon of complete invulnerability. Intoxicated with their arrogance because 
of that boon, those two heroic leaping monkeys annihilated a vast army and 
drank the nectar of immortality of the gods. Let all the other monkeys stand 
aside! If roused to fury, these two alone are capable of destroying Lanka 
with all its cavalry, chariots, and war-elephants. 

[17-22] “Then, too, leaping monkeys, it would be improper for us to 
appear before great Raghava without the queen after having found her. It 
appears to me improper for you, sirs, whose valor is renowned, to report 
there, ‘We have found the queen, but we have not brought her back.’ For 
you, foremost among tawny monkeys, there is no one in all the worlds— 
including the gods and the daityas—who is your equal either in leaping or 
in valor. What else remains to be done with regard to the raksasas, whose 
champions have been slain in this fashion by Hanuman? Let us just take 
Janaki and go.” Then Jambavan, foremost among tawny monkeys and 
expert in sound advice, in delight, replied to him who had formed this 
resolution in words were full of sound advice: “As you perceive, prince, 
this plan is not impracticable for us, but you should look toward the 
fulfillment of our mission in such a way that our plan is determined by 
Rama.” 


Sarga 59 
[1-6] The great monkey Hanuman and the other heroic forest-dwelling 
monkeys led by Angada accepted the advice of Jambavan. Leaving the 


summit of Mount Mahendra, those bulls among leaping monkeys all leapt 
up to follow the son of Vayu. With their huge bodies and vast strength, they 
seemed almost to obscure the sky. They looked like Mount Meru or Mount 
Mandara, or like huge, rutting elephant bulls. It seemed almost as if they 
bore up with their gaze swift, wise, and mighty Hanuman, honored by all 
beings. Their mission accomplished, their spirits uplifted by the success of 
their undertaking, they were now confident that Raghava’s purpose would 
be accomplished and that their master, Sugriva, would achieve the greatest 
glory. All of them were eager to relate the good news. All were joyful at the 
prospect of battle. All were resolute and determined to assist Rama. 

[7-10] Leaping into the sky and flying along, those woodland creatures 
came upon a forest grove filled with trees and creepers that was comparable 
to the heavenly garden Nandana. Enchanting all creatures and yet forbidden 
to them, it was known as the Madhuvana, and it was under the protection of 
Sugriva. It was always guarded by the immensely powerful monkey 
Dadhimukha, the maternal uncle of Sugriva, the great lord of the monkeys. 
When the monkeys arrived at that vast grove, so dear to the heart of the 
monkey lord, they became wildly excited. 

[11-17] Seeing the vast Madhuvana, those monkeys, themselves tawny 
as honey-wine, begged Prince Angada for some honey-wine. So the prince 
obtained permission from the senior monkeys, beginning with Jambavan, 
and gave them leave to drink the honey-wine. Granted leave, all the forest- 
dwelling monkeys were delighted; and they began to dance all around in 
great joy. Some sang, while others prostrated themselves; some danced, 
while others laughed; some fell down, while others staggered about; some 
jumped up and down, while others babbled incoherently. Some supported 
one another, while others fell to arguing among themselves; some leapt 
from tree to tree, while others leapt from the treetops to the ground. Some 
sprang to the tops of the great trees with great speed. Laughing, one of them 
approached another who was singing, while another who was laughing 
approached yet another who was grinning. A weeping monkey approached 
another who was weeping, while another shoved one who was shoving yet a 
third. The monkey army was in confusion because of the behavior induced 
by the honey-wine-inebriated minds of its soldiers. There was not a single 
one of them who was not drunk, nor a single one who was not sated. 


[18-22] When the monkey known as Dadhimukha saw that the grove 
was being devoured and its trees were being stripped of leaves and 
blossoms, he angrily tried to stop the monkeys. Although he was reviled by 
those arrogant monkeys, that elder among the heroic tawny monkeys, the 
guardian of the grove, fierce in his power, resolved once more to protect the 
grove from them. To some he rudely spoke harsh words; others he slapped 
unrestrainedly with his open hand. Approaching some others, he began to 
quarrel, while still others he approached in a conciliatory manner. But in 
their drunkenness and power, those monkeys—uirresistible in their 
impetuosity—surrounded and assaulted him as he tried to stop them. Then 
they dragged him about, having lost all fear, unaware that they were doing 
wrong. In their drunkenness those monkeys all together scratched that 
monkey with their claws, bit him with their fangs, and nearly killed him 
with their slaps and kicks. Then they completely looted that vast grove. 


Sarga 60 

[1-7] Then that bull among monkeys, Hanuman, foremost of tawny 
monkeys, addressed them, saying: “Don’t be distracted, monkeys; enjoy the 
honey-wine!” When Angada, foremost among tawny monkeys, heard 
Hanuman’s words, he was delighted at heart, and he replied: “Let the tawny 
monkeys drink the honey-wine. Since Hanuman has accomplished his 
mission, I would do anything he says, even something one ought not do. 
How much more would I do something like this.”” When the monkeys heard 
these words from the mouth of Angada, they were delighted. Then those 
bulls among monkeys praised him, crying, “Splendid! Splendid!” After 
praising Angada, that bull among monkeys, all the monkeys—swift as the 
current of a mighty river—rushed back to the Madhuvana. Galvanized by 
this sanction and by learning that Hanuman had found Maithili, they 
entered the Madhuvana and violently attacked the guards. Leaping up, they 
banded together and began to beat the hundreds of dedicated guardians of 
the grove there in the Madhuvana. 

[8—12] Seizing honeycombs as big as bushels with their arms, they all 
gathered together. Some broke them open, while the others ate. Some of 
those monkeys, tawny as honey-wine, drank the honey-wine and scattered 
the honeycombs. Others, in their drunkenness, pelted one another with 
beeswax. Still others stood at the foot of the trees, clinging on to the 


branches. And then, excessively drowsy with intoxication, they spread 
some leaves and lay down. Out of their senses and drunk on honey-wine, 
the leaping monkeys giddily reviled one another and staggered about. Some 
roared like lions, while other warbled giddily like birds. Some of the tawny 
monkeys, drunk on honey-wine, passed out on the ground. 

[13-17] The guardians of the honey-wine, who had been dispatched by 
Dadhimukha, had scattered in all directions after being driven back by those 
terrifying monkeys. The monkeys dragged them by their knees and showed 
them their posteriors. Greatly upset, the guards went to Dadhimukha and 
said these words: “Granted leave by Hanuman, these monkeys have 
violently ravaged the Madhuvana. Then they dragged us by our knees and 
showed us their posteriors.” The monkey Dadhimukha, guardian of the 
grove, was furious when he heard that the Madhuvana had been destroyed. 
He soothed those tawny monkeys, saying: “Come on! Come on! Let’s go! 
Let us forcibly stop those highly arrogant monkeys, who are drinking up the 
honey-wine.” 

[18-22] Hearing these words of Dadhimukha, those heroic bulls among 
monkeys together went with him back to the Madhuvana. In their midst 
Dadhimukha took up a huge tree. Then all those leaping monkeys made a 
violent charge. Seizing rocks, trees, and boulders, the monkey guardians of 
the grove rushed angrily to the place where those elephants among monkeys 
stood. Taking their master’s words to heart, the heroic guardians of the 
grove, armed with rocks, sd/a trees, and tala trees, rushed swiftly onward. 
Thousands of those heroic guardians of the grove, arrogant in their strength, 
attacked the monkeys as they rested in the trees and on the ground. 

[23—26] Now, when those bulls among monkeys led by Hanuman saw 
that Dadhimukha was enraged, they violently charged him. In a rage, 
Angada struck his venerable elder with both arms, as the latter—with his 
great arms and immense strength—rushed upon him, armed with a tree. 
Blinded by his drunkenness and not realizing, “This is my venerable elder,” 
Angada failed to recognize him. And so he smashed him to the ground with 
great force. His arms broken, his face averted, afflicted, and drenched with 
blood, that heroic elephant among monkeys, Dadhimukha, suddenly lost 
consciousness for a moment. 

[27-32] Managing somehow to free himself from those monkeys, that 
bull among monkeys reached a secluded spot where he addressed his 


assembled servants: “Let them be! We must go to where our master, the 
thick-necked monkey Sugriva, is waiting with Rama. We shall report all of 
Angada’s wrongdoing to the king. When he hears what we have to say, he 
will not stand for it, and he will have these monkeys executed. For great 
Sugriva cherished the divine Madhuvana, which had come down to him 
from father to son and which was forbidden even to the gods. Since they 
were so greedy for honey-wine, those monkeys are doomed. For surely, 
Sugriva will punish them and all their friends with death. These miscreants, 
who have disobeyed the king’s command, deserve to be put to death. And 
thus the king’s rage, arising from his lack of forbearance, will accomplish 
our purpose.” 

[33-37] When he had addressed the guardians of the grove in this 
fashion, mighty Dadhimukha suddenly sprang up and went off with them. 
In the twinkling of an eye, that forest-dwelling monkey reached the place 
where the wise monkey Sugriva, son of the thousand-rayed sun, was 
waiting. When he spied Rama, Laksmana, and Sugriva, he descended from 
the sky to the level ground. When the tawny monkey Dadhimukha, the 
immensely powerful master of the guards, descended, surrounded by all of 
them, he put on a dejected expression. Then, placing his cupped hands 
reverently to his head, he pressed his forehead to Sugriva’s auspicious feet. 


Sarga 61 
[1-2] When Sugriva, bull among monkeys, saw the monkey prostrated 
before him, he was alarmed at heart and he said these words: “Get up! Get 
up! Why have you fallen at my feet? Have no fear, hero; just tell me the 
truth.” 

[3-10] Reassured in this fashion by great Sugriva, wise Dadhimukha 
arose and said these words: “That grove—entrance to which you, Valin, and 
Rksarajas have always prohibited—has been devoured by the monkeys, 
your majesty. Though they were attacked by these guardians of the grove, 
who tried to stop them, they paid no heed to them and went on eating and 
drinking the honey and the honey-wine. Some scattered the leavings, while 
others ate. When we tried to stop them, they all scowled at us. Thus, the 
guardians of the grove, although they strove furiously, were driven from 
that grove by those angry bulls among monkeys. Then, bull among 
monkeys, my tawny monkeys were routed by many heroic monkeys, their 


eyes red with rage. Some were struck with hands, while others were 
pounded with knees. Those monkeys dragged them about at will and 
showed them their posteriors. That is how these heroes have been battered, 
despite the fact that you are their master, while the entire Madhuvana has 
been devoured at will by those others.” 

[11-12] As Sugriva, that bull among monkeys, was being informed in 
this fashion, wise Laksmana, slayer of enemy heroes, asked him: “Your 
majesty, why has this monkey, the guardian of the grove, presented himself 
before you? What is the matter that has made him speak so miserably?” 

[13—18] Addressed in this fashion by great Laksmana, eloquent Sugriva 
responded with these words: “Respected Laksmana, the heroic monkey 
Dadhimukha says that the heroic monkeys led by Angada have drunk up 
my honey-wine. They would never have acted in such a way unless they 
had accomplished their mission. Since those monkeys have invaded the 
grove, they must have accomplished their mission. No doubt the queen has 
been found and by no one else but Hanuman. For no one other than 
Hanuman could have been the reason for the success of this mission. For 
success in any enterprise, intelligence, resolve, strength, and learning are all 
firmly established in Hanuman, that bull among tawny monkeys. Where 
Jambavan is the leader, Angada the general, and Hanuman the guiding 
force, there can be no other outcome. 

[19-23] “Dadhimukha reports that those heroic bulls among tawny 
monkeys, led by Angada, who have returned after searching the southern 
quarter, have destroyed the Madhuvana. Having returned, the monkeys have 
entered the Madhuvana, laying waste and devouring the entire grove, and 
they have battered the guardians with their knees, driving them all away. It 
is to report this matter in sweet words that this tawny monkey, known as 
Dadhimukha and famous for his valor, has come. You must see the matter 
correctly, great-armed Saumitri. Since all the monkeys have come back and 
are drinking the honey-wine, Sita must have been found! If they had not 
found Vaidehi, bull among men, these renowned forest-dwelling monkeys 
would never have attacked that divine grove, a gift of the gods.” 

[24—27] When they heard those words, so pleasant to the ear, that had 
issued from Sugriva’s mouth, both righteous Laksmana and Raghava were 
delighted. Both Rama and illustrious Laksmana were exceedingly 
delighted. Sugriva too was delighted when he heard those words of 


Dadhimukha, and he responded to that guardian of the grove with these 
words: “I am delighted, my dear friend, that, having accomplished their 
mission, they have devoured the grove. Such behavior on the part of those 
who have accomplished their mission must be pardoned, and I have already 
done so. For along with the two Raghavas, I wish to see them at once— 
those monkeys whose leader is Hanuman, who have accomplished their 
mission, and whose pride is that of the lion, king of beasts. I wish also to 
hear about the effort to find Sita.” 


Sarga 62 

[1-4] Addressed in this fashion by Sugriva, the monkey Dadhimukha was 
delighted, and he saluted Rama, Laksmana, and Sugriva respectfully. After 
he had prostrated himself before Sugriva and the two powerful Raghavas, 
he leapt up into the sky along with his heroic monkeys. Hastening back 
along the way he had come, Dadhimukha descended from the sky to the 
ground and entered the grove. Entering the Madhuvana, he saw those ill- 
mannered leaders of the troops of tawny monkey, who were now sober. 
They were all voiding the honey-wine in the form of urine. 

[S—11] The heroic Dadhimukha approached them, cupping his palms 
reverentially. He then cheerfully addressed Angada with these conciliatory 
words: “Dear friend, please do not be angry that these monkeys tried to 
restrain you. It was merely out of ignorance that the guards angrily tried to 
stop you, sirs. Mighty prince, you are the crown prince; therefore, you are 
master of this grove. Please, sir, forgive the offense that—in our foolishness 
—we committed earlier. Just as your father was formerly the lord of the 
hosts of tawny monkeys, so now are you and Sugriva, best of tawny 
monkeys, no one else. Blameless prince, I have gone and reported the 
arrival here of all these roamers of the forest to your father’s brother, 
Sugriva. He was not angry when he heard about your coming here with the 
leaders of the troops of tawny monkeys and about the despoliation of the 
grove; indeed, he was delighted. In his delight your father’s brother, King 
Sugriva, lord of the monkeys, said, ‘Send them all immediately.’ ” 

[12-16] When eloquent Angada, foremost of tawny monkeys, had heard 
these conciliatory words of Dadhimukha, he said these words to his 
followers: “Leaders of the troops of tawny monkeys! I suspect that Rama 
has already heard the news of our arrival. Since we have accomplished our 


mission, it is not fitting that we remain here, scorchers of our foes. Roamers 
of the forest, we have rested and drunk honey-wine to our heart’s content. 
What is left for us to do here? We should now proceed to where my revered 
elder Sugriva is waiting. As to what is to be done, I shall do just as you— 
acting as a group—instruct me, lords of the troops of tawny monkeys. I am 
completely at your disposal, sirs. I may be crown prince; but still I am not 
entitled to order you about. After you have accomplished this mission, it 
would be highly improper for me to treat you disrespectfully.” 

[17-21] Even as the forest-dwelling monkeys heard these immortal 
words that Angada was saying, they were delighted at heart, and they said 
these words in reply: “Your majesty! Bull among monkeys! What other 
powerful person would speak in this fashion? Drunk with the arrogance of 
power, all others think only of themselves. These words, which no one else 
could have uttered, are so fitting for you. Your humility proclaims the bright 
future that lies in store for you. All of us have rested and are ready to 
proceed to where Sugriva, the immortal lord of the heroic tawny monkeys, 
is waiting. Unless you tell us to, we tawny monkeys would find it 
impossible to move even one step from this place, best of tawny monkeys. 
This is the truth we are telling you.” 

[22—24] While they were speaking in this fashion, Angada replied, “Very 
well then, let us go.” So saying, he sprang up from the surface of the earth. 
All the leaders of the troops of tawny monkeys followed him as he soared 
upward, filling the sky like sacred fires blazing up from the sacrifice. 
Leaping suddenly into the sky, those swift, leaping monkeys gave a 
thunderous roar, like great storm clouds driven before the wind. 

[25-29] While Angada was still on his way, Sugriva, lord of the 
monkeys, addressed lotus-eyed Rama, who was stricken with grief: “Take 
heart, bless you, there is no doubt that the queen has been found. Otherwise 
they would not dare to come here after the expiration of the time limit I set. 
If the mission had failed, the great-armed crown prince Angada, the best of 
leaping monkeys, would not dare approach me. Even if the other monkeys 
had acted in such a fashion without having accomplished their mission, he 
himself would have been dejected, his mind overwhelmed with confusion. 
Unless he were in an exuberant mood, that lord of leaping monkeys would 
never have destroyed my Madhuvana. For it has been handed down from 
father to son and carefully guarded by our forefathers. 


[30-33] “Kausalya has an excellent child in you, Rama, firm in your 
vows. Take heart! No doubt the queen has been found and by no one else 
but Hanuman. For there is no other like him who could have been the 
reason for the success of this mission. For, O foremost among the wise, 
success, intelligence, resolve, and strength are as firmly established in 
Hanuman as is radiant splendor in the sun. Where Jambavan is the leader, 
Angada the general, and Hanuman the guiding force, there can be no other 
outcome. Now is not the time for you to give way to anxiety, you whose 
valor is immeasurable.” 

[34-36] At that moment, a short distance above them, he heard the 
chattering of the forest-dwelling monkeys, who, as they approached 
Kiskindha, were screeching in their pride at Hanuman’s feat as if to 
announce their success. When the foremost of the monkeys heard the 
clamor of the monkeys, he was delighted at heart, curling and uncurling his 
tail. Placing Angada and the monkey Hanuman at their head, the tawny 
monkeys rushed onward in their eagerness to see Rama. 

[37-40] Led by Angada, the joyful and exuberant heroes landed near 
Raghava and the king of the tawny monkeys. Bowing his head before them, 
great-armed Hanuman reported to Raghava that the queen was unharmed 
and was strictly controlling herself. In great delight, Laksmana gazed with 
great fondness and respect upon Sugriva, who had been so certain of this 
outcome with regard to the son of the wind god. And Raghava, slayer of 
enemy heroes, who was rejoicing with great delight, gazed upon Hanuman 
with enormous respect. 


Sarga 63 

[1-5] After proceeding to Mount Prasravana with its lovely woodlands, the 
monkeys bowed their heads before Rama and mighty Laksmana. Then, 
placing the crown prince at their head, and, after having reverently saluted 
Sugriva, they began to relate the news concerning Sita. In Rama’s presence, 
all the tawny monkeys told of Sita’s imprisonment in the inner apartments 
of Ravana, of her being menaced by the raksasa women, of her devotion to 
Rama, and of the time limit that had been set. When Rama learned that 
Vaidehi was unharmed, he responded: “Where is Queen Sita? How is she 
disposed toward me? Tell me everything concerning Vaidehi, monkeys.” 


[6-10] Hearing what Rama had said, the tawny monkeys, there in 
Rama’s presence, prompted Hanuman, who was the one most 
knowledgeable about Sita’s situation. When Hanuman heard their words, 
that eloquent son of Maruta said these words about finding Sita: “When I 
had leapt over the ocean, a hundred leagues in breadth, I wandered about in 
my desire to find Sita Janaki until at last I came upon her. On the southern 
shore of the southern ocean lies Lanka, the city of wicked Ravana. It was 
there that I found virtuous Sita in Ravana’s inner apartments. Your lovely 
wife, Rama, is surviving only through placing all her hopes on you. 

[11-14] “I found her there in the women’s grove, guarded by hideous 
rdksasa women, who menaced her constantly. Imprisoned in Ravana’s inner 
apartments and closely guarded by the rdksasa women, your virtuous 
queen, unaccustomed to suffering, is suffering. Dejected, her hair in a single 
braid, she thinks only of you. She sleeps on the ground; and her body has 
grown so pale that she resembles a lotus pond at the onset of winter. Her 
purpose utterly averse to that of Ravana, she had resolved to die. Still, with 
great difficulty, Kakutstha, I managed to seek out the queen, whose 
thoughts are fixed on you alone. 

[15-18] “I gradually managed to inspire confidence in her, tiger among 
men, by praising the fame of the House of Iksvaku. I managed to converse 
with the queen and to reveal to her all that had occurred. When she heard 
about the alliance between Rama and Sugriva, she was delighted. Her 
virtuous conduct is unshakable, and her devotion is fixed upon you. And 
that is how I found that virtuous woman, the delight of Janaka. She is 
wholly occupied with her fierce austerity and her utter devotion to you, bull 
among men. She provided me with a means of identification, in the form of 
an episode involving a crow that took place in your presence on Mount 
Citrakita, wise Raghava. 

[19-23] “Janaki told me: ‘You must tell Rama, that tiger among men, 
what you have seen here, omitting nothing, son of Vayu. And as you are 
telling him these words, just as I will tell you, in the presence of Sugriva 
you must give him this, which I have hidden away with great effort: “Here 
is my splendid hair ornament, which I have kept hidden for you with great 
effort. And you must remember my ¢i/aka mark of red arsenic. I am sending 
you this splendid jewel, born from the sea. When I look upon it in my 
trouble, I rejoice just as if I had seen you, blameless one. I shall live only 


for one more month, son of Dasaratha. I cannot live beyond this month 
since I am in the hands of the rdksasas.’”’ 

[24—26] “Thus did Sita, emaciated, but utterly righteous in her conduct, 
and imprisoned in Ravana’s inner apartments, address me, her eyes as wide 
as a doe’s. Now I have told you everything, just as it happened, Raghava. 
By all means, you must now devise a way to cross the waters of the ocean.” 
When the son of Vayu saw that the princes had been reassured, he gave 
Raghava that means of identification. Then he fully reported to him 
everything the queen had told him in due order and in her own words. 


Sarga 64 

[1-5] When Rama, son of Dasaratha, had been addressed in this fashion by 
Hanuman, he clasped the jewel to his heart, and he and Laksmana wept. 
Drawn with sorrow, Raghava gazed at that splendid jewel. His eyes filled 
with tears, and he said this to Sugriva: “Just as a cow in her maternal 
affection overflows with love for her calf, so does my heart overflow at the 
sight of this magnificent gem. My father-in-law gave this magnificent gem 
to Vaideht when she was a bride. It was fastened on her head so that it 
would be more lovely still. This gem born from the waters is particularly 
prized by her family; for it was a gift from wise Sakra, who had been 
supremely gratified during a sacrifice. 

[6-10] “As I gaze upon this superb jewel, dear friend, I see in my mind’s 
eye a vision of my father and of the lord Janaka Vaideha. This gem looked 
so lovely on the head of my beloved. In seeing it now, I feel as if I had her 
back. Keep telling me, dear friend, over and over again, exactly what Sita 
Vaidehi said, thus sprinkling me with the water of her words, as one might 
sprinkle with water one who had fainted. What could be more grievous than 
this, Saumitri, that I should see this jewel born of the waters come back to 
me without Vaideht? If Vaidehi can survive for a month, then she will have 
lived a long time. As for myself, dear friend, I cannot live even for a 
moment without that black-eyed woman. 

[11-15] “Dear friend, you must take me to the place where you found 
my beloved. Since I have heard news of her, I cannot remain here even a 
moment longer. How can my fair-hipped lady, who is so excessively timid, 
survive amidst those dreadful, terrifying raksasas? Surrounded by those 
raksasas, her face surely must have lost its radiance, as does the autumnal 


moon when veiled by clouds, its dark spot no longer visible. What did Sita 
say, Hanuman? You must tell me truthfully. For that alone can keep me 
alive, as medicine does a sickly man. What did my lovely, fair-hipped lady, 
so sweet and sweetly spoken, say, Hanuman? You must tell me. Going from 
misery to ever greater misery, how can Janaki survive?” 


Sarga 65 

[1-4] Addressed in this fashion by great Raghava, Hanuman related to him 
everything that Sita had said: “Queen Janaki told me this story, bull among 
men, just as it took place long ago on Mount Citraktta, to serve as a means 
of identification. Sleeping comfortably by your side, Janaki awoke first. For 
a crow had suddenly flown up and injured her between the breasts. You in 
turn, elder brother of Bharata, had fallen asleep in the lap of the queen. But 
once again, she said, the bird caused her pain. 

[S—8] “Returning yet again, he injured her severely, she said. Then you 
awoke, spattered with her blood. Scorcher of your foes, she said that though 
you were sleeping peacefully, the queen awakened you, for the crow would 
not leave off tormenting her. When you saw that she was wounded between 
the breasts, great-armed prince, you spoke, hissing in anger like a 
venomous serpent, ‘Who, timorous one, has wounded you between the 
breasts with his sharp claws? Who is toying with an enraged serpent, its 
jaws agape?’ 

[9-13] “Glancing about you, you spied the crow as he perched there 
watching her, his sharp claws dripping blood. She said that the crow— 
foremost of flying creatures, who swiftly moved about the earth, equal to 
the wind in swiftness—was the son of Sakra. Rolling your eyes in anger, 
you, a great-armed warrior and foremost among the wise, made a harsh 
decision with respect to the crow. You then plucked a blade of darbha grass 
from your mat and infused it with the power of Brahma’s divine weapon. 
Like the blazing fire of universal destruction, it blazed up fiercely in the 
bird’s direction. You hurled that flaming blade of grass at the crow. And it 
pursued him. 

[14-17] “Spurned by his father, all the gods, and the great seers, he 
traversed the triple universe but could find no one to protect him. And as he 
lay there, fallen to the ground seeking refuge with you who are fit to grant 
it, Kakutstha, you spared him in your compassion, although he deserved to 


die. But, Raghava, you said: ‘A divine weapon can never be employed in 
vain.’ It put out the crow’s right eye. And Rama, after he had made his 
obeisance to you and King Dasaratha, you dismissed that crow, and he 
returned to his abode. 

[18—23] “Then Sita said: ‘Since you are the foremost master of divine 
weapons and possess strength and virtue, why, Raghava, do you not employ 
your divine weaponry against the rdksasas? Even the great serpents, 
gandharvas, asuras, and the hosts of Maruts are unable to stand before you, 
Rama. If the mighty man has even the least concern for me, let him slay 
Ravana at once in battle with his keenly honed arrows. Or else, why does 
not the best of men, Laksmana Raghava, scorcher of his foes, rescue me on 
his brother’s orders? Those two mighty tigers among men whose power is 
equal to that of Vayu, and Agni, are truly unassailable even by the gods; 
why then do they ignore me? Surely I must have committed some grave 
offense, since those scorchers of their foes together, although well able to 
rescue me, do not do so.’ 

[24—29] “When I heard Vaideht’s piteous words—so tearfully spoken—I 
addressed that noble lady once more in these words: ‘I swear to you by 
truth itself, my queen, that Rama is preoccupied with his grieving over you; 
while Laksmana, moreover, is deeply pained at the fact that Rama is 
overwhelmed by sorrow. Somehow or other I have managed to find you, 
my lady. This is no time for sorrow. Lovely lady, you shall soon see the end 
of your sorrows. The two princes—tigers among men and subduers of their 
foes—will reduce Lanka to ashes in their determination to see you. Once 
great-armed Raghava has slain the terrible Ravana along with all his 
kinsmen in battle, he will surely take you back to his own city. Blameless 
lady, please give me some means of identification that Rama will recognize 
and that will cheer him.’ 

[30-36] “Then, mighty prince, after glancing about her in all directions, 
she unfastened this gem, this splendid hair clip from her garment, and gave 
it to me. I accepted this heavenly gem on your account, foremost of the 
Raghus. Then, bowing my head to her, I hastened to return. Seeing that I 
was determined to go and that I was increasing in size, Janaka’s fair 
daughter, despondent, her face covered with tears, spoke to me in a voice 
indistinct with weeping: ‘Hanuman, you must inquire for me after the well- 
being of Rama and Laksmana, who resemble lions, as well as Sugriva, his 


ministers, and all the rest. You must see to it that great-armed Raghava 
saves me from this ocean of sorrow. When you arrive in the presence of 
Rama, you must tell him of the intensity of my sorrow and how I am 
constantly menaced by the rdaksasas. May your journey be successful, 
heroic tawny monkey!’ Those, your majesty, are the sorrowful words that 
the noble lady Sita spoke. Reflecting on what I have told you, lion among 
kings, you must have faith that Sita is loyal and well.” 


Sarga 66 

[1-6] Continuing, Hanuman said: “In her affection for you, tiger among 
men, and in her friendly esteem for me, the queen then addressed a further 
message to me in an agitated manner: ‘You must thus address Rama 
Dasarathi in various ways so that he will quickly kill Ravana in battle and 
take me back. Stay another day if you please, heroic tamer of your foes. 
When you have rested in some concealed spot, you can depart tomorrow. 
For your presence, monkey, would be a moment’s respite for hapless me 
from my profound sorrow. For once you, so valiant, have departed, even if 
only to return, it is doubtful whether I shall survive. Have no doubt about 
this. My grief at not being able to see you would only further torment 
unfortunate me; for I am already overcome with sorrow after sorrow and 
am in such a dreadful plight. 

[7-11] “ “But then, too, hero, there is without question still one serious 
doubt that hovers before me regarding your allies, the apes and tawny 
monkeys. Just how will the troops of apes and tawny monkeys and the two 
sons of the best of men cross the impassable ocean? Three creatures alone 
possess the power to fly here over the ocean: Garuda Vainateya, Vayu, and 
you, blameless monkey. Therefore, heroic monkey, tell me what means you 
foresee for accomplishing this impossible undertaking. For you are the 
foremost of those who know how to accomplish things. Granted, you are 
fully capable of carrying out this mission all by yourself, slayer of enemy 
heroes, and this accomplishment of yours would bring you glory. 

[12—15] “ ‘But if Rama with his entire army were to recover me after 
slaying Ravana in battle and were he then in triumph to bring me back to 
his own city, that would redound to his glory. Raghava must not do as the 
raksasa did: steal me away from the forest by means of a trick he played on 
that hero out of fear of him. But if Kakutstha, that tormentor of enemy 


armies, were to fill Lanka with his own troops and take me away, that 
would be worthy of him. Therefore, you should arrange it in such a way 
that the great battle hero demonstrates valor that is worthy of him.’ 

[16—20] “When I had heard these meaningful, courteous, and reasonable 
words, I continued with the remaining portion of my own speech: ‘The 
foremost of the leaping monkeys Sugriva, the mighty lord of apes and 
tawny monkeys, has made a firm resolve on your behalf, my lady. The 
tawny monkeys under his command are imbued with valor, strength, and 
great power; and they move with the swiftness of thought. Their movement 
—upward, downward, or toward any side—cannot be impeded; and those 
creatures of measureless power do not shrink from even the greatest tasks. 
Following the path of the wind, those enormously energetic creatures have 
many times reverently circumambulated the earth. 

[21—24] “ ‘All the forest-dwelling monkeys are equal, if not superior, to 
me. Not a single one of those who attend Sugriva is inferior to me. If I 
managed to get here, how much easier it will be for those who are more 
powerful still. After all, one does not send out the best one has to run 
errands. Lesser folk are sent for that purpose. So enough of this misery, my 
lady! Banish your grief. The leaders of the troops of tawny monkeys will 
reach Lanka in a single bound. Mounted on my back, those two lions 
among men, resembling the newly risen sun and moon, will soon come for 
you, virtuous lady. 

[25-29] “ “You will soon see Raghava, that lionlike slayer of his foes, 
and you will also see Laksmana standing at the gates of Lanka, bow in 
hand. Soon you will see those heroic monkeys assembled here as well. 
Their weapons are their fangs and claws, their valor is that of lions and 
tigers, and they resemble elephant lords. Soon you will hear the sound of 
those extraordinary monkeys, like clouds upon a mountain, roaring on the 
peaks of Lanka’s Mount Malaya. Soon you will see Raghava, subduer of his 
foes, who has completed his term of exile in the forest, reunited with you 
and consecrated king in Ayodhya.’ When I had thus soothed the daughter of 
Janaka Maithila with these auspicious and welcome words, she, who had 
spoken cheerfully in my presence, became calm, although she was still 
pained by your sorrow.” 

The end of the Sundarakanda. 


a Emendation: see PVR 5: 307. 
b Emendation: see PVR 5: 316. 
c Emendation: see PVR 5: 330. 
d Emendation: see PVR 5: 340-41. 
e Emendation: see PVR 5: 340-41. 
f Emendation: see PVR 5: 347. 
g Emendation: see PVR 5: 408. 
h Emendation: see PVR 5: 408. 
i Emendation: see PVR 5: 540-41. 


Chapter 6 
The Yuddhakanda 


Sarga 1 

[1-5] When Rama had heard Hanuman’s report, so faithfully rendered, he 
was delighted and responded in these words: “Hanuman has performed an 
enormous feat, difficult to accomplish in this world, which no one else on 
the face of the earth would be able to do, even in his imagination. For apart 
from Garuda and Vayu I know of no one other than Hanuman who could 
cross the vast ocean. The citadel of Lanka is well guarded by Ravana and so 
is unassailable by gods, danavas, yaksas, gandharvas, great serpents, and 
raksasas. Who, relying on his own strength, could possibly enter it and 
emerge alive? Who, indeed, could enter that unassailable citadel, well 
guarded by the raksasas, unless he were so endowed with might and valor 
as to be the equal of Hanuman? 

[6—9] “In thus putting forth his own power, which is commensurate with 
his valor, Hanuman has performed a truly great service for Sugriva. A 
servant who, assigned a difficult task by his master, loyally carries it out is 
considered to be the best type of servant. A servant, given an assignment, 
who, even though fit and competent, fails to carry out the business of the 
king single-mindedly is considered to be the worst type of servant. Given 
this assignment, Hanuman did what he had to do without disgracing 
himself. What is more, Sugriva 1s satisfied. 

[10-12] “The discovery of Vaidehi has preserved powerful Laksmana, 
the House of Raghu, and myself from unrighteousness. But wretched as I 
am, it pains my heart still more that I cannot, here and now, return a 
commensurate favor to this bearer of good news. Yet let me give to great 
Hanuman this embrace, which is all the wealth I have at this time. 

[13-16] “Thus far, the search for Sita has gone well in every regard, but 
now that we confront the ocean, my mind once again gives way to despair. 
The ocean, with its vast waters, is impossible to cross. How in the world are 
all the tawny monkeys going to reach its southern shore? Even though this 


news about Vaidehi has been reported to me, what on earth are we to do 
next to get the tawny monkeys to the farther shore of the ocean?” When 
great-armed Rama, the slayer of his foes, had spoken in this fashion to 
Hanuman, he was distracted by sorrow and fell to brooding. 


Sarga 2 

[1-4] Then majestic Sugriva spoke these words to Rama, DaSaratha’s son, 
who was stricken with grief, dispelling his sorrow: “Why do you grieve, 
hero, like some other, ordinary man? Don’t be like that! Abandon your 
grief, as an ingrate does friendship. I see no grounds for your sorrow, 
Raghava, since we have received news, and we know the enemy’s lair. You 
are resolute, learned in the sdstras, wise, and erudite. Give up this 
reprehensible attitude, Raghava, as a man of resolute mind does a thought 
that undermines his purpose. 

[S—7] “We shall leap across the ocean infested with huge sharks, scale 
the battlements of Lanka, and slay your enemy! All the undertakings of a 
person who lacks resolve, who is despondent, and whose mind is 
overwhelmed by sorrow fail utterly; and so he comes to grief. All the 
leaders of my troops of tawny monkeys are valorous and powerful. In order 
to please you, they are determined even to enter the purifying fire. 

[8—12] “I am absolutely certain of this; I can tell by their excitement. 
Raghava, you must arrange it so that a bridge is constructed such that we 
may reach the city of the rdksasa king, and that, through my valor, I may 
slay the enemy and bring back Sita. From the very moment that we see the 
city of Lanka, set on the peak of Mount Triktita, you may consider Ravana 
to be as good as slain in battle. As soon as a bridge to Lanka has been built 
over the ocean and the whole army has crossed over, you may claim victory. 
For these tawny monkeys are valorous in battle and can take on any form at 
will. So, your majesty, enough of this craven attitude, so destructive to all 
endeavors. 

[13-16] “In this world, grief saps a man’s valor. But wise Rama, now is 
the time for you to resort energetically to strength, which is the proper 
recourse of a man who relies on valor. For surely, in the case of death or 
disappearance, grief vitiates all the efforts of great and valorous men like 
you. You are foremost among the wise and expert in the essence of all the 
sastras. And together with comrades like me, you must now defeat your 


enemy. For I cannot think of anyone in all the three worlds, Raghava, who 
can stand before you in battle once you take your bow in hand. 

[17-21] “Entrusted to the monkeys, your mission shall not fail. Soon you 
shall cross the inexhaustible ocean and find Sita. So enough of giving way 
to grief, lord of the earth. Unleash your anger! Passive kshatriyas fare 
badly; but everyone fears the impetuous. It is in order to cross the dreadful 
ocean, lord of rivers, that you have come here with us. You have a subtle 
mind, you should consider how to accomplish this. For these tawny 
monkeys are valorous in battle and can take on any form at will. They will 
smash their enemies with volleys of boulders and trees. ?In one way or 
another, we shall reach Ravana’s abode. And then, what more is to be said? 
You shall be completely victorious.” 


Sarga 3 
[1-5] When Kakutstha had heard Sugriva’s reasonable speech and grasped 
its essential meaning, he concurred and then spoke to Hanuman: “Whether 
by building a bridge or even drying up the ocean, in one way or another, I 
will be able to cross the sea quickly. Tell me, monkey, how many defenses 
does the fortress of Lanka have? The size of the army, the fortification of 
the gates, the defensive works of Lanka, and the residences of the rdksasas: 
I wish to know about all of this as if I had seen it for myself. In Lanka you 
were able to reconnoiter carefully and at will. Now you must tell me 
everything exactly as it is, for you are in every way well qualified to do so.” 

[6—-39*] Upon hearing Rama’s words, Hanuman, son of Maruta and 
foremost among the eloquent, spoke to him once more in these words: 
“Listen, and I will tell you everything about the arrangement of the 
defensive works—how the city of Lanka is protected and how it is defended 
by its troops.” ’When he had spoken in this fashion, the foremost of 
monkeys began accurately to describe the fearsome nature of the sea, the 
extraordinary wealth of Lanka, the disposition of its massive numbers of 
troops, and a detailed description of its mounts and vehicles. 

[9-14] “The vast city of Lanka is joyous and filled with crowds of happy 
raksasas. It is full of chariots and rutting elephants. It has four gateways, 
lofty and broad, whose gates are firmly fastened with massive iron bars. On 
its ramparts, there are huge and powerful devices for hurling stones. Any 
enemy force approaching there would be driven back by them. Around the 


gateways, the hosts of valorous raksasas have constructed hundreds of 
sharp, fearsome hundred-slayers made of black iron and fully deployed. Its 
rampart is made of gold. It is immense and impossible to scale. Its interior 
is studded with gemstones, coral, lapis, and pearls. All around it there are 
moats—deep, fearsome, and menacing—their icy waters full of crocodiles 
and teeming with fish. 

[15-17] “At their gates, there are four extremely long bridges equipped 
with many huge instruments of war crowded one upon the other. Those 
bridges protect the city at those points. For should hostile troops approach, 
they would be cast into the moats on every side by the instruments of war 
emplaced upon them. One bridge, in particular, is solid, strong, and 
extremely stable. It is adorned with many pilings and watchtowers, all made 
of gold. 

[18—22] “Ravana is always in full command of himself, Rama. Always 
ready for battle, he 1s both energetic and vigilant in inspecting his troops. 
The citadel of Lanka is not to be scaled. It is inaccessible even to the gods. 
It is fearsome with its fourfold defenses: its rivers, mountains, forests, and 
defensive constructions. It is situated far off, on the other side of the vast 
ocean. Yet, Raghava, the sea has no navigable passage there, for the way is 
all uncharted. Built on a mountaintop, the city is as inaccessible as the city 
of the gods. Filled with warhorses and elephants, Lanka is supremely 
difficult to conquer. Iron clubs, hundred-slayers, and various other 
instruments of war adorn Lanka, the city of evil-minded Ravana. 

[23-27] “On one side, at the western gate, ten thousand unassailable 
rdksasas are stationed. They all bear lances and fight with their swords in 
the vanguard. On the next side, at the southern gate, a hundred thousand 
rdaksasas are stationed along with an army, complete with all four divisions. 
They too are unsurpassed fighters. Next, at the eastern gate, are stationed a 
million raksasas. Bearing shields and swords, they are all adept in the use 
of every missile. Finally, at the northern gate, ten million raksasas— 
chariot-warriors and cavalry—are stationed. They are the sons of noble 
families and are treated with great respect. The central encampment is 
garrisoned by ten million unassailable yatudhdnas and an even greater 
number of rdksasas. 

[28—32] “I have smashed those bridges and filled in the moats. I have 
burned the city of Lanka and leveled its ramparts. By one means or another, 


we shall cross the ocean, the abode of Varuna. Then you may regard the city 
of Lanka as destroyed by the monkeys. Here are Angada, Dvivida, Mainda, 
Jambavan, Panasa, Nala, and General Nila. What need have you for the rest 
of the army? For once, leaping through the air, those monkeys reach 
Ravana’s great city with its ramparts and palaces, they will bring back 
Maithill. You must at once command the entire army to that effect. You 
must select a propitious moment to set forth.” 


Sarga 4 

[1-6] When truly valorous Rama of immense blazing energy had duly 
listened to Hanuman’s speech from beginning to end, he said: “I can 
immediately destroy Lanka, the city of the fearsome rdksasa, which you 
have had described. This is the truth I am telling you. I wish to set forth this 
very moment, Sugriva, for the sun, maker of day, has reached its zenith, and 
the propitious juncture called Vijaya is at hand. Moreover, today is the day 
of the lunar asterism Uttaraphalguni. Tomorrow the moon will enter the 
asterism Hasta. So let us set forth, Sugriva, surrounded by the entire army. 
The omens that appear to me are auspicious. I shall slay Ravana and bring 
back Sita Janaki. For the upper lid of my eye is throbbing, foretelling, it 
seems, victory, the fulfillment of my desire. 

[7-14] “Let Nila, accompanied by one hundred thousand swift monkeys, 
go in advance of the army to scout the way. General Nila, you must at once 
lead your army by a route rich in fruits, roots, and honey and furnished with 
cool groves and waters. But you must be constantly vigilant and guard the 
roots, fruits, and water along the way against the evil raksasas, who might 
poison them. As your forest-dwelling monkeys leap all around, let them be 
on the lookout for enemy forces that may be hidden in hollows, swamps, 
and thickets. Let the mighty lions among monkeys in their hundreds and 
thousands lead the fearsome vanguard of the army, which resembles the 
surge of the sea. Let mountainlike Gaja, powerful Gavaya, and Gavaksa 
march before them, like haughty bulls before their cows. Let the monkey 
Rsabha, a bull among monkeys and a lord of the leaping monkeys, march 
guarding the right flank of the monkey army. And let swift Gandhamadana, 
as irresistible as an unrivaled war-elephant, march forth commanding the 
left flank of the monkey army. 


[15-17] “I myself shall go forth at the center of the army, mounted on 
Hanuman, like lord Indra on Airavata, urging on the vast host. And let 
Laksmana here, who resembles Yama, ender of all things, go forth on 
Angada, like Kubera, the ruler of the yaksas and lord of wealth, on 
Sarvabhauma. Let these three, Jambavan the mighty king of the apes, 
Susena, and the monkey Vegadarsin, guard the rear.” 

[18-20] When he had heard Raghava’s words, Sugriva, that bull among 
monkeys and the commander of the army, gave those orders to the powerful 
monkeys. Then all the troops of monkeys, eager for battle, leaping up, came 
bounding swiftly from their caves and mountaintops. Thus honored by the 
monkey king and Laksmana, righteous Rama, together with his army, set 
out toward the south. 

[21-25] He set out surrounded by tawny monkeys resembling elephants. 
They numbered in the hundreds, the tens of thousands, the hundreds of 
thousands, and the tens of millions. The vast host of tawny monkeys 
followed him as he set forth. Excited and filled with joy, all the leaping 
monkeys, leaping upward and onward, bellowing, roaring, and howling, 
marched toward the south under Sugriva’s command, eating fruit and 
fragrant honey and carrying huge trees laden with masses of blossoms. In 
their wild exuberance, they would carry one another about. Then they 
would suddenly throw down those being carried. Some would fall down, 
then leap up and knock the others down. 

[26-30] In the presence of Raghava, the tawny monkeys bellowed, “We 
shall surely kill Ravana and all the night-roaming rdksasas.” Mighty 
Rsabha, Nila, and Kumuda, along with many monkeys, scouted the path 
ahead of them. In the center marched King Sugriva, Rama, and Laksmana, 
those crushers of their foes, surrounded by many powerful and fearsome 
monkeys. The heroic, tawny monkey Satabali, surrounded by one hundred 
million troops, took over the sole supervision and protection of the entire 
army of tawny monkeys. With their retinues of billions of monkeys, 
Kesarin, Panasa, Gaja, and mighty Arka each guarded one of the army’s 
flanks. 

[31-36] Then, placing Sugriva at their head, Susena and Jambavan, 
surrounded by many apes, guarded the tail end of the army. And that bull 
among monkeys Nila, their heroic general, foremost in leaping, moving 
swiftly about, guarded the army on every side. The heroes Dartmukha, 


Prajangha, Jambha, and the monkey Rabhasa moved about everywhere, 
urging the leaping monkeys onward. As they were proceeding in this 
fashion, those tigers among tawny monkeys, proud of their strength, beheld 
the magnificent Sahya mountains covered with trees and creepers. That 
fearsome army of monkeys, vast as the ocean’s flood, streamed onward 
with a mighty roar, like the ocean in its dreadful rush. All those heroic 
elephants among monkeys who flanked Dasarathi leapt swiftly onward, like 
excellent steeds spurred on. 

[37-39] °As they were being carried along by the two monkeys, the two 
bulls among men resembled the sun, bringer of light, and moon in 
conjunction with two great planets. Mounted on Angada, Laksmana, bold 
and learned in the traditional texts, his quest certain of success, addressed 
Rama in a sweet voice: “You will swiftly slay Ravana and recover Vaideht, 
whom he has abducted. Then, your goals accomplished, you will return to 
prosperous Ayodhya. 

[40-45] “For I perceive significant and auspicious omens in the sky and 
on earth, Raghava, all of which presage the success of your quest. An 
auspicious breeze, favorable and pleasant, is blowing in the direction of the 
army’s march, and birds and wild animals are calling continually with sweet 
voices. It is clear in all directions, and the sun, maker of day, is bright. The 
Bhargava USanas is shining with bright rays behind you. The constellation 
Brahmarasi is clear, as are the Great Seers, which, shining brightly, all 
encircle and illuminate Dhruva, the North Star. The royal sage Trisanku, the 
foremost among the forefathers of our great Iksvaku lineage, is shining 
brightly together with his purohita. The twin stars, the two Visakhas, most 
significant of constellations for our great Iksvaku lineage, shine brightly, 
boding no ill. 

[46-50] “But the constellation of those rdksasas, sons of chaos, Mula, 
whose regent is Nirrti, is occluded. Crossed by a nearby comet, it is 
eclipsed. All of this presages the destruction of the rdksasas. For the 
constellations of those who are in the grip of death are always occluded by 
inimical planets at the hour of their doom. The water is clear and sweet; the 
forest is laden with fruit. Fragrant breezes blow briskly, and the trees are 
filled with the blossoms of the season. Arrayed in battle formations, my 
lord, the monkey armies are as resplendent as were the armies of the gods 
during the battle in which the asura Taraka was slain. Considering these 


things, noble brother, you should be pleased.” Thus did Saumitri in his 
delight speak, reassuring his brother. 

[51-54] Then that vast host filled with those tigers among the apes and 
monkeys—whose weapons were their fangs and claws—advanced, 
covering all the land. And the dust raised by the monkeys with their fore 
and hind feet covered the earthly world, blocking out the light of the sun. 
Day and night the vast host of tawny monkeys marched. Under the 
protection of Sugriva, the army was excited and jubilant. Eager for battle, 
all the monkeys marched swiftly. Anxious to rescue Sita, they did not rest 
anywhere, not even for a moment. 

[55-56] At length they reached the Sahya and then the Malaya 
mountains, dense with trees and abounding in all sorts of wild creatures. 
Viewing the variegated woodlands and the streams and waterfalls, Rama 
passed through the Sahya and Malaya ranges. 

[57-62] And the leaping monkeys broke down many trees—campakas, 
tilakas, mangoes, asokas, sinduvarakas, karaviras, and timisas. Intoxicated 
with their strength, the monkeys ate the fruits, fragrant as nectar, roots, and 
the blossoms of the trees. The monkeys, as tawny as honey, went along 
happily drinking from the honeycombs, which hung down as big as bushels. 
And so those bulls among leaping monkeys went on their way, smashing 
trees and trailing creepers, devastating the lofty hills. Some of the monkeys, 
exhilarated with the honey-wine, bellowed from the trees. Others climbed 
up trees, while still others threw themselves down. Covered with those bulls 
among the tawny monkeys, the earth looked as if it were covered with 
fields of ripened winter rice. 

[63-66] Then, when great-armed Rama, his eyes resembling blue 
lotuses, reached Mount Mahendra, he climbed to its summit, which was 
adored with trees. And when Rama, son of Dasaratha, had climbed to the 
summit, he saw the ocean, the abode of waters, full of turtles and fish. And 
so at last, having traversed the Sahya range and the great Malaya 
mountains, they reached the dreadful-sounding sea in good order. Then, 
descending, Rama, foremost of those who inspire delight, moved swiftly to 
a lovely grove near the shore accompanied by Sugriva and Laksmana. 

[67-72] Reaching the broad shore, whose stony surface was washed by 
the surging waves, Rama spoke these words: “Sugriva, we have reached the 
ocean, Varuna’s abode. ‘Here and now our earlier concern arises once again. 


Beyond this point lies only the boundless ocean, lord of rivers. Without 
some extraordinary measure, it is impossible to cross it. Therefore, we 
should camp here and begin now to deliberate as to how the monkey army 
might reach the farther shore.” Thus, upon reaching the sea, did great- 
armed Rama, in his torment over the abduction of Sita, give the order to 
make camp: “The time has come for us to deliberate about crossing the 
ocean. No one is to leave his unit for any reason whatsoever, but let some of 
the monkey heroes go on patrol, for we must find out what hidden dangers 
lie before us.” 

[73-76] When Sugriva, who was accompanied by Laksmana, had heard 
those words of Rama, he had the army make camp on the densely wooded 
seashore. Spread out along the seashore, the army seemed almost to be a 
second magnificent ocean, its waters tawny as honey. Anxious to reach the 
farther shore of the great ocean, those bulls among tawny monkeys entered 
a grove near the shore and made camp. Having reached the great ocean, the 
monkey army, watching it churned up by the force of the wind, was thrilled. 

[77-82] But as they gazed upon the vast and featureless ocean, abode of 
Varuna, the lair of hosts of rdksasas, the leaders of the troops of tawny 
monkeys gave way to despair. For it was dreadful with its fierce sharks and 
crocodiles. And now, as the day waned and the night came on, the ocean, 
Varuna’s lair, agitated at the rising of the moon, was covered with 
reflections of its orb. It was swarming with huge crocodiles as powerful as 
fierce gales and with whales and whale sharks. It was teeming, it appeared, 
with serpents, their coils flashing. It swarmed with huge creatures and was 
studded with all sorts of rocks. The abode of asuras, it was fathomless, 
unapproachable, and impossible to cross. Teeming with crocodiles and the 
coils of great serpents, huge waves rose and fell, churned by the winds. 
With its great sea serpents glittering, the fearsome ocean, realm of the 
enemies of the gods, ever as unapproachable as the underworld known as 
Patala, resembled a scattered shower of sparks. 

[83-88] The ocean looked just like the sky, the sky just like the ocean. 
Ocean and sky appeared indistinguishable. For the waters merged into the 
sky and the sky into the waters. Filled with stars and gems, respectively, 
they both looked exactly alike. Between the sky with its scudding clouds 
and the ocean covered with waves passing in succession, not the slightest 
distinction could be found. Crashing ceaselessly against one another, with a 


terrifying roar, the waves of the ocean, lord of rivers, sounded like mighty 
bheri drums in battle. And so the great monkeys gazed upon the wind- 
whipped sea, the abode of waters. With the roaring of its waters and of its 
masses of precious stones, it was as if one with the raging gale. Whipped by 
the wind and swarming with hordes of huge sea creatures, the ocean with its 
waves appeared to be leaping into the sky in fury. With its surging waves 
and the roar of its waters, the ocean seemed to have gone mad. 


Sarga 5 
[1-2] Then Nila had the army make camp on the northern shore of the 
ocean, in proper fashion and according to precept, in such a way that it was 
well ordered and secure on every side. Mainda and Dvivida, those two bulls 
among monkeys, themselves stood picket duty to protect the army on all 
sides. 

[3—7] Once the army had made camp on the shore of the ocean, lord of 
rivers and streams, Rama, seeing Laksmana beside him, said these words: 
“They say that grief diminishes with the passage of time. But bereft as I am 
of the sight of my beloved, mine only increases day by day. I do not suffer 
because my beloved is so far away, nor even because she has been 
abducted. This alone is the source of all my grief: her youth is slipping 
away. Blow, breeze, where my beloved stays. Touch her and then touch me. 
For the touching of our limbs now depends on you, as on the moon depends 
the meeting of our glances. And this too, lodged in my heart, brings torment 
to my every limb, like poison once swallowed, that, as my darling was 
being carried off, she must have cried out to me, ‘Alas, my protector!’ 

[8—11] “Night and day my body is consumed by the fire of love, whose 
fuel is my separation from her and whose towering flames are my constant 
brooding on her. I shall plunge into the ocean without you, Saumitri, and 
rest there. For it would be hard for the flame of desire to burn me were I to 
sleep in its waters. And yet, even though I long for her so much, I can 
survive just knowing that that lady of the lovely thighs and I still share the 
same earth. And like a parched rice paddy drawing water from a flooded 
one, I live on through knowing that she lives. 

[12—20] “Oh, when shall I defeat my enemies and gaze once more upon 
fair-hipped Sita, her eyes as wide as hundred-petaled lotuses, as if upon 
splendid Sri herself? And when shall I once more gently raise and kiss her 


lotuslike face with its full and lovely lips, as a sickly person might drink a 
powerful tonic? And when will her full and close-set breasts, so like the 
ripe tala fruit, be once more pressed against me, shaking as she laughs? I 
am the protector of that dark-eyed woman. But now, in the clutches of the 
raksasas, like a woman without a protector, she will surely find no one to 
rescue her. When will she outwit the rdksasas, evade them, and escape, like 
the crescent of the hare-marked autumnal moon emerging from the midst of 
dark storm clouds? Although Sita is naturally slender, she must surely now 
be truly emaciated what with the grief and fasting attendant upon the 
reversal of her fortunes. When shall I bury my arrows in the breast of the 
lord of the rdksasas, so that I may bring Sita back and thus dispel the 
anguish of my heart? When will virtuous Sita, who is like a daughter of the 
immortal gods, clasp her arms eagerly about my neck, shedding tears of 
joy? When shall I instantaneously cast off this dreadful sorrow over my 
separation from Maithili, as one might a soiled garment?” 

[21-22] As wise Rama was lamenting in this fashion, the sun, bringer of 
light, set, its radiance fading at the close of day. Consoled by Laksmana, 
Rama performed the evening sandhya rite, still preoccupied with lotus-eyed 
Sita and overwhelmed with sorrow. 


Sarga 6 

[1-5] Meanwhile, when the lord of the rdksasas had inspected the dreadful 
and terrifying havoc that great Hanuman, the equal of Sakra, had wrought 
in Lanka, he addressed all the rdksasas, his face downcast in humiliation: 
“Not only has this mere monkey breached and laid waste the impregnable 
citadel of Lanka, he has found Sita Janaki as well. This Hanuman has 
smashed the domed palace, slaughtered the leading radksasas, and reduced 
the city of Lanka to chaos. What, pray, am I to do? Or what would be an 
appropriate next step? Please tell me: what would be best for us to do and 
what would be most effective? Those who are venerable and wise say that 
counsel is the cornerstone of victory. Therefore, I seek your counsel, mighty 
warriors, with regard to Rama. 

[6-10] “There are three types of men in this world: the highest, the 
lowest, and those in between. I will now set forth the merits and demerits of 
each of them. The highest type of man, they say, is he who first takes 
counsel with those counselors intent upon his welfare and competent in 


counsel, with those friends who share his goals, or with those kinsmen who 
wish him well, and only then initiates undertakings such that his efforts are 
in harmony with the will of the gods. The man who stands in between, they 
say, 1s he who reflects upon a matter by himself, who by himself directs his 
thoughts to righteous action, and then carries through those actions by 
himself. And the lowest type of man is he who, after saying, ‘I will do this,’ 
undertakes an action—tregardless of its merits and demerits and without 
relying on the will of the gods—and then fails to carry it through. 

[11-14] “Just as men are invariably of three types: the highest, the 
lowest, and those in between, so also must counsel itself be of the same 
three types: the highest, the lowest, and that which is in between. The 
highest type of counsel, they say, is when counselors are consistently of one 
mind through insight informed by the sastras. The counsel that is known as 
that which is in between, they say, is when counselors, having adopted 
many different opinions, subsequently reach unanimity as to how to decide 
a matter. The lowest type of counsel is when counselors go on debating, one 
after another, each defending his own position, and no conclusive argument 
can bring about unanimity. 

[15-18] “Therefore, you eminent counselors should agree on some 
excellent and appropriate counsel for me to follow. I will follow it 
faithfully. For Rama will soon march on the city of Lanka accompanied by 
thousands of heroic monkeys in order to blockade us. It is quite clear that 
by virtue of his power, which is equal to the task, Raghava will easily cross 
the ocean together with his younger brother, his troops, and his allies. This 
being the case and hostilities with the monkeys being imminent, you must 
counsel me fully concerning the well-being of the city and the army.” 


Sarga 7 
[1-5] Addressed in this fashion by Ravana, lord of the raksasas, all those 
mighty raksasas cupped their hands in reverence and replied to him: “Your 
majesty, we have a vast army, equipped with iron clubs, javelins, 
broadswords, lances, and spears. Why then do you give way to despair? 
Inflicting massive slaughter, you subjugated Kubera, bestower of wealth, 
who lives on the summit of Mount Kailasa, surrounded by many yaksas. 
Despite his boasting of his alliance with Mahesvara, you defeated, in your 
fury, that powerful world guardian in battle, lord. Slaughtering, baffling, or 


capturing the yaksa hosts, you took this flying palace from the summit of 
Mount Kailasa. 

[6-14] “Seeking an alliance in fear of you, the danava lord Maya gave 
you his daughter to be your wife, bull among radksasas. And you subdued 
and brought under your sway the unassailable danava lord Madhu, arrogant 
in his might, the bringer of joy to Kumbhinast. You went to the underworld 
known as Rasatala, great-armed hero, where you conquered the great 
serpents and brought Vasuki, Taksaka, Safnkha, and Jatin under your sway. 
Then again, lord, you waged war for a year against those powerful and 
indestructible danava heroes, with their powerful boons, and relying solely 
on your own might, brought them under your sway, tamer of your foes. And 
there you also acquired many powers of illusion, lord of the rdksasas. 
Moreover, great-armed warrior, you defeated in battle the heroic and mighty 
sons of Varuna, who were accompanied by the four divisions of their army. 
And, your majesty, you plunged into Yama’s host, a veritable ocean—with 
the rod of Mrtyu as its great crocodile and all studded with islands in the 
form of sa/mali trees—and you gained a great victory, warding off Mrtyu 
himself. All the worlds were pleased with your brilliant fighting there. This 
treasure-laden earth was once filled with as many heroic kshatriyas, Sakra’s 
equal in valor, as it is with mighty trees. 

[15-16] “This Raghava is no match for them in battle, whether in 
courage, virtues, or power, and yet, your majesty, you violently assaulted 
and slew them, virtually invincible though they were. Your majesty, it is 
unimaginable that any harm could come to you from such vulgar folk. You 
ought not entertain any such thought in your heart. You will certainly kill 
Raghava.” 


Sarga 8 
[1-5] Then the heroic raksasa general Prahasta, who looked like a dark 
storm cloud, cupped his hands in reverence and spoke these words: “Even 
the gods, danavas, gandharvas, pisacas, great birds, and mighty serpents 
are unable to withstand you in battle. What then of mere monkeys? All of 
us were negligent and overconfident, and thus Hanuman got the better of 
us. But that forest-ranging monkey will not escape with his life again, so 
long as I live. I shall rid the entire ocean-girdled earth—its mountains, 
woods, and forests included—of monkeys. Just command me, sir. And, 


night-roaming raksasa, I shall set a guard against that monkey, so that you 
shall suffer no harm whatever as a result of your transgression.” 

[6-8] Next a raksasa named Durmukha, in a towering rage, said, “This 
cannot be tolerated, for it is an attack upon us all! Moreover, this attack on 
the part of the monkey lord constituted an outrage against the city, the inner 
apartments, and the majestic lord of the raksasas himself. This very instant, 
I shall single-handedly repulse the monkeys, slaying them, even if they 
should seek refuge in the fearsome ocean, the sky, or the underworld known 
as Rasatala.” 

[9-11] Then, in a towering rage, powerful Vajradamstra spoke, seizing 
his dreadful iron club all smeared with flesh and blood: “Why do you 
concern yourself with this contemptible and miserable Hanuman, while the 
formidable Rama, Sugriva, and Laksmana are close at hand? This very day, 
with my iron club, I shall single-handedly kill Rama, together with Sugriva 
and Laksmana, and then return after routing the host of tawny monkeys.” 

[12-16] Then, in a towering rage, the mighty and heroic Nikumbha 
Kaumbhakarni addressed Ravana, who makes the worlds cry out: “All of 
you gentlemen can remain here in the company of our great king. I shall 
single-handedly kill Rama as well as Laksmana.” Next a rdksasa named 
Vajrahanu, who was like a mountain, licking his chops with his tongue, said 
these words in anger: “You gentlemen may go about your business as you 
like, free from care. I shall devour all those leaders of the troops of tawny 
monkeys by myself. You can amuse yourselves at your leisure, without a 
care, and drink honey-wine. I shall single-handedly kill Sugriva as well as 
Laksmana, Angada, Hanuman, and Rama, their leader in battle.” 


Sarga 9 
[1-6] Then the rdaksasas Nikumbha, Rabhasa, mighty Siiryasatru, 
Suptaghna, Yajiakopa, Mahaparsva, Mahodara, unassailable Agniketu, the 
rdksasa Rasmiketu, Indrajit—the mighty and immensely powerful son of 
Ravana—Prahasta, Virupaksa, the mighty Vajradamstra, Dhtmraksa, 
Atikaya, and the radksasa Durmukha, seizing iron clubs, spears, darts, 
javelins, lances, battle-axes, bows and arrows, and broad, sharp swords, all 
leapt to their feet in a towering rage and, as if blazing with their fierce 
energy, addressed Ravana: “This very day, we shall kill Rama, as well as 


Sugriva and Laksmana, and that contemptible Hanuman, who dared to 
assault Lanka.” 

[7-11] But Vibhisana stopped them as they all stood there, weapons in 
hand, and bade them be seated once again. Then, cupping his hands in 
reverence, he said these words: “The learned have prescribed as appropriate 
the use of force only on those occasions where one’s object cannot be 
achieved by means of the other three stratagems, dear brother. And, dear 
brother, the use of force, even when made judiciously and in accordance 
with the proper injunctions, succeeds only against those who are off guard, 
preoccupied, or stricken by misfortune. How then can you all hope to assail 
someone who is vigilant, intent upon victory, firm in his strength, the 
master of his anger, and utterly unassailable? Who could have imagined the 
impossible feat that Hanuman accomplished, leaping across the fearsome 
ocean, the lord of rivers and streams? 

[12-15] “By no means, night-roaming raksasas, should we rashly 
underestimate our foes; for their forces and valor are immeasurable. And 
what offense had Rama previously committed against the king of the 
rdksasas that the latter should have abducted that illustrious man’s wife 
from Janasthana? Even if Rama did kill Khara, who was attacking him, in 
battle, still, all living creatures must strive to the limit of their strength to 
save their own lives. ‘For this reason Vaidehi constitutes a grave danger to 
us. She who has been abducted must be surrendered. ‘There is no point in 
acting merely to provoke a quarrel. 

[16-19] “It would therefore not be appropriate for us to engage in 
pointless hostility with this powerful and righteous man. You must give 
Maithilt back to him. You must give Maithili back to him before, with his 
arrows, he lays waste to our city together with its elephants, its horses, and 
its myriad precious things. You must give back Sita before this vast, 
dreadful, and unassailable army of tawny monkeys storms our Lanka. If you 
do not of your own free will give back Rama’s beloved wife, the city of 
Lanka and all its valiant raksasas will surely perish. 

[20—22] “As your kinsman, I beseech you. Do as I say. What I am telling 
you 1s both salutary and beneficial. You must give Maithili back to him. 
You must give Maithilt back to Rama Dasaratha before he unleashes for 
your destruction his massive and unfailing arrows, newly tipped and 
fletched and resembling the rays of the autumnal sun. Give up your wrath, 


so destructive of both happiness and righteousness. Practice righteousness, 
which is conducive to pleasure and fame. Calm yourself, that we may 
survive together with our sons and kinsmen. You must give Maithili back to 
Dasaratha.” 


Sarga 10 

[1-5] Although Vibhisana had uttered these sound and beneficial words, 
Ravana, impelled as he was by his own impending doom, replied with harsh 
words: “One can live with one’s enemy, or even with an enraged venomous 
serpent, but never with a false friend in the service of one’s foes. I know 
very well the nature of kinsmen all the world over, raksasa. Kinsmen 
always take pleasure in one another’s hardships. If a man is a leader, 
competent, learned, righteous in his conduct, and valiant, raksasa, then his 
kinsmen will malign him and bring him down. Always affecting pleasure in 
one’s company, they turn on one in times of trouble. Concealing their true 
feelings, vicious kinsmen are a source of danger. 

[6-8] “There are these well-known verses that were sung once upon a 
time in the Padmavana by some elephants who had seen some men carrying 
ropes to snare them. Listen to them, as I recite them. ‘It is not the fire, the 
other weapons, or the ropes that put us in danger; it is our own vicious kin 
intent on their own self-interest that are the real danger to us. For no doubt, 
it is they who point out the means of capturing us; therefore, we know that 
the danger presented by one’s kin is the most severe of all.’ 

[9-11] “In cattle there is wealth; in a brahman, self-restraint. In women, 
there is fickleness; from kinsmen, danger. And that is why, dear brother, 
you cannot bear it, that I am respected throughout the worlds, that I have 
attained universal sovereignty, and that I have set my foot on the heads of 
my enemies. Anyone else, night-roaming raksasa, who had spoken such 
words as these, would have died that very moment. To hell with you, you 
disgrace to our family.” 

[12-16] Addressed in this fashion with harsh words, Vibhisana, who had 
spoken justly, flew up, mace in hand, along with four other raksasas. Then, 
hovering in midair, majestic Vibhisana, roused to anger, spoke these words 
to his brother, the lord of the raksasas: “You are my brother, your majesty. 
You can say whatever you like to me, but I will not stand for these false and 
abusive words of yours. Those who have lost all self-control and are already 


under the power of death never accept judicious advice uttered by one who 
wishes them well, ten-headed Ravana. It is always easy enough, your 
majesty, to find men who will say what will please you, but it is hard to find 
someone who will say or listen to what is unpleasant yet beneficial. 

[17-21] “But I could not ignore one who, like a burning house on the 
verge of destruction, was caught in the noose of Kala, which carries off all 
creatures. I would not like to see you slain by Rama with his sharp arrows, 
ornamented with gold and resembling blazing fires. For like dikes of sand, 
even mighty heroes skilled in weapons are destroyed in battle once they fall 
under the power of doom. So, by all means, take care of yourself and this 
city with all its raksasas. Farewell, I am leaving. May you be happy without 
me. Although I have tried to dissuade you, night-roaming rdksasa, in my 
desire for your well-being, my words have not found favor with you. For 
men whose time is at hand, whose lives are at an end, never accept the 
beneficial advice offered by their friends.” 


Sarga I] 

[1-5] The moment Ravana’s younger brother had finished speaking these 
harsh words to Ravana, he went to where Rama and Laksmana were. The 
monkey lords standing on the ground saw him there in the sky, resembling 
the peak of Mount Meru and blazing like lightning. When Sugriva, the wise 
and unassailable lord of the monkeys, had seen him and his four 
companions, he deliberated with the monkeys. Then, when they had 
deliberated for a while, he spoke these excellent words to all the monkeys, 
Hanuman and the rest: “Look! There can be no doubt that this raksasa 
armed with every weapon and accompanied by four rdaksasas 1s 
approaching in order to kill us.” 

[6-7] When they had heard Sugriva’s words, all those great monkeys 
picked up sd/a trees and boulders, and said these words: “Command us at 
once, your majesty, to kill these evil-minded creatures. Let them fall to the 
ground slain, their lives cut short.” 

[8-15] Now, as they were conversing with one another, Vibhisana 
reached the northern shore and hovered there in the sky. Seeing Sugriva and 
the other monkeys, great and wise Vibhisana, still hovering in the sky, 
addressed them in resounding tones: “The evil raksasa named Ravana is 
lord of the rdksasas. | am his younger brother, and I am known as 


Vibhisana. He abducted Sita from Janasthana after killing Jatayus. Now 
helpless and miserable, she is imprisoned and closely guarded by raksasa 
women. With various sound arguments, I repeatedly advised him: ‘You 
must return Sita to Rama straightaway.’ But although he was given good 
advice, Ravana, impelled by his own impending doom, would not accept it, 
any more than a dying man will take his medicine. He spoke bitter words to 
me and treated me contemptuously, as if I were a servant. Therefore, I have 
abandoned my wife and my sons, and I have come seeking refuge with 
Raghava. Please inform great Raghava, the refuge of all the worlds, at once 
that I, Vibhisana, have come to him for shelter.” 

[16—21] When he had heard these words, swift-striding Sugriva in the 
presence of Laksmana addressed Rama with great agitation. “The younger 
brother of Ravana, known as Vibhisana, along with four other raksasas, has 
come seeking refuge with you, sir. You must realize that Ravana has sent 
Vibhisana as a spy. You always know what is appropriate, but I think it 
would be appropriate to take him prisoner. Cloaking himself in deception, 
this raksasa comes seeking refuge with deceitful intent and with 
instructions to kill you, once he has gained your trust, Raghava. He should 
be put to death with harsh torture together with his ministers. For he is 
Vibhisana, the brother of cruel Ravana.” When, in his agitation, he had 
spoken in this fashion to eloquent Rama, the leader of the troops, himself 
skilled in speech, fell silent. 

[22-24] Upon hearing these words of Sugriva, powerful Rama said this 
to Hanuman and the rest of the tawny monkeys who stood near him. “What 
the king of the monkeys has said regarding Ravana’s younger brother is 
quite reasonable. You, sirs, have also heard it. When it comes to difficult 
matters, it is appropriate that one be advised by a friend who is intelligent, 
virtuous, capable, and eager for one’s long-term good fortune.” 

[25-28] Questioned in this fashion and desiring to act for the best, each 
of them gave Rama his own opinion diligently and courteously. “There is 
nothing in the three worlds that you do not know, Raghava. But Rama, out 
of friendship, you are questioning us in order to show us honor. You are 
faithful to your vows, heroic, righteous, and firm in valor. You act 
judiciously, are learned in traditional texts, and trust your friends 
wholeheartedly. Therefore, let your advisers, who are wise and capable, 
speak in turn on this matter giving various sound arguments.” 


[29-33] When they had spoken in this fashion, the tawny monkey wise 
Angada was the first to speak to Raghava concerning the interrogation of 
Vibhisana, saying: “Since Vibhisana has come to us from the enemy, he 
must be considered suspect in every way. By no means should we too 
hastily regard him as worthy of our trust. For treacherous people go about 
concealing their true intentions, only to strike when they find an 
opportunity. To trust him would be a great calamity. Only after reflecting on 
the advantages and disadvantages should one come to a decision. One 
should accept a person if he is virtuous, but if he is evil one should cast him 
out. If we find there to be a preponderance of evil in him, we should turn 
him away without hesitation. But if we should find a preponderance of 
virtue, then we ought to accept him, your majesty.” 

[3440] But then Sarabha, having reflected, said these sensible words: 
“You must send a spy to him at once, tiger among men. Only after we have 
dispatched a spy of subtle intellect, and he has conducted an investigation, 
would it be appropriate to accept Vibhisana.” But then wise Jambavan, after 
reflecting on the matter with an intellect steeped in the sadstras, 
communicated his view, which was filled with virtues and free from 
defects: “Vibhisana has come at the wrong time and to the wrong place 
from the wicked lord of the raksasas, who is resolute in his hostility. 
Therefore, he is, by all means, to be viewed with suspicion.” Next, Mainda, 
who was eloquent and adept in discerning good and bad policy, spoke, upon 
reflection, these exceedingly reasonable words: “This Vibhisana ought to be 
interrogated gently and gradually regarding what Ravana has to say, lord of 
kings. Once you have accurately determined his intentions, then, upon 
reflection, you can act according to whether he is good or evil, bull among 
men.” 

[41-46] Then the highly cultivated Hanuman, foremost of ministers, 
spoke the following speech, which was polished, meaningful, mellifluous, 
and concise: “Even Brhaspati himself is incapable of besting you in 
argument, sir, for you are superior in intellect, capable, and eloquent. Rama, 
it is not in order to demonstrate my skill in disputation, my desire to 
outshine the others, nor out of a wish to prove myself the best, or fondness 
for the sound of my own voice that I shall say the following truthful words. 
Rather, your majesty, it is because of the gravity of the situation. I see a 
serious problem in what your ministers have said regarding the advantages 


and disadvantages here: it is impossible to put it into practice. For, on the 
one hand, we cannot determine whether he is trustworthy unless we employ 
him, but, on the other hand, it seems to me that it would be a mistake to 
employ him too hastily. Now as to what your ministers said about the 
propriety of sending out spies, that strategy is unsuitable in this case, as it 
lacks any purpose. 

[47-51] “It has also been argued: ‘Vibhisana has come at the wrong time 
and to the wrong place.’ Now there is something I would like to say about 
this as well. Consider it from my perspective. This is precisely the right 
time and place. For him to have left an evil person to come over to a 
virtuous one, in light of their vices and virtues, respectively, that is, having 
perceived the wickedness in Ravana and the heroism in you, is perfectly 
appropriate and in keeping with his excellent judgment. Furthermore, it has 
been argued that he should be interrogated by undercover agents, your 
majesty. Here too, I can offer my considered opinion. Any intelligent person 
who is interrogated would immediately become suspicious of the questions. 
Thus, a welcome ally, if interrogated deceitfully, would be alienated. 

[52-59] “Moreover, your majesty, even for someone who is confident in 
his own ability, it is impossible immediately to determine the inner feelings 
of a stranger simply on the basis of what he says about himself. Still, at no 
time while he was speaking could one observe any signs of a wicked nature. 
His facial expression, moreover, was composed. For these reasons, I harbor 
no doubts about him. A deceitful person would not approach so confidently 
and without hesitation. Moreover, he is well spoken. For these reasons, one 
should harbor no doubts about him. It is impossible to conceal one’s facial 
expression completely, even if one tries. And it is this that inexorably 
betrays the hidden intentions of men. Moreover, foremost of those who 
know what action should be taken, an action that is undertaken promptly 
and energetically and that is appropriate to the time and place quickly 
brings success. He has witnessed your mighty undertaking and the 
vainglory of Ravana. He has also heard about the killing of Valin and the 
royal consecration of Sugriva. He seeks the kingship for himself, and, with 
this in mind, he has come here. Keeping all this foremost in mind, it would 
be appropriate to accept him. I have argued to the best of my ability that the 
raksasa 1s trustworthy. Having heard this, foremost among the wise, you 
must be the judge of what is to follow.” 


Sarga 12 

[1-3] Now, when Rama, his mind composed, had heard this speech of 
Hanuman, son of Vayu, that unassailable and learned man responded with 
his own thoughts: “I too have something to say with regard to Vibhisana 
that I would like you, devoted as you are to my welfare, to hear in its 
entirety. Under no circumstances would I turn away someone who had 
come to me in friendship, even if he had some flaw. For the virtuous would 
condemn such conduct.” 

[4-7] When Sugriva, lord of the leaping monkeys, had heard Rama 
Kakutstha’s words, he replied to him, motivated by friendship: “Knower of 
righteousness! Crest-jewel among kings! You are mighty and firmly 
established in the path of virtue. What wonder is it then that you should 
speak so nobly! Moreover, my heart knows that Vibhisana is virtuous, for 
he has been thoroughly investigated through inference and on the basis of 
his probable intentions. Therefore, Raghava, let the extremely wise 
Vibhisana at once become your ally on an equal basis with us.” 

[8-12] When Rama had heard these words of Sugriva and had 
considered them, he replied to that bull among the tawny monkeys in 
exceedingly beautiful words: “Whether this night-roaming raksasa be 
thoroughly evil or virtuous, is he not utterly incapable of causing me even 
the slightest harm? For, lord of the hosts of tawny monkeys, if I so desired, 
I could slaughter the pisacas, the danavas, the yaksas, and all the raksasas 
on earth with the tip of my finger. There is a well-known story about a dove 
that showed great hospitality to an enemy who had come seeking shelter. 
He even offered him his own flesh. And so, best of monkeys, even a dove 
took in his wife’s abductor who had come to him. How much more so 
should a person such as I? 

[13-17] “Now listen to these verses, conducive to righteousness, that 
were chanted long ago by the great and truthful seer Kandu, son of the seer 
Kanva: ‘For the sake of compassion, scorcher of your foes, one ought never 
slay a poor wretch who has come for refuge, begging for protection with his 
hands cupped in reverence, even should he be one’s enemy. Even at the cost 
of his own life, a magnanimous person should save an enemy who has 
come for refuge from his enemies, whether he be abject or arrogant. Should 
one fail to offer this protection to the best of one’s ability and the limits of 
one’s strength, whether through fear, confusion, or greed, that would be a 


sin condemned by all the world. Moreover, if a man who has come seeking 
refuge should die for want of protection while the person who could have 
saved him merely looks on, then the former would depart from this world 
taking with him the latter’s good works.’ 

[18—21] “Thus, it is a serious transgression to fail to protect those who 
come seeking shelter, for it blocks the path to heaven, destroys one’s 
reputation, and undermines one’s strength and valor. So I shall fully carry 
out Kandu’s excellent advice, for it is righteous, beneficial to one’s 
reputation, and, at the time of one’s final reward, it leads one to heaven. I 
always grant protection to all beings who come to me for shelter, imploring 
me with the words: ‘I place myself in your hands.’ Such is my vow. So 
bring him here, Sugriva, best of tawny monkeys, for I will grant him 
protection whether he be Vibhisana or Ravana himself.” 

[22] Then, having listened to the words of Sugriva, the lord of men 
quickly welcomed Vibhisana as he had been advised by the lord of the 
tawny monkeys, just as Indra, smasher of citadels, might welcome Garuda, 
the king of birds. 


Sarga 13 

[1-6] Once Raghava had granted him protection, Ravana’s younger brother, 
bowing humbly, descended from the sky to the earth in great delight 
accompanied by his devoted followers. Seeking refuge, righteous Vibhisana 
prostrated himself at Rama’s feet along with his four radksasa companions. 
Then Vibhisana addressed Rama with words that were righteous, fitting, 
timely, and delightful: “I am the younger brother of Ravana, but he has 
humiliated me. Thus I have come for refuge to you, sir, the refuge of all 
beings. I have abandoned Lanka, my friends, and everything I own. Now, 
my homeland, my life, and my happiness depend on you, sir. I shall help 
you kill the raksasas and assault Lanka so long as breath remains in my 
body, and I shall penetrate their forces.” 

[7-10] As Vibhisana was speaking in this fashion, Rama embraced him 
and, in great delight, said to Laksmana: “Bring some water from the ocean 
and, with it, anoint wise Vibhisana as king of the rdksasas at once, since I 
am so pleased with him, bestower of honor.” Addressed in this fashion, 
Saumitri, acting on Rama’s instructions, anointed Vibhisana as king there in 
the midst of the monkey leaders. When the leaping monkeys witnessed 


Rama’s graciousness, they suddenly began chattering loudly, crying, 
“Excellent! Excellent!” 

[11-12] Then Hanuman and Sugriva addressed Vibhisana, saying: “How 
are we to cross the ocean, the imperturbable abode of Varuna? Please tell us 
the means whereby all of us might approach the ocean, lord of streams and 
rivers, the abode of Varuna, so that we might quickly cross over together 
with our troops.” 

[13—14] When Vibhisana, who knew what was right, had been addressed 
in this fashion, he replied, saying: “King Raghava must solicit the help of 
Samudra. For it was Sagara who caused the great and immeasurable ocean 
to be dug; therefore, the great ocean ought to carry forward the mission of 
his kinsman Rama.” 

[15—18] When the wise raksasa Vibhisana had spoken in this fashion, 
Raghava, righteous by nature, found what he said to be agreeable. And 
immensely powerful and skillful Rama smiled and, in order to honor them, 
said this to Laksmana and Sugriva, the lord of the tawny monkeys: “This 
counsel of Vibhisana pleases me, Laksmana. Now, you, together with 
Sugriva, should tell me if it pleases you as well. Sugriva is always wise, and 
you yourself are skilled in counsel. The two of you should consider this 
matter and tell me what pleases you.” 

[19-23] Addressed in this fashion, the two heroes, Sugriva and 
Laksmana, responded with these courteous words: “Why, tiger among men, 
would the advice of Vibhisana not please us? For, at this moment, it seems 
the most feasible plan, Raghava. Without constructing a bridge across the 
fearsome ocean, the abode of Varuna, even the gods and asuras themselves, 
accompanied by Indra, would be incapable of reaching Lanka. We should 
properly carry out the advice of the heroic Vibhisana. Enough of this delay. 
You should petition Samudra.” When Rama had been addressed in this 
fashion, he sat down on a bed of kusa grass that had been spread on the 
shore of the ocean, lord of streams and rivers, like fire, eater of oblations, 
installed upon an altar. 


Sarga 14 
[1-3] Three nights passed and still Rama, keeping strictly to his vow, lay 
there on a bed of kusa grass spread on the ground. But although Rama had 
worshiped him attentively and properly, Sagara, being obdurate, would not 


manifest himself. Then Rama, the corners of his eyes red in his rage at 
Samudra, said these words to Laksmana of auspicious marks, who stood 
nearby: 

[4—7] “Laksmana, just see the arrogance of this ignoble Samudra, who 
will not manifest himself, even though I have worshiped him. The virtues of 
the good—calmness, forbearance, straightforwardness, and kind words— 
are always taken for signs of weakness by those who lack them. People 
only respect an evil, insolent person who runs about praising himself and 
unleashing violence on everyone. Peaceful means can no more lead to fame 
or glory in this world, Laksmana, than they can to victory in the vanguard 
of battle. 

[8—13] “Now, Saumitri, you shall see the ocean, abode of sea monsters, 
with its waters choked with the dead bodies of those very creatures pierced 
by my arrows and floating everywhere. Here and now, Laksmana, you shall 
see me cut to pieces the bodies of gigantic fish, the trunks of sea elephants, 
and the coils of great serpents. Now, launching a powerful assault, I shall 
with my arrows dry up the ocean together with its fish and sea monsters and 
its masses of conch and oyster shells. This lord of the ocean, abode of sea 
monsters, thinks that, because I am endowed with forbearance, I am weak. 
To hell with forbearance for people like this! Fetch my bow, Saumitri, and 
my arrows, which are like venomous serpents, for now in my fury I shall 
convulse the imperturbable ocean. With my arrows, I shall cause the wave- 
crested ocean, the abode of Varuna, which always keeps within its bounds, 
to overflow them violently.” 

[14—17] When he had spoken in this fashion, unassailable Rama, bow in 
hand and eyes flashing with anger, resembled the blazing fire at the end of a 
cosmic era. Bending his fearsome bow, he made the world quake with his 
arrows. He let fly his dreadful shafts as does Indra, of the hundred 
sacrifices, his vajras. Blazing with energy, those swift and excellent arrows 
plunged into the waters of the sea, terrifying its great serpents. Then, along 
with a howling gale, there arose a huge and terrifying surge of the ocean, 
carrying with it sharks and sea monsters. 

[18-21] All at once the ocean was covered with garlands of towering 
waves and filled with conch and oyster shells, its waves shrouded in a 
vaporous haze. Great serpents and the immensely powerful danavas, who 
dwell in the underworld known as Patala, were in agony, flames shooting 


from their mouths and eyes. Suddenly from the ocean, king of rivers, there 
arose thousands of waves as tall as the Vindhya or Mandara mountains and 
filled with sharks and sea monsters. Such was the state of the ocean, the 
repository of all waters: its masses of waves were swirling, its raksasas and 
great serpents were terrified, and its huge crocodiles were tossed about. 


Sarga 15 
[1-2] Then Samudra Sagara himself arose from the midst of the sea. Rising 
together with great serpents, flames shooting from their mouths, he 
resembled the sun, maker of day, rising from the great mountain Meru. His 
complexion was that of polished lapis, and he was adorned with jambunada 
gold. His garlands and robes were red and his eyes were like lotus petals. 

[3-9] Mighty Sagara first hailed Raghava, who stood arrow in hand. 
Then, cupping his hands in reverence, he approached and said: “All the 
elements, gentle Raghava—earth, air, ether, water, and fire—must abide by 
their respective natures. They must follow the eternal path. It is thus my 
inherent nature to be fathomless and impossible to cross. I tell you that it 
would violate that nature for me to become shallow. Nor would I for any 
reason, prince, whether desire, greed, or fear, make solid my waters, 
abounding with crocodiles and sharks. I shall, however, devise some means 
that I can tolerate whereby the sea monsters will not attack while the army 
is crossing, Rama. Here, gentle Rama, is the majestic son of Visvakarman, 
Nala by name. He is the equal of Visvakarman and has been granted a boon 
by his father. This highly energetic monkey must construct a bridge over 
me. I shall support it, for he 1s just like his father.” 

[10-13] When the ocean, that receptacle of waters, had spoken in this 
fashion, he vanished. Then the mighty Nala, foremost among the monkeys, 
stood up and said these words to Rama: “The ocean, that great receptacle of 
waters, has told you the truth. Relying upon my father’s skill, I shall build a 
bridge across the wide ocean, abode of Varuna. Once, on Mount Mandara, 
Visvakarman granted my mother a boon. I am the equal of Visvakarman, 
for I am his flesh-and-blood son. But I could not proclaim my own virtues 
without being called upon. Very well, let the bulls among monkeys 
construct a bridge this very day.” 

[14-19] Then, with Rama’s permission, all the leaders of the troops of 
tawny monkeys rushed excitedly into the great forest by the hundreds and 


the thousands. There those monkeys, bulls among the hosts of tree-dwelling 
monkeys, resembling mountains, broke down trees and dragged them to the 
sea. The monkeys filled the sea with bamboo and sala, asvakarna, dhava, 
kutaja, arjuna, tdla, tilaka, timisa, bilvaka, saptaparna, flowering 
karnikara, mango, and asoka trees. Holding aloft those tree trunks, with and 
without their roots, like so many flagstaffs of Indra, the foremost among the 
tawny monkeys carried off the trees. Heaved up violently by the boulders 
hurled into it, the water rose into the sky and cascaded down on all sides. 

[20-26] Nala constructed a great bridge, ten leagues in width and one 
hundred in length, right through the middle of the ocean, lord of rivers and 
streams. Then, in the ocean, the great receptacle of waters, there arose a 
tumultuous sound from the boulders being hurled into it and the mountains 
being cast down. The bridge that Nala constructed over the ocean, abode of 
sea monsters, was as majestic and splendid as the path of the constellation 
Svat through the heavens. Then the gods, gandharvas, perfected beings, 
and supreme seers gathered and hovered in the sky, eager to witness that 
marvel. The leaping monkeys were bounding, bellowing, and leaping. All 
beings gazed upon that inconceivable, seemingly impossible, and hair- 
raising marvel: the building of a bridge over the ocean. And so, 
constructing that bridge over the sea, those hundreds of billions of 
immensely powerful monkeys reached the farther shore of the ocean, the 
great receptacle of the waters. Broad, well-built, majestic, smooth-surfaced, 
and beautifully proportioned, the great bridge resembled a dividing line in 
the midst of the ocean. 

[27-33] Then, mace in hand, Vibhisana, together with his ministers, took 
up his position on the farther shore of the sea in order to ward off the 
enemy. Carrying his bow, righteous and majestic Rama marched at the head 
of the army, accompanied by Sugriva. Some of the leaping monkeys 
marched down the center of the bridge, while others moved along the 
edges; some dove into the water, while others could find no space in which 
to march. Still others, moving through the sky, flew like great birds. As it 
crossed, the terrifying army of tawny monkeys drowned out with its loud 
roar the terrifying roar rising from the ocean. Once the army of monkeys 
had crossed by means of Nala’s bridge, it made camp, together with its 
king, on the shore in a spot well provided with roots, fruits, and fresh water. 
When the gods, along with the perfected beings and celestial bards, had 


witnessed that marvelous and seemingly impossible feat of Rama Raghava, 
they approached him in the company of the great seers and anointed him, 
one after the other, with holy water, saying, “May you conquer your 
enemies, lord of men, and long may you rule the earth and the seas.” With 
various auspicious blessings such as this, they did homage to Rama, who 
was honored by gods and men. 


Sarga 16 

[1-8] When Rama, the son of Dasaratha, had crossed the ocean with his 
army, majestic Ravana addressed two of his ministers, Suka and Sarana: “A 
whole host of monkeys has crossed the impassable ocean, and Rama has 
done something unprecedented in building a bridge across the sea. I would 
never have believed that a bridge could be built over the ocean. 
Nonetheless, I must now obtain an accurate count of the monkey army. You 
two gentlemen must infiltrate the monkey army undetected. There you must 
accurately determine its size and strength, who the leaders of the leaping 
monkeys are, which counselors are most highly regarded by Rama and 
Sugriva, which ones lead the way, and which of the leaping monkeys are 
truly heroic. You must also find out how the bridge was constructed over 
the ocean, that great body of water, and how the great monkeys are 
bivouacked. In addition, you must determine the resolve, strength, and 
weaponry of Rama and heroic Laksmana. Who is the commander of these 
immensely powerful monkeys? When you have accurately determined all of 
this, you must return swiftly.” 

[9-12] When Suka and Sarana had been instructed in this fashion, those 
two heroic raksasas took on the form of tawny monkeys and infiltrated the 
monkey army. But Suka and Sarana were unable to count that hair-raising 
and inconceivably vast host of monkeys. For it filled the mountaintops, 
caverns, and caves, as well as the shores of the sea, the forests, and the 
parklands. On every side that vast army was raising a terrifying din. Part of 
it was crossing the ocean, part had already crossed, while yet another part 
remained anxious to do so. Part had already made camp, while another was 
in the process of doing so. 

[13-15] Then immensely powerful Vibhisana recognized Suka and 
Sarana, even though they were disguised. He seized them and then reported 
to Rama, saying, “Conqueror of enemy citadels, two spies have come from 


Lanka.” When they saw Rama, they began to tremble and despaired of their 
lives. Terrified, cupping their hands in supplication, they addressed him 
with these words: “The two of us have come here, kind sir, delight of the 
Raghus, because we were dispatched by Ravana in order to gather 
intelligence about your entire army.” 

[16—21] When DasSaratha’s son Rama, who was devoted to the welfare of 
all beings, had heard this speech of theirs, he smiled and said these words: 
“If you have finished inspecting the entire army and have carefully 
examined us, and if you have carried out your mission as you were 
instructed, then you may return as you please. And you two must enter the 
city of Lanka and there address these words of mine exactly as I tell you to 
the king of the raksasas, younger brother of Kubera, the bestower of 
wealth. ‘Now, together with your army and your kinsmen, you may 
demonstrate as you please the valor on which you relied when you carried 
off my Sita. But tomorrow at the proper moment you shall see the city of 
Lanka, along with its gates and ramparts as well as the raksasa army, 
destroyed by me with my arrows. Muster your forces, Ravana! For 
tomorrow at the proper moment I shall unleash my dreadful wrath upon 
you, just as Vasava, the wielder of the vajra, did upon the danavas.’ ” 

[22-29] When Suka and Sarana had been instructed in this fashion, the 
two rdksasas returned to the city of Lanka and addressed the lord of the 
raksasas: “Lord of the raksasas, we were captured by Vibhisana, and, 
although we deserved to die, righteous Rama of immeasurable power 
released us the moment he saw us. Those four bulls among warriors— 
majestic Rama Dasarathi, Laksmana, Vibhisana, and the powerful Sugriva, 
whose valor equals that of great Indra—are as heroic, skilled in weaponry, 
and firm in their valor as the divine guardians of the worlds. Since they are 
assembled in one place, they themselves are capable of uprooting the city of 
Lanka with its ramparts and gates and hurling it far away, even without all 
these monkeys. Rama’s appearance and weapons are such that he will be 
able to lay waste the city of Lanka all by himself, even without those other 
three. And the army, protected by Rama, Laksmana, and Sugriva, seemed as 
if it were completely unassailable even by all the gods and asuras. 
Moreover, this army consists of great forest-dwelling monkeys, who are 
wildly excited and eager for battle. So enough of this hostility! You must 
make peace. You must return Maithili to DaSaratha’s son.” 


Sarga 17 
[1-3] When King Ravana had heard the sound words that Sarana had 
courageously uttered, he replied to him: “Even if the gods, gandharvas, and 
danavas should assault me, I would not give up Sita, not for fear of all the 
worlds. Now you, my good man, are terrified because the tawny monkeys 
got the better of you. So now you think it would be best to give back Sita. 
But what rival can possibly get the better of me in battle?” 

[4-8] When majestic Ravana, lord of the raksasas, had uttered these 
harsh words, he ascended to the top of his snow-white palace, many ¢dlas in 
height, in his desire to see for himself. Accompanied by his two spies, 
Ravana, beside himself with rage, gazed about him at the ocean, the 
mountains, and the forests and saw that the land was completely covered 
with leaping monkeys. As King Ravana gazed upon that vast army of 
monkeys, boundless and innumerable, he questioned Sarana: “Which 
among these monkey leaders are heroic? Which are very powerful? Which 
ones, filled with great energy, always lead the way in battle? Which ones’ 
advice does Sugriva heed? And who are the leaders of the troop leaders? 
You must tell me all of this, Sarana. Who are the leaders of the leaping 
monkeys?” 

[9-15] Upon hearing these words of the rdksasa lord, who was 
questioning him, Sarana, familiar with the leaders of the forest-dwelling 
monkeys, began to describe them. “That monkey who stands bellowing 
before Lanka, surrounded by a hundred thousand troop leaders, and whose 
mighty roaring makes all of Lanka with its ramparts and gateways, its 
mountains, forests, and groves tremble, is the heroic troop leader named 
Nila. He stands at the head of the army of great Sugriva, lord of all the tree- 
dwelling monkeys. That powerful one, stretching out his forelegs and 
stalking the earth on his hind legs, ever showing his fangs toward Lanka in 
his rage, the one who resembles a mountain peak, who 1s the color of lotus 
filaments, and who, furious, lashes his tail repeatedly, the sound of which 
makes, so it seems, the ten directions resound, he is known as Angada, and 
he has been consecrated crown prince by the monkey king Sugriva. He is 
summoning you to battle. 

[16-19] “And those bulls among tawny monkeys who are bracing their 
limbs, roaring and bellowing, leaping up and showing their fangs in rage 
are dreadful, fierce, of fierce valor, and impossible to withstand. Their 


number is ten billion eight hundred thousand. They are the heroic denizens 
of the sandalwood forest. The one whom they follow is the powerful silver- 
hued Sveta. Dreadful in his valor, he is eager for battle and expects to crush 
Lanka with his own forces. This wise and heroic monkey is famed 
throughout the three worlds. 

[20-24] “After reporting to Sugriva, that monkey is now moving swiftly 
to marshal the monkey army, urging his troops onward. And that monkey, 
who used to roam the charming mountain on the banks of the Gomati, 
Mount Samkocana, covered with every sort of tree, is the troop leader 
called Kumuda. He once ruled a kingdom there. And that one, over there, 
commanding one hundred million troops, the fur on whose long tail—tred, 
yellow, black, and white—sticks out so far in all directions, is the 
mettlesome and furious Canda, dreadful in his actions. He is eager for battle 
and expects to crush Lanka with his own forces. 

[25-27] “And the tawny one with the long mane over there, your 
majesty, who looks like a lion and glares fixedly at Lanka as if to scorch it 
with his gaze is the troop leader named Rambha, who always haunts the 
Vindhya, Krsnagiri, and the beautiful Sahya mountains. Three billion 
leaders of the troops of tawny monkeys follow him as his entourage in order 
to crush Lanka with their tremendous power. 

[28-30] “And that one, pricking up his ears and showing his fangs again 
and again, is the fearless and immensely powerful troop leader Sarabha. He 
has no fear of death and never flees an opposing host. He, your majesty, 
haunts the charming Salveya mountains. He commands a full four million 
powerful troop leaders, known as the Viharas, your majesty. 

[31-34] “Now, that huge one standing in the midst of monkey heroes, 
like Vasava in the midst of the gods, who seems to block out the sky like a 
storm cloud, is Panasa, the terrifying troop leader of the tree-dwelling 
monkey lords, who are eager for battle. One can hear his mighty bellowing 
like the roaring of bheri drums, and none can withstand him in battle. He 
dwells on that splendid mountain Pariyatra. Five million troop leaders, each 
with his separate troop, form the entourage of that leader among troop 
leaders. 

[35—40] “The one who stands there like a second Sagara as an ornament 
to the fearsome and surging army encamped upon the seashore and who 
resembles Mount Dardara is the troop leader Vinata. He roams about 


drinking from the river Parnasa, foremost of rivers. His army consists of six 
million leaping monkeys. The one challenging you to battle is the troop 
leader Krathana. The one who is the color of red clay is the powerful 
monkey known as Gavaya. Expanding his body, he advances toward you in 
a rage. His entourage consists of seven million, and he expects to crush 
Lanka with his own forces. These, then, are the dreadful and powerful troop 
leaders and leaders of troop leaders whom none can withstand. They are 
numberless and can take on any form at will.” 


Sarga 18 

[1-5] “And now, as you survey them, I shall describe to you those troop 
leaders, who will engage in acts of valor, risking their lives for Raghava’s 
sake. The one on whose tail the glossy, bristling fur—red, yellow, black, 
and white, glistening like the rays of the sun—sticks out so far in all 
directions as it drags across the ground, is the troop leader called Hara, 
dreadful in his actions. Hundreds and thousands follow in his train, 
wielding trees. Banding together, they are intent upon scaling the ramparts 
of Lanka. Together with his ten billion immensely powerful monkeys, he is 
eager to defeat you in battle, conqueror of enemy citadels. 

[6-8] “The heroes you see standing before you, like great black clouds, 
dark as collyrium, of true valor in battle, and, with claws and fangs for 
weapons, are terrifying and fierce in their anger. As numberless and 
indistinguishable as grains of sand on the far shore of the sea, they are 
utterly savage apes, denizens of the mountains, hill country, and rivers, your 
majesty. They are advancing toward you. 

[9-15] “That one, with the dreadful eyes and fearsome looks, your 
majesty, is the lord of all the apes, the troop leader Dhumra. Standing in 
their midst, he looks like Parjanya surrounded on all sides by storm clouds. 
He dwells on that foremost of mountains Rksavant, where he drinks the 
waters of the Narmada. And there, as huge as a mountain, is his younger 
brother, the great troop leader among troop leaders, Jambavan. He looks 
just like his brother but surpasses him in valor. Although peaceful by nature 
and obedient to his superiors, he is unyielding in battle. Wise Jambavan 
rendered great assistance to Sakra during the wars of the gods and asuras 
and has thus received many boons. In his army there are many enormous, 
shaggy apes of fiery energy, who resemble raksasas and pisdcas and have 


no fear of death. They scale the mountain peaks and hurl down boulders as 
vast as huge clouds. 

[16—20cd] “And standing there, watched by all the monkeys, is that 
troop leader among troop leaders, your majesty, the mighty lord of the 
tawny monkeys Rambha, who with his troops serves thousand-eyed Indra. 
Although he is standing still, in his eagerness that troop leader appears to be 
leaping about. And that one who, when he moves, rubs his flanks against a 
mountain standing a league away and who, when he stretches his body 
upward, reaches a league in height, is known as Samnadana, the grandfather 
of the monkeys. His form is unsurpassed among creatures that move on four 
feet. This wise troop leader among troop leaders once fought a battle with 
Sakra himself and yet was not defeated. 

[20ef—24] “Now that one, whose valor when he goes forth in battle is the 
equal of Sakra’s, is the troop leader Krathana, who never boasts on the 
battlefield. He was fathered long ago by Agni of the black path on a 
gandharva maiden in order to assist the gods, the inhabitants of heaven, in 
their wars with the asuras. This majestic and powerful bull among monkeys 
dwells on the king of lordly mountains—frequented by many kinnaras— 
which always serves as the delightful pleasure garden of your brother, King 
Kubera Vaisravana, and on which he disports himself among jambi trees, O 
lord of the raksasas. He has come here surrounded by ten billion tawny 
monkeys. He is eager for battle and expects to crush Lanka with his own 
forces. 

[25—28] “And the one upon whom ten million attend is the troop leader 
Pramathin, your majesty, impossible to withstand. Keeping in mind the 
ancient hostility between the elephants and monkeys, he haunts the banks of 
the Ganges, terrifying the leaders of the elephant herds. As troop leader, 
commander, and general of the tawny monkeys, he moves along the Ganges 
River, the daughter of the Himalaya, sleeping in mountain caves. Resorting 
to Mount Usirabija, the equal of Mount Mandara, that foremost of monkeys 
takes his pleasure, as does Sakra himself in heaven. 

[29-31] “And what you see there, like a cloud raised by the wind, where 
that great column of dust is swirling copiously, are the dreadful and 
immensely powerful black-faced langurs. Having witnessed the 
construction of the bridge, ten million of them follow their troop leader, the 


swift langur Gavaksa, as his entourage in order to crush Lanka with their 
tremendous power. 

[32-34] “And there, your majesty, is the foremost among the foremost 
monkeys, the troop leader Kesarin, who disports himself on the lovely 
golden mountain whose peaks the great seers never abandon. It is there 
where the trees, swarming with bees, bear fruit to gratify every desire. He 
roams about that mountain, the color of which is equal to that of the sun and 
through the radiance of which the beasts and birds take on that color. 

[35-38] “Of the sixty thousand mountains, the most beautiful are the 
golden mountains. This foremost of mountains stands among them, as do 
you, blameless one, among the rdksasas. These monkeys—tawny, white, 
red-faced, honey-yellow—with sharp fangs and claws for weapons, dwell 
on that highest of mountains. Like lions with their four great fangs, as 
unassailable as tigers, they are all as fierce as Agni Vaisvanara or like 
venomous serpents inflamed with anger. With their long tails arching 
upward, they resemble rutting elephants. They look like huge mountains, 
and their roar is like that of mighty storm clouds. 

[39-42] “Their mighty commander, standing there in their midst, is 
renowned throughout the earth, your majesty, by the name Satabalin. He is 
eager for battle and expects to crush Lanka with his own forces. And there 
are Gaja, Gavaksa, Gavaya, Nala, and the monkey Nila, each of them 
surrounded by one hundred million troops. And there are yet other swift and 
formidable monkeys, inhabitants of the Vindhya mountains, who because of 
their vast numbers are impossible to count. All of them, your majesty, are 
enormously powerful. All of them possess bodies that resemble huge 
mountains. All of them are capable of instantly covering the earth with the 
mountains they have shattered.” 


Sarga 19 
[1-5] Then, after Suka had listened to Sarana’s speech, he looked out over 
the whole army and addressed these words to Ravana, lord of the raksasas: 
“Those monkeys—resembling great rutting elephants, banyan trees along 
the Ganges, or sala trees in the Himalayas—whom you see taking up their 
positions are powerful and impossible to withstand, your majesty. They can 
take on any form at will, and they are like the daityas and the danavas. 
Their valor is that of the gods in battle. There are tens of billions of them— 


times nine, times five, and times seven, and there are quadrillions and 
septillions more. They are Sugriva’s followers and Kiskindha is their home. 
They are tawny monkeys born of the gods and gandharvas, and they are 
able to take on any form at will. 

[6-8] “Those two youthful monkeys whom you see standing there 
looking like gods are Mainda and Dvivida. No one is their equal in battle. 
With Brahma’s blessing they have partaken of the nectar of immortality, 
and they thus expect to crush Lanka with their tremendous power in battle. 
And those two whom you see standing beside them, looking like mountains, 
are Sumukha and Vimukha. They are the sons of Mrtyu, and they are just 
like their father. 

[9-17] “Now the monkey you see standing over there, like an elephant in 
rut, is the same one who has already come to Lanka and sought out Vaideht 
and yourself, lord. Look at him! You have seen this monkey before, and he 
has now returned. If angered, he could make the ocean itself tremble with 
his strength. He is the eldest son of Kesarin, but he is called the son of the 
wind god. He is known as Hanuman, and it is he who leapt over the ocean. 
Foremost among tawny monkeys, he is endowed with strength and beauty 
and can take on any form at will. His advance can no more be checked than 
that of the ever-moving lord, the wind god. They say that once, when he 
was a child, he grew hungry and, seeing the sun, bringer of light, rising, he 
swooped down a distance of three thousand leagues, thinking in the 
arrogance of his strength, ‘I shall devour the sun, so that my hunger shall 
not return.’ But failing to reach that divinity, who is beyond the reach of 
even the gods, seers, and danavas, he fell upon the mountain from behind 
which the sun, bringer of light, rises. One of that monkey’s jaws was 
slightly broken as he fell on the stone surface. And since this toughened his 
jaw [hanu], he came to be known as Hanuman, ‘He of the Powerful Jaw.’ I 
can accurately identify this tawny monkey on the basis of this authoritative 
account. His strength, beauty, and power are impossible to describe. With 
his tremendous power, he expects to crush Lanka all by himself. 

[18-21] “And the dark, lotus-eyed hero next to him is Rama, the great 
chariot-warrior of the Iksvakus, famed for his valor throughout the world. 
His righteousness never wavers, nor does he ever transgress it. Foremost 
among those who know the vedas, he knows the vedas and Brahma’s divine 
weapon-spell as well. With his arrows he might rend the heavens and 


shatter the mountains. His wrath is like that of Mrtyu, and his valor like that 
of Sakra. Sita, whom you abducted from Janasthana, is his wife; and so, 
your majesty, he is advancing upon you in order to give battle. 

[22-25] “And standing to his nght—the one with a complexion as 
radiant as pure jambunada gold, a broad chest, reddened eyes, and dark, 
curling hair—is his brother Laksmana, as dear to him as life itself. He is 
skillful in statecraft and in battle, and he is adept in all the sdstras. 
Implacable, invincible, victorious, valorous, intelligent, and powerful, he is 
Rama’s right arm, like another life breath constantly moving outside his 
body. He would give his own life for Raghava’s sake, and he expects to 
slaughter all the raksasas in battle. 

[26-34] “And the one standing on Rama’s left, surrounded by a group of 
rdaksasas, is none other than King Vibhisana. He was consecrated as king of 
Lanka by the majestic king of kings. And in his rage, he too is advancing 
toward you for battle. The one whom you see standing in their midst, as 
unshakable as a mountain, is Sugriva, the unconquered lord of all the 
leaders of the tree-dwelling monkeys. In power, glory, intelligence, 
knowledge, and lineage, he outshines the other monkeys, as does Himalaya 
all other mountains. With his principal troop leaders, he dwells in the 
densely forested and inaccessible cavern Kiskindha, which is hidden in a 
mountain fastness. He is the one whose necklace of a hundred golden 
lotuses shines so brightly; for Laksmi herself, coveted by gods and men, 
resides in it. Sugriva acquired that necklace along with Tara and the 
everlasting kingship of the monkeys through Rama, who had slain Valin. 
And thus Sugriva, the lord of the monkeys, is advancing upon you for battle 
accompanied by one hundred trillion, ten billion troops. Now that you have 
seen this army that has come here like some baleful planet, your majesty, 
you must exert yourself to the utmost so that you may be victorious and not 
suffer defeat at the hands of your enemies.” 


Sarga 20 
[1-4] Ravana looked out upon the leaders of the troops of tawny monkeys. 
He saw Vibhisana—his own brother—standing at Rama’s side, immensely 
powerful Laksmana, the right arm of Rama, and Sugriva of terrifying valor, 
the king of all the monkeys, just as they had been described by Suka. He 
was somewhat shaken at heart, yet, flaring up with anger, he reviled the 


heroic Suka and Sarana when they had finished their report. Enraged, his 
voice choked with anger, he spoke harsh words to Suka and Sarana, who 
stood there humbly, hanging their heads. 

[S—12] “It is utterly inappropriate for a king’s ministers, dependents after 
all, to utter words that are displeasing to him when he is able to punish or 
imprison them. How fitting it is that the two of you should at so 
inopportune a moment heap praises upon my enemies who have approached 
in such a menacing fashion to make war upon me! Clearly your attendance 
upon your teachers, parents, and elders was to no purpose, since you have 
failed to learn the essence of the science of politics, which should govern 
your conduct. Or even if you had once learned it, you failed to fully 
comprehend it. You carry your education as mere mental baggage. With 
imbeciles such as you for ministers, it is only through sheer luck that I have 
retained my hold on the kingdom. Have you no fear of death that you say 
such harsh words to me, your sovereign, whose tongue metes out rewards 
and punishments? Trees touched by a forest fire may survive, but those 
whose offenses have incurred the wrath of the king cannot. I would have 
slain you two wretches, who dare to praise my enemies, had not my rage 
been softened by your previous acts of service. Go! Get out of my sight! 
Remembering your past acts of service, I do not wish to kill you. 
Nevertheless, you two ingrates, who have turned away from my affections, 
are as good as dead to me.” 

[13-19] When Suka and Sarana had been addressed in this fashion, they 
were humiliated. Then, saluting Ravana with invocations of victory, they 
withdrew. Next, ten-necked Ravana spoke to Mahodara, who stood near 
him, saying, “Hurry up and get me some spies who really understand the 
science of politics.” Then spies, hastening at the king’s command, 
approached him. They attended upon him with hands cupped in reverence, 
glorifying him with blessings of victory. Ravana, lord of the raksasas, then 
addressed these words to those spies, who were reliable, heroic, devoted, 
and utterly fearless: “Go forth from here and find out Rama’s plans. Find 
out also who have allied themselves with him out of affection and are privy 
to his counsel. When does he sleep? When does he wake? What else is he 
planning to do? Come back when you have ascertained all of this accurately 
and completely. For an enemy whose intentions are discovered by a spy is 
easily attacked and destroyed in battle by clever kings.” 


[20—24] Enthusiastically saying, “So be it,” to the lord of the raksasas, 
the spies reverently circumambulated him and went off to where Rama and 
Laksmana were. Departing, they concealed themselves near Mount Suvela, 
where they spied upon Rama and Laksmana, who were in the company of 
Sugriva and Vibhisana. But as it happened, the rdksasas who were there 
were spotted by Vibhisana, the righteous lord of the raksasas, and captured. 
Beaten by swift and valorous monkeys, they returned to Lanka, dazed and 
breathing hard. Then, approaching ten-necked Ravana, those mighty night- 
roaming raksasas, spies accustomed to serving in foreign lands, reported to 
him regarding the terrifying army encamped near Mount Suvela. 


Sarga 21 
[1-3] Then the spies informed the lord of Lanka that Raghava, along with 
an unassailable army, was encamped near Mount Suvela. When Ravana had 
heard from his spies that Rama had come with a vast army, he became 
somewhat agitated, and he spoke these words to Sardiila: “You look pale, 
night-roaming rdksasa, and you seem despondent. You haven’t by any 
chance fallen into the clutches of our enraged enemies?” 

[4-10] Questioned in this fashion, Sardiila, stupefied with fear, faintly 
spoke these words to that tiger among rdksasas: “It is impossible to spy 
upon those bulls among monkeys, your majesty. For they are valiant, 
powerful, and under the protection of Raghava. It is impossible even to 
speak with them. There is no question of interrogating them. For the paths 
on every side are guarded by monkeys the size of mountains. The moment I 
entered, I was recognized. Before I even had a chance to observe the army, I 
was violently seized by many monkeys and badly wounded. Fiercely 
pummeled with knees, fists, teeth, and palms, I was paraded about by those 
tawny monkeys, who are both powerful and relentless. When I had been 
paraded all around, I was taken to Rama’s headquarters, stupefied, my 
senses reeling, my entire body covered with blood. Belabored by the tawny 
monkeys and pleading with my hands cupped in supplication, I was spared 
by Raghava. Truly, I am lucky to be alive. 

[11-13] “Rama has filled in the vast ocean with mountains and boulders 
and now stands at the very gates of Lanka, heavily armed. After releasing 
me, that immensely powerful warrior arranged his troops in the garuda 
formation, and now, completely surrounded by tawny monkeys, he is 


advancing on Lanka. Soon he will reach the outer walls, and so you must 
quickly do one of two things: you must either return Sita to him at once or 
offer fierce battle.” 

[14-18] When Ravana, lord of the raksasas, had heard those grave 
words of Sardila, he was stricken at heart, but he replied: “Even if the gods, 
gandharvas, and danavas should assault me, I would not give up Sita, not 
for fear of all the worlds.” Having spoken in this fashion, the immensely 
powerful Ravana continued speaking: “You, sir, have spied upon this army. 
Which of the leaping monkeys in it are truly heroes? What are they like? 
What are the powers of these unassailable monkeys? Whose sons and 
grandsons are they? Tell me truthfully, raksasa. Once I know their strengths 
and weaknesses, I shall take appropriate action. A person wishing to engage 
in battle must first take account of the opposing forces.” 

[19-23] When the chief spy, Sardiila, had been addressed in this fashion 
by Ravana, he began to speak the following words in Ravana’s presence: 
“To begin with, your majesty, there is the son—utterly invincible in battle— 
of Rksarajas. Then there is Jambavan, the renowned son of Gadgada. There 
is also the other son of Gadgada. And in addition, there is the son of the 
guru of Indra of the hundred sacrifices. It is his son who single-handedly 
slaughtered the raksasas. Then there is righteous and powerful Susena, the 
son of Dharma, and, your majesty, the gracious monkey Dadhimukha, the 
son of Soma. Then there are Sumukha, Durmukha, and the monkey 
Vegadarsin. Surely self-existent Brahma created death in the form of these 
monkeys. 

[24—29] “General Nila over there is himself the son of Agni, bearer of 
oblations, and the son of Anila, over here, is famed as Hanuman. That 
young, powerful, and unassailable Afigada is the grandson of Sakra, while 
powerful Mainda and Dvivida are both sons of the Asvins. Those five sons 
of Vaivasvata, who themselves are like Kala, the ender of all things, are 
Gaja, Gavaksa, Gavaya, Sarabha, and Gandhamadana. Sveta and 
Jyotirmukha are both the sons of Surya, bringer of light, while the leaping 
monkey Hemakita is the son of Varuna. That foremost among leaping 
monkeys is heroic Nala, son of Visvakarman, while swift and valorous 
Sudurdhara is the son of the Vasus. There are one hundred million of these 
majestic and heroic monkeys, who are all the sons of gods and are lusting 
for battle. I am unable to describe the rest. 


[30-35] “And that youth whose build is that of a lion is the son of 
Dasaratha. He is the one who slew Disana, Khara, and Trisiras. There is no 
one on earth who is equal to Rama in valor; for he slew Viradha and 
Kabandha, who was like Yama, the ender of all things. No man on earth is 
able to recount the virtues of Rama, who slew all the rdksasas in 
Janasthana. And there also is righteous Laksmana, resembling a bull 
elephant. Once, having come into the range of his arrows, not even Vasava 
himself could survive. And there is your brother Vibhisana, foremost 
among the raksasas, who, having received the city of Lanka, 1s devoted to 
Raghava’s cause. In this way, I have described to you the entire monkey 
army, which is encamped upon Mount Suvela. You, sir, must now decide 
what is to be done next.” 


Sarga 22 

[1-4] Meanwhile, in Lanka, the spies reported to the king that Raghava, 
along with an unassailable army, was encamped near Mount Suvela. When 
Ravana had heard from his spies that Rama had come with a vast army, he 
became somewhat agitated, and he spoke these words to his ministers: 
“Raksasas! Let all my counselors assemble, focusing their thoughts. The 
time has come for us to take counsel.” Upon hearing that command of his, 
the counselors hurriedly approached. Then he took counsel with his raksasa 
ministers. 

[S—9] After taking counsel with them as to what was appropriate for 
them to do next, the unassailable Ravana dismissed his ministers and 
entered his own residence. Then, summoning an immensely powerful 
rdksasa named Vidyujjihva, a master of illusion, Ravana, himself a great 
master of illusion, went to where Maithilt was. The lord of the raksasas 
addressed Vidyujjihva, master of illusion, saying, “Let us delude Sita, 
Janaka’s daughter, with an illusion. Night-roaming rdksasa, you must come 
to me bearing Raghava’s head along with his great bow and arrows—all 
fashioned through the power of illusion.” When he had been addressed in 
this fashion, the night-roaming raksasa Vidyujjihva responded, “So be it.” 
The king was pleased with him and presented him with a piece of jewelry. 

[10-11] Entering the asoka grove, the immensely powerful younger 
brother of Kubera, bestower of wealth, saw Sita seated on the bare earth, 
her face lowered, overcome with sorrow, although she did not deserve it. 


Seated there in the asoka grove, thinking only of her lord, she was closely 
surrounded by horrible raksasa women. 

[12-15] Approaching Sita and calling out to her in feigned delight, he 
arrogantly addressed these words to the daughter of Janaka: “I have just 
now slain in battle your husband, Raghava, the slayer of Khara, about 
whom you are wont to speak so boastfully. I have completely undermined 
your grounds for refusing me and have crushed your pride. As a result of 
your catastrophic loss, Sita, you will have to become my wife. Your merit is 
exhausted and your purpose has failed, you foolish woman, who think 
yourself so clever. Now you shall hear about your husband’s death, Sita, 
which was as dreadful as the slaying of Vrtra. 

[16—21] “Raghava had come to our shores surrounded by a vast army led 
by the lord of the monkeys in a futile effort to kill me. When he reached the 
southern shore of the sea, Rama made camp with his vast army just as the 
sun, maker of day, was going down. Then, in the middle of the night, my 
spies approached that army as it slept peacefully, exhausted from its long 
march, and spied upon it. And then, in the night, on that very spot where 
Rama and Laksmana lay, Rama’s army was slaughtered by my own vast 
army led by Prahasta. Over and over again, the rdksasas raised their 
weapons—spears, iron clubs, swords, small discuses, staves heavy with 
iron, streams of arrows, lances, shining mallets and war hammers, clubs, 
iron cudgels, darts, large discuses, and cudgels—and let them fall upon the 
monkeys. 

[22-29] “Then murderous, deft-handed Prahasta with his huge sword 
completely severed the head of Rama, who lay sleeping. Vibhisana tried to 
flee, but, as it happened, he was captured. Then Laksmana and all the 
leaping monkeys were driven off in all directions. Sugriva, lord of the 
leaping monkeys, lies there with a broken neck. Hanuman too lies there, 
slain by the raksasas, his jaw smashed. Then Jambavan, as he leapt up in 
battle, was stricken at the knees. Pierced by many spears, he was cut down 
like a tree. Those two bulls among monkeys, Mainda and Dvivida, were 
also cut down, gasping and wailing, drenched in their own blood. Cut 
through the middle with a sword, Panasa, destroyer of his enemies, fell 
thunderously to the ground like a panasa fruit. Pierced by many iron 
arrows, Darimukha lies in a pit, while the hugely powerful Kumuda, struck 
by arrows, is moaning. Angada has been attacked and felled by the 


raksasas, who pierced him with many arrows. Adorned with his armlets, he 
lies on the ground vomiting blood. 

[30-34] “Some of the tawny monkeys, scattered like clouds driven by 
the force of the wind, are lying about, trampled by elephants, while others 
have been crushed by row upon row of chariots. Others have fled in terror, 
being harried from the rear, pursued by the raksasas, like great elephants by 
lions. Some have thrown themselves into the ocean, others have taken 
refuge in the sky. Apes and monkeys, all mixed together, have scampered 
up trees. On the shores of the sea, in the mountains, and in the forests, many 
of the yellow-eyed monkeys have been slaughtered by innumerable evil- 
eyed raksasas. In this way, your husband, along with his army, was killed 
by my forces. Here, I have had them bring you his head, dripping with 
blood and covered with dust.” 

[35-40] Then unassailable Ravana, lord of the raksasas, addressed a 
rdksasa woman so that Sita could hear him: “Go and fetch Vidyujjihva, that 
raksasa of cruel deeds, the very one who has brought the head of Raghava 
from the battlefield.” Then Vidyujjihva, grasping the head along with the 
bow, presented himself before Ravana, bowing his head in reverence. Then 
King Ravana addressed the long-tongued rdksasa, Vidyujjihva, who stood 
close beside him, saying: “Place the head of Dasarathi before Sita at once. 
Let the wretched woman clearly see her husband’s final state.” Addressed 
in this fashion, the rdksasa placed that beautiful head before Sita and 
swiftly withdrew. 

[41-43] But Ravana threw down the great and shining bow that was 
famed throughout the three worlds and said this to Sita: “Here is the bow of 
your precious Rama, complete with its bowstring. It was brought here by 
Prahasta after he slew that human during the night.” When he and 
Vidyujjihva had flung that head and bow upon the ground, Ravana said to 
the illustrious daughter of the king of Videha, “You must obey me.” 


Sarga 23 
[1—5] Sita stared at the head and at that magnificent bow. Recalling the 
alliance with Sugriva that had been mentioned by Hanuman and seeing 
those eyes and that facial complexion that were so like those of her husband 
—his hair, his forehead, and his splendid crest-jewel—she recognized all 
those familiar things and was stricken with grief. Shrieking like an osprey, 


she reviled Kaikeyi: “I hope you are satisfied now, Kaikeyi! The delight of 
our family has been slain. You malicious creature! You have destroyed our 
entire family. In what way did noble Rama offend Kaikeyi such that she had 
him exiled from his home to the forest in the barkcloth garments of an 
ascetic?” 

[6-11] When Vaidehi, trembling, had spoken in this fashion, that 
wretched young woman fell to the ground like a plantain tree that has been 
cut down. After a moment, she heaved a sigh and regained consciousness. 
Then the large-eyed woman kissed that head and broke into lamentation. 
“Alas, great-armed hero, I am undone! For I have pledged myself to one 
who followed the code of the warrior. I have now been made a widow and 
so must share this, your final state. When a husband dies first, they say it is 
because of the wife’s lack of virtue. But even though my conduct has been 
exemplary, you, who were so virtuous, departed before me. While I, having 
gone from one sorrow to another, am sunk in an ocean of grief, you, who 
were trying to rescue me, have now been slain. And, Raghava, my mother- 
in-law Kausalya, bereft of you, her son, is now like a loving cow bereft of 
her calf. 

[12—15] “Your valor was beyond imagination, Raghava! And yet, the 
words of those who foretold a long life for you have proven false, for your 
life has been cut short. Or did your wisdom fail you, even though you were 
so wise? For Kala, who creates all beings, leads them inevitably to 
destruction. How could you, so learned in the science of politics, so 
knowledgeable about and skillful at strategies for averting disaster, have 
fallen prey to an unforeseen death? Having fallen into my clutches—I who 
am the fierce and pitiless Kalaratri, the dark night of universal destruction 
—you, a lotus-eyed hero, have been thus cut down and carried off. 

[16—22] “Abandoning me to my misery, great-armed bull among men, 
you lie in the embrace of the earth, as if she were a beautiful and beloved 
woman. And this, hero, is your gold-inlaid bow, so dear to me, which you 
and I always worshiped so assiduously with fragrances and garlands. 
Surely, blameless hero, you have now been reunited in heaven with my 
father-in-law, your father, Dasaratha, and with your other ancestors as well. 
You have become a shining star in the heavens through the great and 
pleasing deed that you performed, but thus you now ignore your own 
lineage, the holy race of royal seers. Why do you not look at me, your 


majesty? Why will you not speak to me? It is I, your lifelong companion, 
whom you took as your wife when I was but a girl and you yourself a mere 
boy. ‘I will be with you forever.’ That is what you promised when you took 
my hand in marriage, Kakutstha. So please recall that to mind and take me, 
full of sorrow, with you. Why have you abandoned me and gone away, 
resourceful hero? You have departed from this world to the next, leaving me 
here, full of sorrow. 

[23-27] “Your body was once accustomed to only the finest things and 
embraced by me alone. Now, surely, it is being dragged and torn apart by 
beasts of prey. You performed the vedic rites—the agnistoma and the rest— 
with ample fees for the officiants. How is it then that you will be denied the 
funerary rites by means of the agnihotra fire? Kausalya, sorrowfully 
longing, will now have to question only Laksmana, who, alone among the 
three of us who set out in exile, will return. And since she will ask him, he 
will surely have to tell her about the slaughter of the forces of your ally and 
your own murder in the night by the rdksasas. When she hears that you 
have been murdered in your sleep and that I am living in the rdksasa’s 
household, she will die of a broken heart, Raghava. 

[28-32] “But enough of this! Please, Ravana, let me throw myself upon 
Rama’s body at once. Do this one truly fine thing: reunite a husband and 
wife. Join my head with his head, and my body with his body, Ravana, and 
I shall follow the path of my great husband. I do not wish to live for even 
another moment, wicked woman that I am. Once, in my father’s house, I 
heard from some brahmans learned in the vedas that women to whom their 
husbands are dear gain auspicious worlds. What recourse is left for me 
without him who was possessed of forbearance, self-restraint, renunciation, 
truth, righteousness, gratitude, and nonviolence toward all creatures?” Thus 
did that large-eyed lady, the daughter of Janaka, burning with sorrow, 
lament as she gazed there upon her husband’s head and bow. 

[33-37] As Sita was lamenting bitterly in this fashion, a rdksasa sentry 
approached his master, hands cupped in reverence. After saluting and 
propitiating Ravana with the words, “May my lord be victorious,” he 
reported that General Prahasta had arrived, saying: “Prahasta has presented 
himself with all your ministers. The matter appears to be rather urgent. 
Therefore, kindly grant them an audience.” When ten-necked Ravana had 
heard the raksasa’s message, he left the asoka grove to grant an audience to 


his counselors. Deliberating with his counselors as to how he should 
proceed, he entered his council hall and there, knowing full well the martial 
valor of Rama, laid his plans. 

[38—42] But no sooner had Ravana departed than that head and splendid 
bow vanished. Nonetheless, the lord of the raksasas went on deliberating 
with his counselors, fearsome in their valor, as to what action he should take 
with regard to Rama. Then Ravana, lord of the raksasas, who looked like 
Kala himself, addressed all the commanders of his troops assembled before 
him, eager to act on his behalf: “Assemble the troops at once with the loud 
beating of bheri drums sharply struck with drumsticks, but do not tell them 
why.” Then the commanders of the troops, receiving those instructions, 
said, “So be it.” Assembling each his own vast host, they reported to their 
lord, who was so eager for battle, that they were assembled. 


Sarga 24 

[1-3] Meanwhile, a certain raksasa woman named Sarama, a dear friend of 
her beloved Sita Vaidehi, seeing that she was utterly confused, came 
quickly to her side. For as she had been instructed by Ravana to protect 
Sita, who was under guard, and because she was compassionate and firm in 
her vows, she had become Sita’s friend. Sarama saw that her friend, who 
had now arisen covered with dirt, like a mare that had been rolling in the 
dust, was completely bewildered. 

[4-8] Firm in her vows, she consoled Sita out of love for her friend: 
“Timorous lady, in my love for you, my friend, I overcame my fear of 
Ravana, and, concealing myself in a deserted thicket, I overheard 
everything Ravana said to you and what you said to him in return. For, 
wide-eyed lady, I would gladly die for your sake. Then, when the overlord 
of the raksasas had departed, Maithili, I followed after him and learned the 
whole reason for his agitation. It would be impossible to slay the ever- 
vigilant Rama in his sleep. Indeed, no one can kill that tiger among men. 
Nor would it be possible to kill the monkeys, who use trees as weapons. For 
they are as fully protected by Rama as are the divinities by Indra, bull 
among the gods. 

[9-17] “Majestic Raghava, destroyer of his foes, could not have been 
slain, Sita. For his arms are long and muscular and his chest is massive. He 
is majestic and fierce in valor. He is righteous and powerfully built, a 


bowman famed throughout the world. Along with his brother Laksmana, 
that courageous hero always protects himself and others. Skillful, deeply 
learned in the science of statecraft, and of inconceivable strength and valor, 
he slaughters the hosts of enemy soldiers. This was just an illusion, 
perpetrated upon you by that savage master of illusion, whose every 
thought and deed is reprehensible and who is inimical to all creatures. Put 
all your grieving behind you. Happiness awaits you. Surely Laksmi1 herself 
is smiling upon you. Now hear the good news, which will delight you. 
Rama has crossed the ocean with an army of monkeys. And now, having 
reached the southern shore, he is encamped. I myself have seen Kakutstha, 
who has practically accomplished his mission. Right now, he is standing 
with Laksmana on the seashore guarded by his massed forces. And those 
swift-footed raksasas whom Ravana had dispatched brought back the news 
that Raghava has crossed the ocean. Hearing that news, wide-eyed lady, 
Ravana, the overlord of the rdksasas, took counsel with all his ministers.” 

[18-26] Now, while the raksasa woman Sarama was speaking in this 
fashion, she and Sita heard the dreadful sound of the troops fully preparing 
themselves for war. When Sarama heard the deafening sound of the bheri 
drums resounding with the strokes of the drumsticks, she spoke to Sita in a 
sweet voice. “That, timid woman, is the terrifying sound of the bheri drum, 
a call to arms. Listen to its deep sound so like the rumble of storm clouds. 
Rutting war-elephants are being made ready, while chariot-horses are being 
yoked. Everywhere armed foot soldiers are forming their ranks. The royal 
highways are filled with rushing, roaring soldiers, amazing in their 
appearance, just as the ocean is filled with rushing, roaring torrents of 
water. Just look at the multicolored radiance arising from the rdksasas’ 
shining weapons, shields, armor, chariots, horses, elephants, and ornaments 
as they glitter. It looks like a blazing forest fire in the hot season. Listen to 
the clanging of the bells and the rumbling of the chariots. Listen to the 
neighing of the warhorses, like the blaring of trumpets. These are the 
frenzied preparations—tumultuous and hair-raising—of the followers of the 
raksasa lord, their weapons held aloft. 

[27-31] “Good fortune will favor you, dispelling your sorrow. But fear 
of Rama has come upon the rdksasas, lotus-petal-eyed woman, as fear of 
Vasava overcame the daityas. When your inconceivably valorous husband, 
who has subdued his anger, has defeated and slain Ravana in battle, he will 


surely take you back. Together with Laksmana, your husband will defeat 
the raksasas, just as that slayer of his foes, Vasava, together with Visnu, did 
his enemies. Soon Rama will come, and I shall see you seated upon his lap, 
your enemy slain and all your wishes fulfilled. Lovely lady, once you are 
reunited and in his tight embrace, you will shed tears of joy on the chest of 
that broad-chested hero. 

[32-36] “Soon, Sita, my lady, mighty Rama will unbind the braid— 
falling to your waist—that you have worn these many months. Once you 
see his face, my lady, which is like the full moon newly risen, you will 
abandon these tears born of your sorrow, as a female serpent sheds her skin. 
Very soon, Maithili, Rama will slay Ravana in battle. Then he, who 
deserves happiness, will enjoy complete happiness together with you, his 
beloved. Once you are reunited with Rama, you will rejoice with that great 
man, just as the earth does with its ample crops when watered with copious 
rains. My lady, you must take refuge with Surya, maker of day and 
sustainer of all creatures, who, like a horse, moves swiftly in his orbit, 
circumambulating the foremost of mountains.” 


Sarga 25 

[1-4] Thus, with her words, did Sarama bring new life to the confused and 
suffering Sita, as do the heavens to the earth with their rains. Then, as a 
friend desiring what was best for her friend and, with a good sense of 
timing, she smiled and spoke these timely words: “Dark-eyed lady, I can go 
and return unseen in order to give Rama a message from you, informing 
him that you are safe. For when I traverse the unsupported sky, neither 
Pavana, the wind god, nor even Garuda himself is able to follow my path.” 

[S—11] As Sarama was speaking in this fashion, Sita replied to her in a 
voice that was sweet, soft, and tinged with her recent sorrow: “You are 
capable of going to the heavens or even to the underworld known as 
Rasatala. I know that for my sake you could accomplish even the 
impossible. But if your mind is set on doing me a favor, you should go to 
Ravana, as I wish to know what he is doing now. For that cruel and wicked 
Ravana, who makes his foes cry out, is a master of illusion. He robbed me 
of my senses, as does wine the moment you drink it. He has the terrifying 
raksasa women, who constantly stand guard over me, menace and threaten 
me incessantly. I am fearful and apprehensive and have no peace of mind. I 


tremble in fear of him, here in the asoka grove. If you can report to me 
everything that he may have discussed or decided, then that would be the 
greatest favor you could do for me.” 

[12—16] As Sita was speaking in this fashion, the soft-spoken Sarama, 
caressing her, replied in words choked with tears. “If that is what you wish, 
Janaki, I shall go, and you shall see me when I return after learning your 
enemy’s plans.” When she had spoken in this fashion, she proceeded from 
there to the presence of the raksasa Ravana and eavesdropped on his 
deliberations with his counselors. Once she had heard and familiarized 
herself with the evil-minded rdksasa’s decisions, she then swiftly returned 
once more to the asoka grove. She reentered the grove, where she saw 
Janaka’s daughter waiting for her and looking like the goddess Sri, robbed 
of her lotus. 

[17-19] When soft-spoken Sarama had returned, Sita embraced her 
affectionately and offered her a seat, saying: “Once you are comfortably 
seated, please report to me accurately everything that the cruel and wicked 
Ravana has decided.” Addressed in this fashion by the tremulous Sita, 
Sarama reported to her all of Ravana’s deliberations with his counselors. 

[20-26] “The rdksasa lord was given earnest advice to release you by his 
own mother and his elder counselor Aviddha, who said: ‘You must give 
back Maithill to the lord of men with full honor. His amazing deeds in 
Janasthana should be sufficient evidence for you. Then, too, there was 
Hanuman’s leaping of the ocean, his finding Sita, and his slaughter of the 
raksasas in battle. What mere human on earth could have brought all this 
about?’ Although his aged counselors and his mother argued with him in 
this vein at length, he can no more bear to give you up than can a miser his 
money. He will not give you up, Maithili, unless he dies in battle. For such 
is the fixed resolve of that cruel raksasa and his ministers. That, indeed, is 
the unwavering resolve he has formed, befuddled as he is by his impending 
doom. He will have to be completely crushed in battle through the slaughter 
of the raksasas and himself. Intimidation alone cannot force him to release 
you. But with his sharp arrows, Rama will completely destroy Ravana in 
battle, and then, dark-eyed lady, he will take you back to Ayodhya.” 

[27-28] At that very moment, the din of the bheri drums and conches of 
the entire army was heard, causing the ground to shake. And when, there in 
Lanka, the servants of the raksasa king heard the din of the monkey army, 


their spirits failed them. Their energies were sapped by despair, and they 
foresaw no good arising from the crimes of their king. 


Sarga 26 

[1-4] Thus, to the mingled sound of conches and bheri drums, did great- 
armed Rama Raghava, the conqueror of enemy citadels, draw near. Now, 
when Ravana, lord of the raksasas, heard that tumultuous sound, he fell to 
brooding for a while, before turning to his ministers. Then mighty Ravana, 
addressing all his ministers, spoke so that the entire assembly hall 
resounded, saying: “Gentlemen, I have listened to what you have said 
concerning Rama’s crossing of the ocean, his valor, and the size of his 
army. But I know that you, sirs, are also truly valorous in battle.” 

[5—10] Then, after listening to his words, a very wise rdksasa named 
Malyavan, the paternal uncle of Ravana’s mother, began to speak: “Your 
majesty, a king who 1s well versed in the traditional branches of learning 
and who acts in accordance with sound policy will long exercise 
sovereignty and bring his foes under his power. And if he makes peace or 
war with his enemies at the appropriate times and strengthens his own side, 
he will thus enjoy broader sovereignty. A king who is weaker than his rival 
or equal to him in strength should sue for peace. Only one who 1s stronger 
should make war, but even he must never underestimate his enemy. 
Therefore, Ravana, I would recommend making peace with Rama. You 
should give him back Sita on whose account we are so heavily besieged. 
All the gods, seers, and gandharvas desire Rama’s victory. Therefore, you 
should not oppose him. You should choose to make peace with him. 

[11—15] “The blessed Grandfather Brahma created two races: that of the 
gods and that of the asuras, who had recourse to righteousness and 
unrighteousness, respectively. For righteousness is said to be the way of the 
great gods, Ravana, while unrighteousness is the way of the asuras and the 
raksasas. For they say that when righteousness eclipses unrighteousness, 
that ushers in the golden age, known as the Krta. But when unrighteousness 
eclipses righteousness, that brings on the degenerate Tisya Age. In 
rampaging through the worlds, you trampled glorious righteousness and 
embraced unrighteousness instead. It is for that reason that your enemies 
have grown more powerful than we. Grown strong through your reckless 


actions, the serpent of unrighteousness is devouring us; while righteousness, 
which the deities revere, strengthens the forces of the gods. 

[16—20] “Doing whatever you pleased in your addiction to sensuality, 
you have caused great suffering to the firelike seers. Their power is as 
irresistible as a blazing fire, the purifier. Their minds are purified through 
their austerities, and they are devoted to the furtherance of righteousness. 
These twice-born brahmans constantly perform all the different principal 
sacrificial rites. Reciting the vedas aloud, they pour oblations into the 
sacrificial fire according to the ritual injunctions. Thwarting the raksasas, 
they chant the vedic mantras because of which all the rdksasas scatter in all 
directions, like thunderclouds in the hot season. And spreading in all ten 
directions, the smoke arising from the agnihotra rites of those firelike seers 
saps the energy of the raksasas. Moreover, the fierce austerities that those 
sages, firm in their vows, practiced in their various holy places torment the 
raksasas. 

[21-30] “And observing many different, dreadful omens, I foresee the 
destruction of all the raksasas. Thundering deafeningly, dreadful and 
terrifying storm clouds drench all of Lanka with hot blood. Teardrops fall 
from our weeping mounts, while our battle standards, dusty and discolored, 
do not shine as brightly as once they did. Beasts of prey, jackals, and 
vultures keep pouring into Lanka, shrieking horrendously as they form into 
packs. Dark women with deathly white teeth appear before us in dreams 
laughing wildly, speaking menacingly, and looting houses. Dogs are 
devouring the bali offerings in house after house. Cows are giving birth to 
donkeys, while rats are mating with mongooses. Cats are mating with 
tigers, pigs with dogs, kinnaras are mating with rdksasas and even with 
humans. White doves with red feet flutter through the sky impelled by 
doom and presaging the destruction of the raksasas. Screeching, ‘cicikici,’ 
domesticated sdrikas are flying about, even though they are tethered. 
Although once tamed, they have become aggressive. Kala himself, in the 
form of a terrifying and hideous bald man, all yellow and black, peers into 
everyone’s houses at all hours. These and other evil omens continue to 
appear. 

[31-33] “We truly believe that Rama is none other than Visnu, who has 
taken the body of a man. For this Raghava, so firm in his valor, 1s surely no 
ordinary human. Therefore, Ravana, you should make peace with Rama, the 


king of men, who built that utterly extraordinary bridge across the ocean.” 
When mighty and supremely valorous Malyavan had spoken these words 
there among those foremost counselors and had judged the intentions of the 
raksasa overlord, he fell silent, watching Ravana closely. 


Sarga 27 

[1—5] But ten-faced Ravana, evil-minded as he was and driven by his doom, 
could not abide the words of Malyavan although they had been uttered for 
his own good. Overwhelmed with anger, he replied to Malyavan, knitting 
his brows on his forehead and rolling his eyes in rage, saying: “I shall not 
listen to these harmful words you have so harshly uttered, thinking them to 
be beneficial. For you are, in effect, siding with my enemies. What makes 
you think that this wretched human Rama, who lives alone in the 
wilderness, abandoned by his own father, and has been forced to rely on 
monkeys, is so formidable? And what makes you think that I, the lord of the 
rdksasas and the terror of the gods, who am in no way lacking in valor, am 
so weak? 

[6-13] “I suspect that you have addressed me so harshly out of 
resentment of my prowess, sympathy for my enemies, or at the prompting 
of my foes. For unless he were prompted by an enemy, what wise man 
learned in the sadstras would dare speak so harshly to a powerful man of 
high station? Besides, after taking S1ta—who, but for the lotus, resembles 
the goddess Sri—from the forest, why would I give her back for fear of 
Raghava? In a few short days, you will see me slay Raghava along with 
Sugriva, Laksmana, and their tens of millions of monkeys. Even the gods 
themselves dare not stand before Ravana in single combat. Whom, then, 
should he fear in battle? I might be cut in two, but never would I bow down 
to anyone. This is an innate fault of mine; and it is impossible to overcome 
one’s nature. Even if, somehow or other, Rama actually built a bridge over 
the ocean, what is so miraculous about this that it should fill you with fear? 
And I swear to you truthfully that now that Rama has crossed the ocean 
with his army of monkeys, he shall not return alive.” 

[14-22] Now, when Malyavan saw that Ravana was speaking with such 
agitation and was so angry, he was humiliated and made no reply. Then, 
after praising the king in the customary fashion with prayers for victory, 
Malyavan took his leave and returned to his own dwelling. But as for the 


rdksasa Ravana, he went on taking counsel and deliberating with his 
counselors before ordering an unparalleled defense of Lanka. He assigned 
the raksasa Prahasta to the eastern gate, and immensely powerful 
Mahaparsva and Mahodara to the southern gate. He assigned his son 
Indrajit, the great master of illusion, to the western gate, in the company of 
many raksasas. Then, after assigning Suka and Sarana to the northern gate, 
he told his counselors, “I shall be there myself.” He then stationed the 
immensely powerful and valorous raksasa Viripaksa in the central 
encampment along with many rdksasas. Thus did that bull among raksasas 
complete his arrangements in Lanka. Then, being under the power of fate, 
he considered himself to have accomplished his objective. After he had 
ordered these elaborate arrangements for the city and dismissed his 
counselors, he entered his vast and luxurious inner apartments, honored by 
his hosts of counselors with prayers for victory. 


Sarga 28 

[1-5] Meanwhile, having entered enemy territory, Rama, the king of men; 
Sugriva, the king of the monkeys; the monkey Hanuman, son of Vayu; 
Jambavan, the king of the apes; the raksasa Vibhisana; Angada, son of 
Valin; Saumitri; the monkey Sarabha; Susena and his sons; as well as 
Mainda, Dvivida, Gaja, Gavaksa, Kumuda, Nala, and Panasa, took counsel 
together, saying: “There lies the citadel of Lanka, ruled by Ravana. It is not 
to be conquered even by the immortal gods along with the asuras, great 
serpents, and gandharvas. It is time to take counsel and formulate a plan, 
keeping the success of our mission foremost in mind. For this is the 
principal stronghold of Ravana, lord of the radksasas.” 

[6-9] As they were speaking in this fashion, Vibhisana, Ravana’s 
younger brother, addressed to them a speech rich in meaning and free from 
all vulgarity: “My counselors, Anala, Sarabha, Sampati, and Praghasa, have 
gone to the city of Lanka and returned. Turning themselves into birds, they 
infiltrated the enemy’s army. Then, once they had observed the defensive 
preparations that have been put in place, they all reported back. Now listen 
to me, Rama, as I describe to you faithfully the entire defensive 
preparations of evil-minded Ravana, just as they have reported it. 

[10-18] “Prahasta with his army is stationed at the eastern gate while the 
immensely powerful Mahaparsva and Mahodara are at the southern gate. 


Ravana’s son Indrajit—accompanied by heroes armed with various 
weapons and by many raksasas bearing spears, swords, and bows, and 
wielding lances and war hammers—is stationed at the western gate. He has 
with him many thousands of rdksasas with weapons in hand. Ravana 
himself, focused and supremely confident and accompanied by many 
rdksasas, has taken up his position at the northern gate of the city. And 
Virupaksa, along with still more raksasas and a force armed with lances, 
swords, and bows, is stationed in the central encampment. Once they had 
surveyed those garrisons, arranged in that fashion, all my ministers returned 
as quickly as possible. In the city there are one thousand elephants, ten 
thousand chariots, twenty thousand horses, and more than ten million 
raksasas. Those night-roaming raksasas—valorous, powerful, and fierce in 
battle—are at all times the handpicked guard of the rdksasa king. And in 
order to give battle, an entourage of one million attends upon each one of 
those rdksasas here, lord of the people.” 

[19-23] After Vibhisana had delivered his account of the activities in 
Lanka as they had been reported by his counselors, he made these 
concluding comments to Rama, whose eyes were like lotus petals: “When 
Ravana went to war against Kubera, Rama, six million raksasas—the 
equals of evil-minded Ravana in valor, strength, energy, power, dignity, and 
pride—marched forth. Please do not be angry with me over this. I am trying 
to rouse your fury for battle, not alarm you. For with your valor, you are 
able to defeat even the gods. Once you have arrayed the monkey forces for 
battle, you, sir, surrounded by this great host with its four divisions, will 
utterly destroy Ravana.” 

[24-30] When Vibhisana, the younger brother of Ravana, had spoken in 
this fashion, Raghava uttered these words in order to repulse his enemies: 
“Let that bull among monkeys, Nila, surrounded by many monkeys, 
confront Prahasta at Lanka’s eastern gate. And let V4lin’s son, Angada, 
accompanied by a large force, attack Mahaparsva and Mahodara at the 
southern gate. Meanwhile, let Pavana’s son, Hanuman, of boundless 
vitality, accompanied by many monkeys, force and breach the western gate. 
I am determined to kill the lord of the raksasas myself. For that lowly 
wretch, whose power derives from the gift of a boon, takes delight in 
harming the hosts of daityas and danavas, as well as the great seers, as he 
rampages through all the worlds oppressing all creatures. Thus, together 


with Saumitri, I shall force and breach the northern gate of the city, where 
Ravana is stationed with his forces. 

[31-34] “Let the powerful king of the monkeys, Sugriva, Jambavan, 
king of the apes, and Vibhisana, the younger brother of the raksasa lord, 
take up their positions at the central encampment. Let none of the tawny 
monkeys take on human form in battle. For this shall be our mark of 
recognition for the monkey army in battle. The monkey form itself will be 
the sign of recognition for our own forces. Only the seven of us—my friend 
Vibhisana with his four companions, and I myself, together with my 
immensely powerful brother Laksmana—will, in human form, confront our 
enemies.” 

[35-36] When resolute Rama had spoken in this fashion to Vibhisana in 
order to secure the success of their mission, he resolved purposefully to 
ascend Mount Suvela. Then, covering the land with his vast army, wise and 
great Rama marched on Lanka in great excitement, determined to slay his 
enemy. 


Sarga 29 

[1-7] Once Rama, who was accompanied by Laksmana, had made up his 
mind to climb Mount Suvela, he spoke in sweet and polished tones to 
Sugriva and to the devoted and righteous Vibhisana, the night-roaming 
raksasa, who was skillful both in counsel and in action, saying: “Let us all 
straightaway climb this great mountain Suvela, abounding in hundreds of 
minerals. For we shall camp there tonight. There we shall survey Lanka, the 
abode of that raksasa, the evil-minded wretch who stole away my wife to 
his own undoing. He has no regard for righteousness, proper conduct, or his 
own high lineage. And so, in his vile rdksasa nature, he has done this 
contemptible thing. For at the mere mention of that vilest of raksasas, my 
anger blazes up, and, because of the transgression of that lowly wretch, I 
shall have to witness the slaughter of the raksasas. A single person acting 
under the power of the noose of Kala has committed this crime; and 
because of this despicable offense an entire race must perish.” 

[8—12] Speaking in this fashion, Rama, filled with rage toward Ravana, 
ascended Mount Suvela with its lovely slopes to make camp there. Behind 
him came Laksmana, ever vigilant, holding his bow and arrows, intent on 
deeds of great valor. Behind him climbed Sugriva with his counselors and 


Vibhisana as well as Hanuman, Angada, Nila, Mainda, Dvivida, Gaja, 
Gavaksa, Gavaya, Sarabha, Gandhamadana, Panasa, Kumuda, Hara, and the 
troop leader Rambha. These and many other swift monkeys, denizens of the 
mountains, swarmed up Mount Suvela by the hundreds, leaping with the 
speed of the wind to where Raghava was. 

[13-18] When, after a short time, they had scaled the mountain from all 
sides, they saw, perched as they were on its summit, a city that seemed to be 
suspended in the sky. And the leaders of the leader of the troops of monkeys 
gazed upon splendid Lanka, adorned with magnificent gates and ramparts 
and filled with raksasas. There the foremost among tawny monkeys saw 
what appeared to be a second rampart made up of those dark night-roaming 
raksasas who were stationed at the base of the city wall. When the monkeys 
saw those raksasas, so eager for battle, they all bellowed loudly, as Rama 
stood watching. Then, reddened at twilight, the sun set and night came on, 
illumined by the full moon. Then Rama, the commander of the forces of the 
tawny monkeys, received and honored by Vibhisana, settled in at his leisure 
on the summit of Mount Suvela. He was accompanied by Laksmana and 
surrounded by the hosts of the leaders of the monkey troops. 


Sarga 30 
[1-9] After passing the night on Mount Suvela, those heroic bulls among 
the tawny monkeys gazed upon the parks and woodlands of Lanka. They 
were level, hospitable, pleasant, broad, long, and charming to look upon. 
Gazing upon them, the monkeys were wonderstruck. The city of Lanka was 
filled with trees: campaka, asoka, pumnaga, sala, and tala. It was screened 
by groves of tamdla trees and surrounded by rows of ndga trees. Indeed, 
with its celestial trees of every kind entwined with creepers and bursting 
with blossoms on every side—hintdlas, arjunas, nipas, flowering 
saptaparnas, tilakas, karnikaras, and patalas—it was as lovely as Indra’s 
city of Amaravati. Replete with varicolored blossoms, red and tender leaf 
buds, dark lawns, and variegated groves, those trees wore their fragrant and 
enticing flowers and fruits, as people do their jewelry. They looked just like 
the Caitraratha gardens. Delightful and resembling the Nandana groves, 
those parklands—charming in every season and filled with bees—were 
ravishing. It was filled with birds—natyithas, koyastibhakas, and dancing 


peacocks. The sweet notes of the parabhrta cuckoo could be heard across 
the rushing woodland streams. 

[10—13] In great excitement and delight, the heroic tawny monkeys, who 
could take on any form at will, entered those parks and woodlands. These 
were swarming with bees and filled with birds, constantly enflamed with 
passion. Kokilas flocked in their groves, which resounded with the songs of 
birds. They were filled with the song of bhrngardjas and were swarming 
with bees. They echoed with the song of kondlakas and resounded with the 
cries of sarasa cranes. And as those immensely powerful monkeys entered, 
a breeze, fragrant from its contact with the blossoms, began to blow. 

[14-17] But with the permission of Sugriva, some of the troop leaders, 
notable for their deafening roars, separated themselves from the troops of 
heroic tawny monkeys and marched toward many-bannered Lanka, 
terrifying birds, frightening deer and elephants, and shaking Lanka itself 
with their roaring. Those immensely swift monkeys crushed the earth under 
their feet, while clouds of dust rose up suddenly, kicked up by their feet. 
Frightened by the noise, bears, lions, boar, buffalo, elephants, and deer fled 
in all ten directions, terrified. 

[18—21] There, reaching into the sky, stood one of the lofty summits of 
Mount Trikiita. Covered on all sides with flowers, it seemed to be made of 
gold. It was bright and lovely to behold, and its breadth was a hundred 
leagues. It was beautiful, grand, and majestic and impossible for even the 
birds to reach. It was impossible for men to scale, even in their imagination, 
let alone in reality. And there, on that peak, stood Lanka, under the 
protection of Ravana. The citadel was adorned with ramparts of gold and 
silver and with lofty gateway towers resembling white clouds. 

[22—26] Indeed, Lanka was as magnificently adorned by its palaces and 
mansions as are the heavens, Visnu’s middle step, with clouds at summer’s 
end. In the city could be seen a palace adorned with a thousand columns, 
which, seeming to scrape the sky, resembled the peak of Mount Kailasa. It 
was the domed palace of the rdksasa lord, and it was the ornament of the 
city. It was constantly guarded by a full complement of a hundred raksasas. 
Thus did Laksmana’s fortunate elder brother, Rama, whose objective had 
been thus far achieved, first gaze, together with the monkeys, upon 
Ravana’s opulent citadel. Rama and his vast army looked out upon the city. 
It was glittering with gems, abounding with defensive works, and adorned 


with rows of palaces. Its mighty gates were studded with great defensive 
engines. 


Sarga 31 

[1-12] Now, at this juncture, observing various portents, Laksmana’s elder 
brother addressed these words to fortunate Laksmana: “Laksmana, let us 
secure these cool lakes and woodlands abounding in fruit. We shall make 
camp here, dividing this massive army into companies and marshaling it in 
formation. I see signs of a horrendous universal catastrophe near at hand, 
presaging the annihilation of the heroic apes, monkeys, and rdksasas. 
Winds blow fiercely and the earth trembles. The hilltops shake, and the 
mountains crumble. Frightful and terrible clouds, resembling beasts of prey 
and thundering ominously, pour down fierce torrents mingled with drops of 
blood. The evening sky, the color of red sandalwood paste, is deeply 
ominous. A blazing ball of fire plummets from the sun. Dreadful beasts and 
birds of ill omen, mournful and with mournful voices, howl at the sun, 
engendering intense fear. At night the moon glows dully, emitting a dark 
and reddish glare, just as it might at the end of the world. A faint but 
menacing corona, crimson and inauspicious, encircles the orb of the sun, 
while a dark spot is visible on its surface, Laksmana. And look, Laksmana! 
The constellations themselves look strange. All of this that appears to us 
seems to presage the destruction of the world. Crows, kites, and vultures are 
spiraling downward, while jackals emit loud and inauspicious howls. 
Therefore, surrounded on all sides by tawny monkeys, we should, this very 
day, swiftly and without delay attack that citadel, which is protected by 
Ravana.” 

[13-19] As that mighty hero, Laksmana’s elder brother, was speaking in 
this fashion to Laksmana, he swiftly descended from the mountain peak. 
And when righteous Raghava had descended from the mountain, he 
inspected his troops, who were not to be vanquished by their enemies. 
Together with Sugriva, Raghava, who was a master of timing, prepared the 
vast army of the monkey king and, at the proper moment, sent them into 
battle. Then, when the time was right, that great-armed hero, armed with his 
bow and surrounded by his vast army, led the march toward the citadel of 
Lanka. Vibhisana, Sugriva, Hanuman, Jambavan, Nala, the king of the apes, 
Nila, and Laksmana all followed him. Behind them, a vast army of apes and 


forest-dwelling monkeys, covering a huge swath of land, followed 
Raghava. By the hundreds, those monkeys, resembling elephants and able 
to drive off their foes, seized mountain peaks and full-grown trees. 

[20—27] In a short time, the two brothers, Rama and Laksmana, subduers 
of their foes, reached Lanka, the citadel of Ravana. Garlanded with 
pennants, adorned with parks and groves, it was lovely with its splendid 
ramparts. But with its lofty walls and gateways, it seemed impregnable. 
Urged on by Rama’s words, the forest-dwelling monkeys, following orders, 
closely besieged the city, which was unassailable even by the gods. Armed 
with his bow and accompanied by his younger brother, Rama both guarded 
and blockaded Lanka’s northern gate, which was as lofty as a mountain 
peak. Thus did Rama, the heroic son of Dasaratha, followed by Laksmana, 
approach the northern gate, where Ravana was stationed, and begin his 
siege of the city of Lanka, which was guarded by Ravana. For none other 
than Rama was capable of guarding that gate. For with Ravana stationed 
there, it was as fearsome as the ocean guarded by Varuna. It struck terror 
into the hearts of the weak. It was guarded on every side by terrifying and 
well-armed rdksasas, just as is the underworld known as Patala by the 
danavas. And Rama saw arrayed there many and various stores of weapons 
and armor belonging to the warriors. 

[28-34] Meanwhile, Nila, the powerful general of the army of tawny 
monkeys, approached the eastern gate and took up his position there 
together with Mainda and Dvivida. The very powerful Angada took up his 
post at the southern gate, along with Rsabha, Gavaksa, Gaja, and Gavaya. 
The mighty monkey Hanuman, accompanied by Pramathin, Praghasa, and 
other heroes, guarded the western gate. At the same time, Sugriva stationed 
himself in the central encampment along with all the foremost among the 
tawny monkeys, who were as swift as Suparna or the wind. And thus, at the 
place where Sugriva had stationed himself, three hundred and sixty million 
illustrious leaders of the monkey troops were encamped, pressing their 
siege. Acting on Rama’s orders, Laksmana and Vibhisana posted the tawny 
monkeys by the tens of millions at each of the gates. Then, Sugriva and 
Jambavan, accompanied by many troops, took up their position in the 
central encampment, a little to the west of Rama’s post. 

[35-39] Seizing trees and mountaintops, those tigers among monkeys, 
whose fangs were like those of tigers, held their positions, eager for battle. 


All of them held their tails erect. All were armed with fangs and claws. All 
were flexing their variegated limbs. And all their faces were contorted. 
Some of them were as powerful as ten elephants, and others yet ten times 
stronger than that, while some were equal in strength to a thousand 
elephants. Some of them were as powerful as millions of elephants, others 
were a hundred times as powerful as that. Some of the troop leaders of the 
tawny monkeys had strength beyond measure. The host of those monkey 
walriors was as variegated and awe-inspiring as a swarm of locusts. 

[40-43] The ground seemed to be completely filled with the monkeys 
who were encamped before Lanka, while the sky was as if covered with 
those who were still converging on the city. A hundred divisions each of 
one hundred thousand apes and forest-dwelling monkeys stationed 
themselves at the gates of Lanka, while still more of them swarmed in from 
every side to fight. The mountain was completely covered on every side by 
all those leaping monkeys. Meanwhile, an additional ten million marched 
upon the city. And thus Lanka was blockaded on every side by powerful, 
tree-wielding monkeys, so that not even the wind could enter. 

[44-46] Suddenly besieged by monkeys who resembled great clouds and 
who were equal to Sakra in valor, the raéksasas were dumbfounded. From 
that huge mass of troops as it marched forth, a deafening roar arose, which 
was like the sound that might arise from the waters if the ocean itself were 
to be shattered. That deafening sound shook all of Lanka, together with its 
ramparts, gateways, hills, parks, and woodlands. 

[47-50] Under the protection of Rama and Laksmana along with 
Sugriva, the army was completely unassailable even by all the gods and 
asuras. When Raghava had deployed his army in this fashion for the 
destruction of the raksasas, he once again took counsel with his counselors 
and arrived at a decision. Fully conversant with the sequential application 
of the various stratagems and of their consequences, he was eager to move 
on to the next stage. Abiding by the advice of Vibhisana, he called to mind 
the protocol of kings. Summoning Valin’s son, Angada, he said this: 
“Abandoning fear and free from anxiety, my good monkey, you must leap 
into the city of Lanka. Approaching ten-necked Ravana, you are to address 
him in my words as follows: 

[51-54] “ ‘You have lost your royal majesty, your lordship is at an end. 
You have lost your wits and doomed yourself. Since, night-roaming 


raksasa, in your delusion and pride you have committed crimes against the 
seers, gods, gandharvas, apsarases, great serpents, yaksas, and kings, 
surely your arrogance, born of the boon of self-existent Brahma, will today 
be humbled. For tormented by the abduction of my wife and bearing the rod 
of punishment against you, I have encamped at the gates of Lanka to inflict 
that punishment upon you. Once I have killed you, raksasa, you shall attain 
the realm of the gods, the great seers, and all the royal seers. 

[55-61] “ “Now show me the strength, wretched raksasa, with which 
you carried Sita off after first luring me away with an illusion. Unless you 
hand Maithili over to me and come to me for refuge, I shall rid the earth of 
rdksasas with my keen arrows. The foremost of rdksasas, righteous-minded 
Vibhisana, has come over to me. Endowed with majesty, he shall obtain the 
secure and unchallenged lordship of Lanka. For since you are unrighteous, 
unrestrained, wicked, and surround yourself with fools, you cannot possibly 
continue to enjoy your kingship for even another moment. So gather up 
your fortitude and, relying on your valor, fight, raksasa! Then, slain by my 
arrows in battle, you shall be purified. Even if you were to take the form of 
a bird, swift as thought, and fly through the three worlds, once you came 
within the range of my sight, you would not escape alive. Let me tell you 
something for your own good: Prepare yourself for the next world. Take a 
good long look at Lanka. Your life is in my hands.’ ” 

[62-65] When Tara’s son, Angada, had been addressed in this fashion by 
Rama, tireless in action, he leapt into the sky and sped on his way, like 
Agni, bearer of oblations, incarnate. Reaching R&avana’s palace in an 
instant, the majestic monkey spied Ravana calmly seated with his ministers. 
Landing a short distance from him, that bull among tawny monkeys 
Angada, with his golden armlets, stood there like a blazing fire. After first 
identifying himself in his own words, he then repeated that entire excellent 
speech of Rama to Ravana and his ministers, neither adding nor omitting 
anything. 

[66-70] “I am a messenger of Rama, the lord of Kosala, tireless in 
action. I am called Angada, son of Valin, perhaps you have heard of me. 
Rama Raghava, the bringer of joy to Kausalya, says this to you: ‘Savage, 
lowest of men, come out and fight. I am going to kill you along with your 
counselors, sons, friends, and all your kinsmen. Once you have been slain, 
the three worlds will be free of your menace. This very day, I shall pluck 


you out, thorn that you are in the side of the seers and foe of the gods, 
danavas, yaksas, gandharvas, great serpents, and raksasas. If you do not 
give back Vaidehi, after first begging her forgiveness and falling at my feet, 
then, once you have been killed, the kingship shall be Vibhisana’s.’ ” 

[71-77] As that bull among tawny monkeys was uttering these harsh 
words, the lord of the host of night-roaming raksasas was transported with 
rage. His eyes red with rage, he then repeatedly commanded his ministers, 
“Seize this fool and kill him!” Upon hearing Ravana’s words, four dreadful 
night-roaming rdksasas, whose energy was like that of a blazing fire, seized 
Angada. Tara’s heroic son freely allowed himself to be captured in order to 
demonstrate his power before the hosts of the yatudhdnas. Then Angada 
leapt to the top of the palace, which resembled a mountain peak, carrying 
with him those raksasas who clung to his arms like locusts. Shaken loose 
by his speed, all four rdksasas fell from the sky to the ground right before 
the eyes of the raksasa lord. And then, as he landed upon the pinnacle of 
the palace, lofty as a mountain peak, it crumbled right before the eyes of 
ten-necked Ravana. 

[78-82] When he had smashed the pinnacle of the palace, he loudly 
proclaimed his own name, and then, letting out a great roar, he flew off 
through the sky. Ravana flew into a towering rage at the assault on his 
palace. But foreseeing his own destruction, he fell to sighing. But as for 
Rama—eager to slay his enemy—he advanced for battle in the company of 
many leaping monkeys, who roared in their excitement. Then, at Sugriva’s 
command, the tawny monkey Susena—immensely powerful, unassailable, 
and resembling a mountain peak—surrounded by many monkeys, who 
could take on any form at will, made a tour of all four city gates, much as 
the moon passes through the lunar mansions. 

[83-86] When the rdksasas saw those hundreds of armies of forest- 
dwelling monkeys laying siege to Lanka and stretching all the way to the 
sea, some of them were amazed, some were terrified, while others were 
filled with excitement because of their fervor for battle. Since the entire 
area between the ramparts and the moat was covered with monkeys, the 
disheartened raksasas gazed upon what appeared to be a wall of monkeys. 
In the midst of that terrifying and tumultuous uproar in the rdksasa capital, 
the rdksasas took up their mighty weapons and raced about, like the fierce 
winds at the end of a cosmic era. 


Sarga 32 
[1-5] Then the raksasas went straightaway to Ravana’s palace and reported 
to him that Rama and the monkeys had laid siege to the city. When the 
night-roaming rdaksasa heard that the city was besieged, he grew furious. 
After first doubling his defensive arrangements, he climbed up to the 
terrace of the palace. He saw that Lanka, together with its hills, parks, and 
woodlands, was surrounded on all sides by countless troops of tawny 
monkeys, eager for battle. Seeing the entire land swallowed up by monkeys, 
he fell to brooding, thinking, “How can they be destroyed?” After brooding 
for a long time, Ravana drew upon his fortitude and gazed wide-eyed at 
Raghava and the troops of tawny monkeys. 

[6-12] As the raksasa lord stood watching, the armies, division after 
division, began to scale the walls of Lanka in order to accomplish 
Raghava’s most cherished desire. Willing to lay down their lives for Rama’s 
sake, the red-faced monkeys, shimmering like gold, advanced upon Lanka 
armed with sd/a and tala trees as well as boulders. Those leaping monkeys 
smashed the lofty tops of palaces and gateway arches with trees, 
mountaintops, and even their fists. With earth, mountaintops, grass, and 
timber, the monkeys filled in the moats, which had held clear water. Then 
other troop leaders with their troops that numbered in the thousands, tens of 
millions, and billions scaled the walls of Lanka. Like great bull elephants, 
the leaping monkeys advanced upon Lanka, jumping back and _ forth, 
roaring, crushing golden archways, and smashing towers that resembled the 
peaks of Mount Kailasa. 

[13-19] Those leaping monkeys, who could take on any form at will, 
hurled themselves upon the ramparts of Lanka, roaring and shouting, 
“Victory to supremely powerful Rama and mighty Laksmana! Victory to 
King Sugriva, who is protected by Raghava!” Virabahu, Subahu, and the 
forest-ranging Nala, leaders of the troops of tawny monkeys, made a breach 
in the rampart and stationed themselves there. At that juncture, they 
established a bridgehead. Accompanied by a hundred million tawny 
monkeys, all with a victorious air, mighty Kumuda stationed himself at the 
eastern gate, blockading it. The powerful and valorous monkey Satabali 
proceeded with two hundred million troops to the southern gate and took up 
his post there, blockading it. Tara’s father, the powerful tawny monkey 


Susena, proceeded to the western gate with six hundred million troops and 
took up his post there, blockading it. 

[20-24] Together with Saumitri, mighty Rama himself and Sugriva, lord 
of the tawny monkeys, approached the northern gate and took up their 
posts, blockading it. At Rama’s side stood the huge langur Gavaksa. 
Enormously powerful, mighty, and dreadful to look upon, he was 
accompanied by ten million troops. Also at Rama’s side stood valorous 
Dhumra, crusher of his foes, accompanied by ten million apes of terrifying 
speed. There too, accompanied by his ministers, stood immensely powerful 
and valorous Vibhisana, girded for war, his mace in hand. Gaja, Gavaksa, 
Gavaya, Sarabha, and Gandhamadana patrolled swiftly on all sides, 
guarding the army of tawny monkeys. 

[25—28] Then Ravana, lord of the rdksasas, his mind suffused with rage, 
ordered all of his forces to make an immediate sortie. Urged on by Ravana, 
his troops rushed forth in great excitement, like the waves of the great 
ocean when, at the appointed time, it is filled to overflowing. At that 
juncture, a horrific battle ensued between the rdksasas and the monkeys, 
just like the one long ago between the gods and the asuras. The dreadful 
rdaksasas slaughtered the monkeys with blazing maces, lances, javelins, and 
battle-axes, boasting of their valorous deeds. 

[29-32] Similarly, the huge and swift monkeys slaughtered the raksasas 
with trees, mountaintops, claws, and teeth. Meanwhile, other dreadful 
rdaksasas positioned on the rampart hewed the monkeys on the ground with 
short javelins, swords, and lances. But the leaping monkeys on the ground 
were enraged and, leaping up, hurled down the rdaksasas stationed on the 
ramparts. That tumultuous conflict of the raksasas and monkeys, in which 
the ground grew thick with flesh and blood, was something unimaginable. 


Sarga 33 
[1-4] As those great monkeys continued to fight, a terrible rage against 
their army arose among the rdksasas. Those tigers among rdksasas sallied 
forth, causing the ten directions to resound. They were rdksasas of dreadful 
deeds, eager for Ravana’s victory. They had golden-plumed horses, battle 
standards that resembled flames of fire, chariots resplendent as the sun, and 
exquisite armor. And the vast host of monkeys, who also desired victory, 


hurled itself upon the army of the raksasas, who could take on any form at 
will. 

[S—9] At this juncture, as they hurled themselves at one another, the 
monkeys and the raksasas engaged in single combat. The rdksasa Indrayjit 
fought with Angada, V4lin’s son, just as long ago the immensely powerful 
asura Andhaka fought with three-eyed Siva. Sampati, ever irresistible in 
battle, fought with Prajyangha, while the monkey Hanuman engaged 
Jambumialin. In a towering rage, Ravana’s younger brother, the raksasa 
Vibhisana, closed in combat with Mitraghna, of blazing speed. Mighty Gaja 
fought with the raksasa Tapana, and powerful Nila with Nikumbha. 

[10-15] The lord of the monkeys, Sugriva, engaged with Praghasa, while 
majestic Laksmana closed in battle with Virtipaksa. Rama engaged with the 
irresistible Agniketu, the raksasa Rasmiketu, Suptaghna, and Yajfakopa. 
Two of the leading monkeys engaged with a pair of particularly dreadful 
raksasas: Mainda with Vajramusti and Dvivida with Asaniprabha. The 
heroic and dreadful raksasa Pratapana, irresistible in battle, engaged in 
combat with Nala, of blazing speed. The son of Dharma, the great and 
powerful monkey known as Susena, fought with Vidyunmalin. And many 
other fearsome monkeys engaged in single combat in various ways with 
many other raksasas. 

[16-17] The great battle that took place there between the heroic 
raksasas and monkeys, both desirous of victory, was tumultuous and hair- 
raising. From the bodies of the tawny monkeys and raksasas flowed 
gushing rivers of blood, with hair in place of weeds and carrying logjams of 
corpses. 

[18—22] In a rage, Indrajit struck the heroic Angada, breaker of enemy 
ranks, with his mace, just as Indra of the hundred sacrifices might with his 
vajra. And in that combat, the swift monkey, majestic Angada, smashed 
Indrajit’s gilded chariot together with its horses and charioteer. Prajangha 
shot Sampati with three arrows; but he, in turn, struck Prajangha with an 
asvakarna tree in the vanguard of battle. In that battle, immensely powerful 
Jambumialin, furious, mounted his chariot and, with a javelin he kept there, 
struck Hanuman in the middle of the chest. But Hanuman, the son of 
Maruta, leapt upon Jambuméalin’s chariot and, with a blow of his hand, 
swiftly destroyed it together with that raksasa. 


[23-27] Then Gaja, his body pierced by the sharp arrows of the 
dexterous raksasa Tapana, smashed him with a mountain peak held in his 
fist. Sugriva, overlord of the monkeys, then killed Praghasa, who seemed 
almost to be devouring the troops, smashing him to pieces with a 
saptaparna tree. After tormenting the fearsome-looking rdksasa Virupaksa 
with a hail of arrows, Laksmana killed him with a single shaft. The 
irresistible Agniketu, the raksasa Rasmiketu, Suptaghna, and Yajfakopa all 
pierced Rama with their arrows. But with four fearsome arrows resembling 
tongues of flame, Rama, enraged, lopped off the heads of all four of them in 
battle. 

[28-31] In combat Mainda smashed Vajramusti with his fist so that, 
along with his chariot and horses, he crashed down to the earth, like the 
lofty tower of a citadel. Then Dvivida, whose blows were like that of 
Indra’s vajra or thunderbolt, struck Asaniprabha with a mountain peak right 
before the eyes of all the rdksasas. But in the battle, with arrows that 
resembled thunderbolts, Asaniprabha, in turn, riddled the monkey lord 
Dvivida, who used trees as weapons. And, in turn, with a sd/a tree, Dvivida, 
his body bristling with arrows and beside himself with rage, crushed 
Asaniprabha, along with his horses and chariot. 

[32-34] Then, in battle, Nikumbha pierced Nila, whose dark luster was 
like that of a mass of collyrium, with sharp arrows, just as the many-rayed 
sun pierces a dark cloud with its beams. Next, that dexterous night-roaming 
raksasa Nikumbha once again riddled Nila in combat with a hundred 
arrows and laughed. But Nila, like Visnu in battle, cut off the heads of 
Nikumbha and his charioteer in combat with a discus taken from their 
chariot. 

[35-41] Mounted in his chariot, Vidyunmalin struck Susena with gold- 
inlaid arrows and roared repeatedly. Then, seeing him mounted in his 
chariot, that foremost among monkeys Susena quickly smashed the chariot 
with a huge mountain peak. But the night-roaming raksasa Vidyunmalin, 
who was endowed with great speed, swiftly leapt from his chariot and, 
mace in hand, made a stand on the ground. Then, suffused with rage, 
Susena, that bull among the tawny monkeys, seized an enormous boulder 
and charged at the night-roaming rdaksasa. With his mace, the night- 
roaming raksasa Vidyunmalin swiftly struck Susena, foremost of tawny 
monkeys, who was rushing toward him, in the chest. But that best of 


leaping monkeys paid no heed to that terrible blow of the mace, and in that 
great battle, he hurled the boulder down upon Vidyunmiélin’s chest. Struck 
by the blow of that boulder, the night-roaming raksasa Vidyunmalin fell 
lifeless to the earth, his chest crushed. 

[4246] In this fashion, the valorous monkeys slaughtered the valorous 
night-roaming rdksasas in single combat, just as the gods, dwellers in 
heaven, slaughtered the daityvas. With its crescent-headed arrows, swords, 
maces, javelins, iron cudgels, spears, broken chariots, butchered warhorses, 
slaughtered rutting elephants, monkeys, and radksasas, and shattered wheels, 
axles, and yokes lying on the ground, the battlefield, haunted by packs of 
jackals, was a place of horror. And in that tumultuous conflict, which was 
comparable to the battle of the gods and the asuras, headless corpses of 
monkeys and raksasas leapt about in every direction. As they were being 
torn to pieces by the bulls among the tawny monkeys, the night-roaming 
raksasas, their limbs smeared with blood, swiftly hurled themselves into 
battle once again, anxious now for the sun, maker of day, to set. 


Sarga 34 

[1-4] As the monkeys and raksasas continued to fight, the sun set and a 
deadly night came on. Then ensued a clash by night between those 
terrifying monkeys and raksasas, locked in their mutual hostility, all of 
them eager for victory. In that terrible darkness they slaughtered one 
another in battle: the tawny monkeys crying, “Are you a raksasa?” and the 
raksasas crying, “Are you a monkey?” “Kill!” “Rend” “Come on!” “What, 
running away?” Such were the tumultuous cries that were heard in that 
darkness. 

[S—9] With their golden armor, in the darkness, the swarthy raksasas 
looked like great mountains with thickets of luminescent herbs. Beside 
themselves with fury, the swift raksasas raced about in that impenetrable 
darkness, devouring the leaping monkeys. But the monkeys hurled 
themselves upon the rdksasas’ golden-plumed horses and their battle 
standards that resembled flames of fire and, in a terrifying rage, tore them to 
pieces with their sharp fangs. Beside themselves with fury, they dragged 
about elephants with their riders and chariots bedecked with pennants and 
banners, slashing at them with their fangs. Meanwhile, with arrows that 


resembled venomous serpents, Laksmana and Rama cut down the foremost 
among the rdksasas, whom they could make out but dimly in the darkness. 

[10-15] The thick dust raised by the horses’ hooves and chariot wheels 
blocked up the eyes and ears of the warriors. And there, as that terrible, 
hair-raising battle proceeded in this fashion, swift rivers with blood for 
water began to flow. And there arose an astonishing sound of battle drums 
—bheris, mrdangas, and panavas—mingled with sounds of conch and 
flute. A very horrifying clamor arose from the clash of arms and from the 
rdksasas and monkeys, screaming as they were struck down. Strewn with 
weapons, as if with floral offerings, and thick with mud that oozed blood, 
the battleground was impassable, transformed beyond all recognition. Like 
Kalaratri, the dark night of universal destruction, which no living thing can 
escape, that dreadful night was devastating to both the raksasas and the 
tawny monkeys. 

[16—22] Then, in that terrible darkness, the frenzied rdksasas attacked 
Rama with hails of arrows. And the uproar that they made as they rushed 
upon him, roaring in fury, was like the sound of the upheaval of the seven 
seas at the time of universal destruction. But in the blink of an eye, with six 
sharp arrows, like flames of fire, Rama struck six of those night-roaming 
rdksasas: unassailable Yajfasatru, Mahaparsva, Mahodara, the giant 
Vajradamstra, and both Suka and Sarana. Pierced in every vital point by 
Rama with his hail of arrows, they crawled away from the battle, barely 
clinging to life. Then mighty Rama illuminated all directions with his 
arrows, which, with their shafts adorned with gold, resembled flames of 
fire. As for the remaining raksasa heroes who stood their ground before 
Rama, they too were destroyed, like moths entering a flame. 

[23-26] With thousands of arrows flying, their feathers fletched with 
gold, the night was as lovely as an autumnal evening sparkling with 
fireflies. The bellowing of the raksasas and the roaring of the tawny 
monkeys made that dreadful night more dreadful still. As that deafening 
sound increased on every side, Mount Trikita, with its many echoing 
caverns, seemed almost to shout in reply. Huge langurs, as black as the 
darkness itself, crushed night-roaming raksasas in their arms, rending them 
with their fangs. 

[27-30] At this point, Angada threw himself into the battle in order to 
destroy his enemy. He swiftly slew the charioteer and horses of Indrayit 


Ravani. His horses and charioteer slain by Angada, Indrajit, who possessed 
great powers of illusion, vanished on the spot. The evil Indrajit Ravani, a 
hero ruthless in battle, possessed a boon from Brahma. Seething with rage, 
he concealed himself; and, unseen, he loosed sharp arrows, blazing like 
lightning bolts. In a rage, the raksasa pierced Rama and Laksmana in every 
part of their bodies with dreadful arrows in the form of great serpents. 


Sarga 35 

[1-4] Eager to find out where Indrajit had gone, the valorous and 
exceedingly mighty Prince Rama ordered ten leaders of the monkey troops 
to search for him. That scorcher of his foes gave his command to the two 
sons of Susena, that bull among leaping monkeys Nila, Angada, son of 
Valin, swift Sarabha, Vinata, Jambavan, mighty Sanuprastha, Rsabha, and 
Rsabhaskandha. In great excitement, those tawny monkeys ripped up 
fearsome trees as they all flung themselves into the sky, searching the ten 
directions. 

[S—9] But Indrajit Ravani, expert in divine weapon-spells, used the 
greatest of such weapon-spells to halt the swift movement of those swift 
monkeys with arrows that were swifter still. Pierced and mutilated by his 
iron arrows, those tawny monkeys of terrifying speed could not discern 
him, obscured as he was by darkness, as is the sun by clouds. Indrajit 
Ravani, victorious in battle, completely overwhelmed Rama and Laksmana 
with arrows that pierced every vital point. In his fury Indrajit riddled the 
heroic brothers, Rama and Laksmana, with great serpents that had turned 
into arrows. Their bodies were thus thickly covered with arrows that had 
not a hair’s breadth between them. From their wounds, the pathways of 
blood, the blood flowed copiously so that they both resembled kimsuka 
trees covered with their bright red blossoms. 

[10-15] Then, as hard to discern as a scattered mass of collyrium, 
Indrajit Ravani, his eyes rimmed with red, addressed the two brothers in 
these words: “Not even Sakra himself, the lord of the thirty gods, can see 
me or attack me when I fight unseen. How much less could the two of you? 
Raghavas! In my towering rage, I shall send you both—tightly bound in my 
web of heron-fletched arrows—to the abode of Yama.” When he had 
spoken in this fashion to the brothers Rama and Laksmana, who understood 
righteousness, he pierced them with sharp arrows, as he exulted and roared. 


As obscure as a scattered mass of collyrium, he drew his great bow and 
again and again let fly terrifying arrows in that great conflict. Roaring 
repeatedly, that hero, who knew the vital points, sank sharp arrows into the 
vitals of Rama and Laksmana. 

[16—21] In the blink of an eye, the two of them were so tightly bound in 
the bonds of those arrows there in the forefront of the battle that they could 
not even see. Then, pierced with arrows and darts and wounded in every 
limb, the two of them trembled, like two of great Indra’s flagstaffs cut loose 
from their sustaining cords. Weakened by the piercing of their vitals, those 
two great archers, heroic lords of the earth, staggered and fell to the earth. 
Their every limb constricted by arrows, suffering and in great agony, the 
two heroes lay upon the battlefield, a hero’s bed, spattered with blood. 
sThere was not a finger’s breadth between the wounds that covered their 
bodies. There was no part of their bodies down to their very fingertips that 
had not been wounded and immobilized by straight-flying arrows. Struck 
down by that fierce raksasa, who could take on any form at will, they both 
poured forth their blood copiously, as two fountains might their water. 

[22—26]| Rama fell first, pierced to the vitals with arrows by the raging 
Indrajit, who had once defeated Sakra. Indrajit had riddled him with iron 
arrows, half-iron arrows, crescent-headed arrows, and arrows with heads 
like folded palms, calves’ teeth, lions’ fangs, and razors. Rama lay there on 
the battlefield, a hero’s bed, clutching his gilded, thrice-curved bow, now 
unstrung, its grip shattered. Seeing Rama, that bull among men, fallen there 
in the midst of that hail of arrows, Laksmana despaired of his own life. And 
the monkeys, headed by Hanuman, the son of Vayu, gathered and stood 
surrounding the two fallen heroes, who lay in bondage. In their affliction, 
they too became deeply despondent. 


Sarga 36 
[1-7] Then the forest-dwelling monkeys, glancing nervously at the earth 
and the sky, gazed upon the two brothers Rama and Laksmana, who were 
riddled with arrows. When the raksasa had accomplished his task and 
ceased his onslaught, like the god Indra after pouring down the rains, 
Vibhisana arrived at that spot together with Sugriva. Nila, Dvivida, Mainda, 
Susena, Sumukha, and Angada, together with Hanuman, began at once to 
mourn the two Raghavas. As the monkeys, along with Vibhisana, gazed 


upon the two fallen Raghavas, ensnared in a web of arrows, they were all 
shaken to their depths. For both heroes were motionless, barely breathing, 
and drenched in gouts of blood. Lying on beds of arrows, they were 
immobilized, tightly bound with webs of arrows. Their labored breathing 
was like the hissing of snakes; they barely moved for their strength had all 
but left them. Their bodies drenched in streams of blood, they resembled 
flagstaffs of burnished gold. Surrounded by the troop leaders, whose eyes 
were filled with tears, the two heroes lay there on the battlefield, a hero’s 
bed, barely moving. 

[8—10] Although the monkeys scanned the sky and all directions, they 
could not see Indrajit Ravani, who had concealed himself in the battle with 
his powers of illusion. But Vibhisana, in looking about, was able, through 
his own supernatural powers, to discern his brother’s son, who stood there, 
concealed by his powers of illusion. Vibhisana was thus able to see that 
hero, unequaled in his feats and unrivaled in battle, who had concealed 
himself through the gift of a boon. 

[11-16] But Indrajit, as he observed his handiwork and the two heroes 
lying there, was supremely pleased with himself, and he spoke as follows to 
the delight of all the raksasas, sons of chaos: “The two mighty brothers, 
Rama and Laksmana, slayers of Khara and Disana, have been struck down 
by my arrows. Not even all the gods and asuras together, along with the 
hosts of seers, can free these two from the bonds of my arrows. I have put 
an end to the menace they posed, which could have destroyed us all. It is 
because of them that the three watches of the night now pass without my 
father—consumed as he was by anxiety—so much as touching his bed. And 
it is because of them that the whole city of Lanka has become as turbulent 
as a river in the rainy season. All the valorous deeds of Rama, Laksmana, 
and all the forest-dwelling monkeys have proven to be as fruitless as rain 
clouds in autumn.” 

[17-19] When he had spoken in this fashion to all the raksasas who 
stood beside him, Ravani began once more to assail all the leaders of the 
monkey troops. Once he had afflicted them with torrents of arrows and 
terrified the monkeys, the great-armed hero laughed and said this: “Look, 
rdaksasas, at those two brothers, whom I have bound with the terrible bonds 
of my arrows right in front of their troops!” 


[20-23] Addressed in this fashion, the raksasas, treacherous fighters all, 
were greatly amazed and gratified by that feat. Thinking, “Rama has been 
slain!” those raksasas, who resembled storm clouds, uttered a great roar and 
honored Ravani. Seeing both Rama and Laksmana motionless on the 
ground and scarcely breathing, he assumed that they had been killed. Filled 
with delight, Indrajit, victorious in battle, entered the citadel of Lanka to the 
delight of all the raksasas, sons of chaos. 

[24-28] When Sugriva saw that the bodies of Rama and Laksmana were 
riddled with arrows in each and every limb, terror seized him. Then 
Vibhisana addressed the monkey king, who was terrified and dejected, his 
face covered with tears and his eyes suffused with sorrow: “Enough of this 
faintheartedness, Sugriva! Hold back this flood of tears! Battles are often 
like this. Victory is far from certain. If there is any remnant of good fortune 
left to us, hero, the brothers Rama and Laksmana will regain consciousness. 
So pull yourself together, monkey, and thus encourage me, who am without 
any recourse. Those who are devoted to the true path of righteousness have 
no fear of death.” 

[29-38] When he had spoken in this fashion, Vibhisana dipped his hand 
in water and, with it, wiped Sugriva’s lovely eyes. Once he had wiped the 
wise monkey king’s face, he calmly spoke these timely words: “This is not 
the time to give way to despair, greatest of monkey kings. Moreover, at this 
inopportune moment, excessive tenderness could prove fatal. Therefore, 
you must abandon despair, which undermines all endeavors. You must think 
about what would be best for these troops under Rama’s leadership. Rather, 
you should stand guard over Rama until he regains consciousness. Once the 
two Kakutsthas have regained consciousness, they will dispel our fear. This 
is nothing to Rama; nor is he about to die. For that vital glow, which is 
never found in the dead, is not deserting him. So you must console yourself 
and rally your forces while I regroup all the troops. For, bull among tawny 
monkeys, these tawny monkeys, filled with alarm, their eyes wide with 
terror, are spreading rumors from ear to ear. But once the tawny monkeys 
see me rushing about to encourage the army, they will cast aside their fear, 
as one would a used garland.” Once that foremost of raksasas Vibhisana 
had reassured Sugriva, he set about rallying the terrified monkey army. 

[39-43] But as for Indrajit, that great master of illusion, he entered the 
city of Lanka, surrounded by all his troops, and presented himself before his 


father. Hands cupped in reverence, he respectfully greeted his father, 
Ravana, who was seated there, and told him the good news that Rama and 
Laksmana had been slain. When Ravana heard that his two enemies had 
been felled, he leapt up in great delight and embraced his son, right in the 
midst of the raksasas. Delighted at heart, he kissed him on the head before 
questioning him. Indrajit then reported everything, just as it had happened, 
to his father, who was questioning him. His heart flooded with a great 
access of joy upon hearing the words of that great chariot-warrior, he cast 
aside the anxiety that Dasarathi had caused and, in great delight, praised his 
son. 


Sarga 37 

[1-4] Once Indrajit, the son of Ravana, had returned to Lanka, his mission 
accomplished, the bulls among monkeys, in great distress, surrounded 
Raghava to protect him. Then those monkeys—Hanuman, Angada, Nila, 
Susena, Kumuda, Nala, Gaja, Gavaksa, Gavaya, Sarabha, Gandhamadana, 
Jambavan, Rsabha, Sunda, Rambha, Satabali, and Prthu—put their troops in 
battle formation and, maintaining a watch on all sides, armed themselves 
with trees. Scanning all directions, above as well as on every side, they 
thought at the mere stirring of the grass that the raksasas had come. 

[S—10] Meanwhile, in great delight, Ravana, having dismissed his son 
Indrajit, summoned the raksasa women who were guarding Sita. Those 
rdksasa women, together with Triata, attended upon him at his command. 
Then, in great delight, the lord of the raksasas addressed those rdksasa 
women: “You are to tell Vaidehi that Rama and Laksmana have been slain 
by Indrayit. Then take her in the flying palace Puspaka and show her the two 
of them, slain on the battlefield. That husband of hers, relying on whom she 
stubbornly spurned me, has been destroyed, along with his brother, in the 
vanguard of battle. Now Sita Maithili, free from anxiety, longing, and hope, 
and adorned with all manner of jewelry, will surely come to me. 'Seeing 
that Rama, along with Laksmana, has succumbed to the power of Kala in 
battle and finding no alternative, she will have her hopes finally dashed this 
very day.” 

[11-13] Upon hearing those words of evil-minded Ravana, the raksasa 
women said, “So be it,” and went off to where the flying palace Puspaka 
was. Then, in compliance with Ravana’s command, the radksasa women 


took the flying palace Puspaka and fetched Maithili, who was in the asoka 
grove. The rdksasa women seized Sita, who was lost in sorrow for her 
husband, and forced her into the flying palace Puspaka. 

[14-15] Once Ravana had seen to it that Sita had been taken aboard the 
flying palace Puspaka along with Trijata, he had Lanka festooned with 
pennants and banners. And in great delight, the lord of the raksasas had the 
following proclamation made throughout Lanka: “Indrajit has slain 
Raghava and Laksmana in battle!” 

[16-21] Meanwhile, Sita, traveling with Trijata in the flying palace, saw 
that practically the entire monkey army had been annihilated. And she saw 
that the flesh-eating raksasas were delighted at heart, while the monkeys 
standing beside Rama and Laksmana were afflicted with sorrow. Then Sita 
spied both Laksmana and Rama lying unconscious on their beds of arrows, 
riddled with arrows. Their armor was shattered and their bows had slipped 
from their grasp. Their every limb riddled with arrows, the two heroes 
looked like two pillars of arrows fallen to the ground. When Sita saw the 
two heroic brothers, those bulls among men, she was overwhelmed with 
terrible grief, and she lamented piteously. Seeing those two brothers, who 
were equal in power to the gods, Sita, overwhelmed with tears and sorrow, 
assumed that they were dead. Stricken with grief, she uttered these words. 


Sarga 38 

[1-5] When Sita, drawn with grief, saw that her husband as well as mighty 
Laksmana had been struck down, she lamented piteously and profusely: 
‘Those scholars who know the science of bodily signs said that I would bear 
sons and never be a widow. Now that Rama has been slain, iit is clear that 
all those wise men spoke falsely. And they said that I would be the chief 
queen of a king who performed the rites of royalty, the wife of a great 
patron of sacrifices. Now that Rama has been slain, “it 1s clear that all those 
wise men spoke falsely. And although they told me, ‘You shall be the wife 
of a heroic king and very fortunate,’ now that Rama has been slain, ‘it is 
clear that all those wise men spoke falsely. And as for those twice-born 
brahmans, the astrologers who foretold in my presence that I should enjoy 
good fortune, now that Rama has been slain, it is clear that all those wise 
men spoke falsely. 


[6-8] “And here, on my feet, are those lotus marks, whereby it is said 
women come to be consecrated for sovereignty together with their royal 
husbands. Nor, though I search for them, do I find on my body those 
inauspicious signs whereby unfortunate women become widows. Indeed, 
the signs on my body are meaningless. In the science of bodily signs, the 
lotus marks of women are said to be infallible. But now that Rama has been 
slain, they have proven false for me. 

[9-13] “My hair is fine, even, and dark. My eyebrows do not meet. My 
legs are smooth and tapering, and my teeth are closely set. And my temples, 
eyes, hands, feet, ankles, and thighs are nicely developed. My nails are 
rounded and glossy. My fingers and toes are well proportioned. My breasts, 
their nipples sunken, are full and closely set. My navel is deep with sloping 
sides. My chest and sides are nicely developed. My complexion has the 
radiance of a jewel. My body hair is fine. Since I stand so firmly on my feet 
—all twelve points making contact—they said that I was possessed of 
auspicious signs. My hands and feet are of excellent color, without gaps, 
and marked with the auspicious sign of a whole barleycorn. Those who 
know the science of the bodily signs of girls said of me, ‘She has that faint 
smile.’ 

[14-19] “The brahman astrologers foretold that I should be consecrated 
for sovereignty together with my husband. Now that has all proven false. 
After scouring Janasthana and finding out what had become of me, the two 
brothers crossed the imperturbable ocean only to be slain in a petty 
skirmish. Didn’t the two Raghavas obtain the divine weapon-spells of 
Varuna, Agni, Indra, and Vayu, as well as the divine Brahmasiras weapon- 
spell? My two protectors, Rama and Laksmana, who are comparable to 
Vasava himself, have been slain in battle by an invisible foe through the 
power of illusion. Now there is no one to protect me. For in battle no enemy 
whom Raghava could see would have escaped with his life, even were he as 
swift as thought itself. Since Rama and his brother lie slain in battle, I see 
that nothing is beyond the power of Kala and that it is impossible to avert 
one’s fate. 

[20-21] “I do not grieve for my slain husband and Laksmana, nor for 
myself and my mother, as much as for my poor mother-in-law. For she must 
be constantly thinking, ‘Oh, when will I see Rama, his vow completed, 
return together with Sita and Laksmana?’ ” 


[22-28] But as Sita was lamenting in this fashion, the raksasa woman 
Triyata said to her: “Do not despair, my lady, for your husband still lives. 
And I shall give you powerful and convincing reasons, my lady, why the 
brothers Rama and Laksmana must be alive. For if their leader had been 
slain in battle, his troops’ faces would not be so suffused with anger and 
animated with excitement. Moreover, Vaidehi, if those two heroes had 
really lost their lives, this celestial flying palace, which goes by the name of 
Puspaka, would not be carrying you. Then, too, when its heroic leader is 
slain, an army, dispirited and irresolute, drifts aimlessly across the 
battlefield, like a rudderless vessel on the water. But this army is neither 
confused nor despondent. On the contrary, it is moving swiftly to protect 
the two Kakutsthas, who have been defeated in battle by the power of 
illusion. You should be reassured by these signs, which presage happiness. 
You must realize that the Kakutsthas have not been slain. I tell you this out 
of affection. 

[29-33] “I have never uttered a falsehood, nor will I ever. Through your 
virtuous conduct and pleasant demeanor, you have found a place in my 
heart. These two could never be defeated in battle even by the gods and 
asuras together with Indra. I have told you this on the basis of my 
observation of their faces. And observe carefully, Maithili, the most 
important sign of all: although they are both unconscious, their vital glow 
has not left them. For, invariably, when men have lost their vital spark and 
breath of life, a terrible change is apparent in their faces. So, daughter of 
Janaka, you must give up your grief, pain, and delusion on account of Rama 
and Laksmana. For it is not possible that they could have been killed this 
day.” 

[34-37] When Sita Maithili, who was like a daughter of the gods, had 
heard these words of Trijataé, she cupped her hands in reverence and said 
this: “May it be so.” Trijata then turned around the flying palace Puspaka, 
swift as thought, and took the despondent Sita back to Lanka. When Sita, 
together with Trijata, had descended from the flying palace Puspaka, the 
raksasa women took her straight back to the asoka grove. Sita entered the 
raksasa l\ord’s pleasure ground with its many groves of trees. And there, 
brooding about the king’s sons whom she had just seen, she sank into the 
most profound despair. 


Sarga 39 

[1-3] Meanwhile, overcome with grief, all the mighty monkey leaders, 
including Sugriva, stood surrounding the two great sons of DaSaratha. As 
the two of them lay there drenched in blood, bound with the terrible bonds 
of arrows, their labored breathing was like the hissing of great serpents. At 
that moment, because he was so hardy and through the exertion of his 
strength, powerful Rama regained consciousness, though he remained 
bound by the arrows. 

[4-7] But then, when he saw that his brother was stricken—deeply 
wounded, covered with blood, his face deathly—he began to lament in his 
desolation: “What do I care for Sita or even for my life itself now that I see 
my brother lying defeated in battle? Were I to search the world, I could find 
another woman like Sita, but never a brother, a companion, or a warrior to 
equal Laksmana. If Laksmana, the increaser of Sumitra’s joy, has indeed 
returned to the elements, then I shall abandon my life right before the eyes 
of the monkeys. 

[8—11] “Whatever shall I tell Kausalya, and what shall I tell mother 
Kaikey1? And how shall I tell mother Sumitra, longing for the sight of her 
son? And how shall I console Sumitra, trembling and shrieking like an 
osprey at the loss of her darling son, if I should return without him? And 
how shall I tell Satrughna and the illustrious Bharata, if I were to go back 
again without him with whom I went to the forest? Alas! I shall not be able 
to endure the reproaches of Sumitra. I shall abandon my body right here, for 
I cannot bear to go on living. 

[12-17] “Damn me, an ignoble evildoer, on whose account Laksmana 
lies fallen on a bed of arrows, his life breaths ebbing. You always used to 
comfort me, Laksmana, when I was downcast. But now, your life breaths 
ebbing, you can no longer even speak to me in my pain. That hero, who 
struck down so many raksasas in combat on the field of battle, now lies on 
the very same field, struck down by his foes. Lying on this bed of arrows, 
covered with his own blood, and bound in a web of arrows, he looks like 
the sun, bringer of light, as it sets. His vitals pierced with arrows, he can no 
longer see. And although he cannot speak, the expression of his eyes 
betrays his torment. Just as that glorious hero followed me as I went to the 
forest, so will I now follow him to the abode of Yama. 


[18—21] “He always cherished his family, and he was ever devoted to 
me. But now through my failed tactics—ignoble as I am—he has been 
reduced to this state. I cannot recall heroic Laksmana ever uttering a harsh 
or unpleasant word, even when he was enraged. Laksmana, who could 
loose five hundred arrows in one swift motion, thus surpassed even 
Kartavirya himself in archery. He who, with his divine weapon-spells, could 
destroy the divine weapon-spells of even great Sakra and who deserves the 
most costly bed now lies stricken on the bare earth. 

[22-29] “In that I have failed to make Vibhisana the king of the 
raksasas, there is no doubt that what has proven to be my idle boast will 
torment me. And you, King Sugriva, should return home this very instant, 
for once mighty Ravana realizes that you no longer have me to assist you, 
he will attack. Placing Angada in the lead, you, together with your troops 
and allies, must once again cross the ocean by that very same bridge. 
Hanuman accomplished feats in battle impossible for others to accomplish. 
I am also well pleased with the king of the apes and the overlord of the 
langurs. Angada accomplished great deeds, as did Mainda and Dvivida, 
while Kesarin and Sampati fought fearsome battles in the war. Gavaya, 
Gavaksa, Sarabha, Gaja, and the other tawny monkeys fought on my behalf, 
heedless of their lives. Truly, Sugriva, it is impossible for men to evade 
their fate. Nonetheless, Sugriva, scorcher of your foes, in your anxiety lest 
you transgress righteousness, you did everything that was possible for a 
friend or ally to do. Bulls among monkeys! You have discharged the 
obligations of friendship. I therefore give you all leave. You may depart as 
you please.” 

[30-32] As those tawny-eyed monkeys listened to R&ama’s lament, they 
began to weep. Meanwhile, Vibhisana, having prevented all the troops from 
fleeing, rushed back, mace in hand, to where Raghava lay. But when the 
monkeys saw him rushing toward them, like a mass of black collyrium, 
they all fled, thinking that he was Indrajit Ravani. 


Sarga 40 
[1-6] Then the mighty and powerful king of the tawny monkeys asked: 
“Why is the army fleeing wildly, like a ship driven to and fro by contrary 
winds at sea?” Hearing Sugriva’s words, Valin’s son, Angada, replied: 
“Can’t you see that the two great heroes, the sons of DaSaratha—Rama and 


mighty Laksmana—are lying on beds of arrows, drenched with blood and 
tightly bound with webs of arrows?” Then Sugriva, lord of the monkeys, 
responded to his son, Angada: “I do not doubt that that is one reason. Still, 
there must be some other cause for their alarm. For the tawny monkeys, 
their faces downcast, have dropped their weapons and are fleeing in all 
directions, their eyes wide with terror. They have no sense of shame before 
one another; nor do they look back. They drag one another out of their way 
and leap over the fallen.” 

[7-12] At that very moment, the hero Vibhisana, mace in hand, hailed 
Sugriva and then stared at Raghava. Perceiving that it was Vibhisana who 
was the cause of the monkeys’ terror, Sugriva said to Jambavan, the king of 
the apes, who was close at hand: “It is Vibhisana who has come. Upon 
seeing him, these bulls among monkeys are fleeing in terror, fearing that it 
was Ravana’s son. You must stop them, for, in their terror, they are running 
off in all directions as fast as they can. Tell them that it is only Vibhisana 
who has come.” Addressed in this fashion by Sugriva, Jambavan, the king 
of the apes, turned back the monkeys from their flight and reassured them. 
When the monkeys heard the words of the king of the apes and saw that it 
was indeed Vibhisana, they all abandoned their fear and returned. 

[13-19] But as for righteous Vibhisana, when he saw the bodies of Rama 
and Laksmana riddled with arrows, he became deeply distraught. Wiping 
their eyes with a hand moistened with water, he wept and lamented, his 
heart overwhelmed with sorrow. “These two powerful and brave warriors, 
delighting in battle, have been reduced to this condition by those 
treacherous warriors, the rdksasas. With his crooked rdksasa mind, my 
brother’s evil and unworthy son has tricked these two whose valor was 
untainted by guile. Drenched with blood, they lie sleeping on the ground. 
Completely riddled with arrows, they look like two hedgehogs. These bulls 
among men, upon whose might I had pinned my hopes for royal 
consecration, now both lie sleeping on the point of death. Though still 
living, I am now as good as dead, my hopes of kingship dashed. 
Meanwhile, my enemy, Ravana, has accomplished his vow and has had his 
wish fulfilled.” 

[20-22] As Vibhisana was lamenting in this fashion, powerful Sugriva, 
king of the tawny monkeys, embraced him and said this: “Knower of 
righteousness, you shall obtain kingship over Lanka. Of this there can be no 


doubt. Ravana and his son will not retain the kingship here. Raghava and 
Laksmana are both merely pinioned by arrows. Once they shake off their 
stupor, they will surely kill Ravana and all his troops in battle.” 

[23—25] When he had consoled and reassured the rdksasa in this fashion, 
he spoke to his father-in-law, Susena, who stood at his side: “Take the 
brothers Rama and Laksmana, tamers of their foes, once they have regained 
consciousness, and, together with the heroic hosts of tawny monkeys, go 
back to Kiskindha. But as for me, I shall slay Ravana along with his son and 
his kinsmen and bring back Maithili, just as Sakra did Sri when she was 
lost.” 

[26—32] When Susena had heard this speech of the lord of the monkeys, 
he spoke these words: “I have heard about a great and terrible battle 
between the gods and the asuras. At that time, the danavas, who were 
expert in the use of arrows, concealed themselves and thus repeatedly 
struck down the gods although they too were skilled in weaponry. Then, 
although they were afflicted, unconscious, or dead, Brhaspati restored them 
with healing herbs and spells replete with mantras. Therefore, let Sampati, 
Panasa, and the other monkeys go with all possible speed to the ocean of 
milk to bring back those healing herbs. Those tawny monkeys will 
recognize the two powerful healing herbs that grow on the mountains there, 
the divine samjivakarani, ‘restorer of life,’ and the visalya, ‘healer of arrow 
wounds,’ which was created by the gods. In that great ocean, there are two 
mountains called Candra and Drona. There, where the nectar of immortality 
was churned forth, is where those two supreme herbs of healing are to be 
found. Those two supreme herbs of healing were planted on the mountains 
there by the gods. So, king, let Hanuman, son of Vayu, go there.” 

[33-37] Just at that moment there arose a wind hurling up the water in 
the ocean, driving away the lightning-streaked clouds and seeming almost 
to shake the very mountains. That powerful wind, driven by a pair of wings, 
snapped the branches of all the island’s great trees and sent them flying, 
roots and all, into the salt sea. The hooded serpents who dwelt there were 
terrified and the great sea serpents swiftly plunged deep into the salt sea. 
Then, a moment later, all the monkeys spied immensely powerful Garuda 
Vainateya as radiant as fire, the purifier. And when those great serpents, 
who had assumed the form of arrows and who had bound fast those two 


virtuous and immensely powerful men, saw him coming, they fled in all 
directions. 

[38-40] Then Suparna, spying the Kakutsthas, greeted them and stroked 
their faces, as lustrous as the moon, with both his hands. No sooner had 
Vainateya touched them than their wounds healed over and their bodies 
immediately became smooth and lustrous once more. And their cardinal 
virtues—courage, prowess, strength, vigor, and fortitude, as well as their 
insight, intelligence, and memory—returned to them with redoubled force. 

[41-44] Helping the two delighted heroes, equals of Vasava, to their 
feet, Garuda embraced them. Rama then said this: “Through your grace, sir, 
we have overcome the great calamity wrought here by Ravani and have 
been swiftly restored to our full strength. On meeting you, my heart is as 
soothed as if I had met my father, DasSaratha, or my grandfather, Aja. You 
are endowed with beauty and adorned with heavenly garlands and unguents. 
You wear spotless garments and are adorned with heavenly ornaments. Who 
are you, sir?” 

[45-49] Then mighty and powerful Vainateya, king of the birds, 
delighted at heart, his eyes lighting up with joy, said to him: “I am 
Garutman, Kakutstha, your dear comrade, your second life breath outside 
your body. I have come here to the aid of you both. Neither the powerful 
asuras nor the mighty danavas, not even the gods and gandharvas with 
Indra of the hundred sacrifices at their head, would have been able to loose 
this terrible bondage of arrows effected by cruel Indrajit through the power 
of illusion. Through the raksasa’s power of illusion, those great serpents, 
the sons of Kadri, sharp fanged and fiercely venomous, had become arrows 
and fastened themselves upon you. 

[50-54] “Along with your brother Laksmana, a slayer of enemies in 
battle, you have been fortunate, righteous Rama, true in your valor. For as 
soon as I heard what had happened, I came at once, in great haste, out of my 
affection for you both and to honor my friendship. Now that you have been 
freed from the very dreadful bondage of those arrows, you must both be 
constantly on your guard. By their very nature all rdksasas are treacherous 
fighters in battle. On the other hand, the strength of pure-hearted heroes, 
such as yourselves, lies in the fact that they are honorable. Therefore, you 
two should not trust rdksasas on the battlefield. This very example serves to 
show that rdksasas are always treacherous.” 


[55-59] When mighty Suparna had addressed Rama in this fashion, he 
embraced him with the affection befitting a friend and began to take his 
leave. “Raghava, my righteous friend, compassionate even to your enemies, 
I should like to take leave of you, for I shall now depart just as I came. 
Once you have slaughtered the male population of Lanka with your waves 
of arrows, sparing only the children and the aged, and have slain your 
enemy Ravana, you shall surely recover Sita.” When mighty Suparna, swift 
in flight, had spoken these words in this fashion and had healed Rama of his 
wounds there in the midst of the forest-dwelling monkeys, he reverently 
circled and embraced him. Then, hurling himself into the sky like Pavana, 
Suparna departed. 

[60-64] Seeing that the two Raghavas were healed of their wounds, the 
leaders of the monkey troops unleashed lionlike roars and lashed their tails. 
They beat the bheri drums and made the mrdangas resound. They blew 
their conches and frolicked about happily just as before. The valiant 
monkeys, who used trees as their weapons, clapped their upper arms again 
and again. Ripping up trees of various kinds, they took their stand there by 
the hundreds of thousands. Emitting mighty roars and terrifying the night- 
roaming rdksasas, the leaping monkeys advanced upon the gates of Lanka, 
eager for battle. The terrifying and tumultuous roar that arose from those 
leaders of the troops of the tree-dwelling monkeys was like the frightful 
rumbling of the thundering storm clouds in the dead of night at summer’s 
end. 


Sarga 41 

[1-5] Then Ravana and the raksasas heard the tumultuous sound of the 
swift monkeys as they roared. Upon hearing that mighty uproar with its 
deep and joyous resonance, he spoke these words in the midst of his 
ministers: “From this tremendous uproar, arising from these many excited 
monkeys, roaring like thunderclouds, it is clear beyond a doubt that they are 
experiencing tremendous joy. Indeed, the ocean itself, abode of Varuna, is 
agitated by their loud cries. Granted, the two brothers, Rama and Laksmana, 
have been bound fast with sharp arrows; nonetheless, this great uproar 
causes me concern.” 

[6-10] Having addressed these words to his counselors, the lord of the 
raksasas then spoke to the rdksasas, sons of chaos, who stood at their posts 


all around him. “Find out at once why all these forest-dwelling monkeys are 
rejoicing at a time when they ought to be grieving.” Addressed by him in 
this fashion, they climbed the ramparts in great agitation and surveyed the 
army that was under the protection of great Sugriva. When those raksasas 
saw the two illustrious Raghavas standing there, freed from the terrible 
bondage of arrows, their hearts sank. Terrified at heart and with faces 
downcast, they all descended from the ramparts and presented themselves 
before the raksasa lord. 

[11-17] Their dismay evident in their faces, the night-roaming raksasas, 
skilled in speech, broke the bad news to Ravana faithfully and accurately, 
saying: “Indrajit had bound the two brothers, Rama and Laksmana, with 
bonds of arrows so that their arms were immobilized. But just now, on the 
battlefield, we saw those two, powerful as lordly elephants, freed from the 
bondage of arrows, like two elephants who have broken their chains.” 
When the mighty lord of the raksasas had heard those words of theirs, he 
was overwhelmed with anxiety and grief. With downcast face, he said: “In 
combat, Indrajit had struck down and bound those two with fearsome and 
unfailing arrows. Resembling venomous serpents and brilliant as the sun, 
they were given to him as a boon. If, having once been subject to such 
bondage by weapons, my two enemies are now free, then I see that my 
entire army is in peril. Those arrows, as powerful as the great serpent 
Vasuki, which used to steal away the lives of my enemies in battle, have 
now been rendered useless.” 

[18-21] Having spoken in this fashion, Ravana, hissing like a serpent in 
his rage, addressed a rdksasa called Dhtmraksa there in the midst of the 
raksasas. “Take a large force of raksasas, fearsome in their deeds, and go 
forth to slaughter Rama together with the monkeys.” Addressed in this 
fashion by the wise lord of the rdksasas, Dhtimraksa made his obeisance 
and, in great excitement, left the king’s residence. As he passed through the 
palace gates, he ordered the officer in charge of the garrison, “Mobilize the 
troops at once! What use is delay to one eager to fight?” 

[22—27] When the officer in charge of the garrison, the leader of his 
troops, had heard Dhiimraksa’s words, he quickly mobilized his troops, 
following the command of Ravana. Those mighty and terrifying night- 
roaming raksasas fastened on their war bells and, roaring loudly in their 
great excitement, surrounded Dhumraksa. They wielded various weapons. 


In their hands they held lances and war hammers. Roaring like 
thunderclouds, those terrible raksasas marched forth vigorously armed with 
maces, spears, staves, iron cudgels, iron clubs, short javelins, crescent- 
headed arrows, darts, and battle-axes. Unassailable as tigers, those tigers 
among rdksasas sallied forth. Some wore armor and rode in chariots 
adored with battle standards, inlaid with fretworks of gold, and drawn by 
donkeys with faces of many different kinds. Others rode extremely swift 
horses and lordly elephants intoxicated with rut. 

[28—35] With harsh cries, Dhiimraksa then mounted a heavenly chariot 
yoked to donkeys, which had the faces of wolves and lions and were 
adored with gold. Laughing, the mighty Dhtmraksa, surrounded by 
raksasas, proceeded to the western gate, where the troop leader Hanuman 
was stationed. But as that very terrible and fearsome-looking raksasa 
proceeded, savage birds of ill omen appeared in the sky, blocking his path. 
A very fearsome vulture alighted on the top of his chariot, while long lines 
of carrion birds perched on the edge of his battle standard. A huge, headless 
corpse, ghastly pale and drenched with blood, lay on the earth in 
Dhiimraksa’s path, emitting discordant sounds. It rained blood and the earth 
shook. The wind blew in an unfavorable direction with a thunderous roar. 
Shrouded in a flood of darkness, the directions were no longer visible. 
Seeing those very gruesome portents that had appeared, bringing terror to 
the raksasas, Dhtmraksa himself was shaken. As that mighty and very 
fearsome raksasa, eager for battle, marched forth, surrounded by many 
night-roaming raksasas, he gazed upon the army under the protection of 
Raghava’s arms, which, with its many monkeys, resembled an ocean. 


Sarga 42 

[1-4] When the monkeys saw the raksasa Dhimraksa marching forth with 
his fearsome cries, they all roared in their excitement, eager for battle. Then 
a frenzied battle broke out between the tawny monkeys and the rdksasas, 
who slaughtered one another—the former with terrifying trees, the latter 
with lances and war hammers. The rdadksasas cut down the fearsome 
monkeys on all sides, while the monkeys smashed the raksasas to the 
ground with trees. And the rdksasas, in their fury, pierced the monkeys with 
sharp and fearsome-looking arrows, fletched with heron feathers and flying 
true. 


[S—8] Although they were wounded by the rdaksasas with fearsome 
maces, spears, mallets, and war hammers, various and dreadful iron clubs, 
and sharp tridents, the very powerful monkeys, their fervor aroused by their 
indignation, fearlessly accomplished great feats. Their limbs pierced with 
arrows and their bodies pierced with lances, the leaders of the troops of 
tawny monkeys seized trees and boulders. Bellowing and calling out their 
names, the tawny monkeys, fearsome in their speed, annihilated the 
fearsome rdksasas on every side. 

[9-860*—14] It was an amazing and horrific battle that took place 
between the monkeys and the raksasas. With a victorious air, the monkeys 
annihilated some of the raksasas with various boulders and trees with many 
branches. Other radksasas, accustomed to drinking blood, now spewed it 
from their mouths. Some had their flanks ripped open, others were beaten to 
a shapeless mass with trees; still others were pulverized by boulders, while 
some were rent with fangs. "The ground was littered with torn and broken 
battle standards, slain donkeys, shattered chariots, fallen night-roaming 
raksasas, lordly elephants that resembled mountains, and, together with 
their riders, warhorses that had been crushed with mountain peaks by the 
forest-dwelling monkeys. The raksasas had their faces ripped open by the 
sharp claws of the swift monkeys, who leapt at them again and again, 
fearsome in their valor. Their faces pale, their hair flying wildly about, the 
rdaksasas fell to the ground again and again, fainting from the smell of 
blood. 

[15—23] But some of the raksasas, fearsome in their valor, attacked the 
tawny monkeys with their open hands, which struck like thunderbolts. But 
as they rushed swiftly onward, they were struck down by the monkeys— 
who were swifter still—with fists, feet, fangs, and trees. Seeing his forces 
put to flight, that bull among rdaksasas, Dhumraksa, in a rage, began to 
slaughter those monkeys, who were eager for battle. Some of the monkeys, 
wounded with darts, gushed blood, while others, smashed by war hammers, 
fell to the ground. Some were wounded with iron clubs, others were slashed 
with short javelins. Still others, struck down by spears, staggered and 
breathed their last. Some of the forest-dwelling monkeys were knocked to 
the ground, drenched in blood; still others, fleeing the battle, were 
slaughtered by the furious raksasas. Some of them lay on one side, their 
chests ripped open; still others were ripped open by tridents so that their 


entrails spilled forth. With its hosts of tawny monkeys and rdksasas, its 
abundance of weapons, and masses of boulders and trees, that great battle 
looked truly frightening. With the twanging of bowstrings in place of the 
sweet sound of the lute, the gasps of the dying for the beating of time, and 
the faint cries of the wounded in place of singing, the battle resembled a 
musical recital. 

[24-30] And as for Dhimraksa, he stood laughing in the forefront of the 
battle, bow in hand, as he scattered the monkeys in all directions with 
showers of arrows. When Maruti saw that the army was being harassed and 
tormented by Dhtmraksa, he seized an enormous boulder and rushed at him 
in a rage. Equal in might to his father, his eyes now doubly red with rage, he 
hurled that boulder at Dhumraksa’s chariot. When Dhumraksa saw that 
boulder hurtling toward him, he grabbed his mace in great agitation and, 
quickly leaping from his chariot, took his stand on the ground. As it fell to 
the ground, the boulder smashed his chariot along with its wheels, poles, 
horses, battle standard, and bows. After smashing his chariot, Hanuman, 
son of Maruta, began to slaughter the rdaksasas with trees—trunks, 
branches, and all. Some of the rdksasas, crushed by trees, their heads 
smashed, lay on the ground, drenched in blood. 

[31-37] When he had put the raksasa army to flight, Hanuman, son of 
Maruta, seized a mountain peak and charged straight at Dhimraksa. With a 
roar, mighty Dhtimraksa seized his mace and charged violently toward 
Hanuman as the latter ran toward him. Then, in a fury, Dhimraksa 
forcefully brought his mace, with its numerous spikes, down upon 
Hanuman’s skull. Struck with that fearsome-looking mace, the monkey, 
who had the strength of Maruta, shrugged off that blow and brought the 
mountain peak down on the middle of Dhimraksa’s head. Struck by that 
mountain peak, his every limb buckling, he fell violently to the ground, like 
a shattered mountain. When the surviving night-roaming raksasas saw that 
Dhiimraksa had been slain, they were terrified. They fled back to Lanka 
with the leaping monkeys still slaughtering them. When the great son of 
Pavana had slain his enemy and sent rivers of blood flowing in all 
directions, he succumbed to the fatigue born from slaughtering his enemies. 
Then, honored by the monkeys, he experienced great joy. 


Sarga 43 


[1-2] When Ravana, lord of the raksasas, heard that Dhimraksa had been 
slain, he said this to the officer in charge of the garrison, who stood before 
him with his hands cupped in reverence: “Let unassailable raksasas of 
fearsome valor go forth led by Akampana, skilled in the use of every 
weapon.” 

[3-8] Then, at the urging of the officer in charge of the garrison, 
fearsome-looking raksasa leaders, with fearsome eyes and bearing all kinds 
of weapons, marched forth. Wearing earrings of burnished gold, Akampana 
mounted a huge chariot and set forth, surrounded by fearsome rdksasas. He 
was incapable of being shaken in a great battle, even by the gods 
themselves. Thus, he was called Akampana, “Unshakable,” and, in their 
midst, he was like the sun in blazing energy. But as he raced forth filled 
with fury in his eagerness to fight, the horses drawing his chariot were 
seized with a lethargy that had no apparent cause. Though normally he 
delighted in battle, his left eye now began to twitch, his face took on a 
sickly hue, and his voice began to crack. Although the weather had been 
clear, the sky grew dark and a harsh wind blew. Fierce birds and beasts all 
uttered fearsome cries. 

[9-11] But ignoring these ominous signs, Akampana, whose shoulders 
were as massive as a lion’s and whose stride was that of a tiger, proceeded 
toward the battleground. And as the raksasa marched forth with his 
raksasas, he uttered a roar so mighty that it seemed to make the ocean itself 
tremble. Terrified by that sound, the vast army of monkeys, armed with 
trees and boulders, arrayed itself for battle. 

[12-18] Then an extremely violent battle broke out between the 
monkeys and the rdksasas, who were prepared to lay down their lives for 
the sake of Rama and Ravana, respectively. The tawny monkeys and the 
raksasas were all exceedingly powerful heroes, all as huge as mountains. 
And they were eager to slaughter one another. As those swift warriors 
roared in battle and bellowed at one another in their fury, a tremendous din 
arose. The red dust, thick and terrible, kicked up by the rdksasas and tawny 
monkeys, obscured the ten directions. Enveloped in that dust, as pale as 
floating silk, the opposing forces could not see each other on the battlefield. 
Because of that dust, neither pennant nor battle standard, armor nor horse, 
weapon nor chariot was visible. A tremendous din could be heard as they 


roared and raced about in that tumultuous battle, though nothing at all could 
be seen. 

[19-25] In their towering fury, tawny monkeys killed tawny monkeys in 
battle, while rdksasas slaughtered rdksasas in the darkness. And as the 
monkeys and rdksasas slaughtered friend and foe alike, they drenched the 
earth with blood, making it slick with mud. The gouts of blood that were 
spattered all around settled the dust, and the ground was littered with dead 
bodies. With speed and power, the tawny monkeys and the rdksasas 
slaughtered one another with trees, javelins, boulders, darts, maces, iron 
clubs, and cudgels of iron. Fighting with their arms, which resembled iron 
clubs, the tawny monkeys, fearsome in their deeds and huge as mountains, 
slaughtered the radksasas in battle. For their part, the furious rdksasas, with 
darts and iron cudgels in hand, slaughtered the monkeys there with their 
pitiless weapons. But counterattacking, the tawny monkeys bravely seized 
those weapons from them and smashed the raksasas with huge trees and 
enormous boulders. 

[26-27] At that juncture, the heroic tawny monkeys Kumuda, Nala, and 
Mainda, in a towering rage, charged with unparalleled speed. And, as if in 
play, those immensely swift leaders of the troops of tawny monkeys 
wrought tremendous slaughter with their trees in the front ranks of the 
raksasa army. 


Sarga 44 

[1-7] When he witnessed the immense feat accomplished by the foremost 
among the monkeys, Akampana gave vent to a savage fury in the midst of 
the battle. Seeing that feat of his enemies, he was beside himself with rage. 
Brandishing his mighty bow, he said these words to his charioteer: 
“Charioteer! Drive the chariot at once to where so many monkeys are 
slaughtering so many raksasas in battle. For there, armed with trees and 
boulders, mighty monkeys with fearsome bodies stand facing me. It appears 
that they have crushed the entire raksasa army, and therefore I wish to 
exterminate these boastful warriors.” Then, in his chariot, whose horses 
were whipped to a gallop, Akampana, foremost of chariot-warriors, in his 
fury, assailed the tawny monkeys with a hail of arrows. The monkeys were 
unable to stand before him in battle, much less to fight. Routed by 
Akampana’s arrows, every last one of them fled. 


[8—10] Now, when mighty Hanuman saw that his kin had come under the 
power of Akampana and, indeed, the power of Mrtyu, god of death, he 
rushed over. When the heroic leaders of the troops of leaping monkeys saw 
that great leaping monkey, they all gathered together around him in the 
battle. After the leaders of the troops of tawny monkeys saw Hanuman take 
his stand there, they recovered their strength, placing their trust in that 
powerful warrior. 

[11-18] But as Hanuman, who looked like a mountain, took his stand 
there, Akampana pelted him with arrows, just as great Indra might with 
torrents of rain. Paying no heed to the hail of sharp arrows falling on his 
body, the mighty monkey set his mind on killing Akampana. Laughing, 
Hanuman, the immensely powerful son of Maruta, charged that raksasa. As 
he did so, he shook the very earth, or so it seemed. Roaring and blazing 
with energy, he took on a form that was as irresistible as a blazing fire. 
Realizing that he had no weapon, that bull among tawny monkeys, in a 
transport of rage, swiftly ripped up a mountain by its roots. Grasping that 
huge mountain in one hand, mighty Maruti swung it about, uttering a 
tremendous roar. With it, he rushed upon the rdksasa lord Akampana, just 
as Indra, smasher of citadels, with his vajra, rushed upon Namuci in battle. 
But when Akampana saw that mountain peak held aloft, he smashed it to 
pieces from afar with huge half-moon-headed arrows. 

[19-23] Seeing the mountaintop shattered in midair by the raksasa’s 
arrows and fallen in pieces, Hanuman was beside himself with rage. Filled 
with rage and pride, the tawny monkey raced over to an asvakarna tree, as 
tall as a mighty mountain, and swiftly tore it up by the roots. Seizing that 
asvakarna tree with its vast trunk, Hanuman, blazing with splendor, swung 
it about in battle, laughing in supreme delight. Racing onward with 
tremendous speed and breaking down trees in his haste, Hanuman, in a 
towering rage, tore up the earth with the pounding of his feet. Wise 
Hanuman then smashed elephants along with their riders, chariot-warriors 
together with their chariots, and the rdksasa foot soldiers as well. 

[24—26] When the rdksasas spied Hanuman, enraged and wreaking 
slaughter on the battlefield like Yama himself, the ender of all things, they 
fled in all directions. Seeing the enraged Hanuman rushing onward and 
terrifying the raksasas, heroic Akampana flew into a rage and roared. 


Akampana then pierced immensely powerful Hanuman with fourteen sharp 
arrows that tore through his body. 

[27-29] Riddled in this fashion with many volleys of arrows, heroic 
Hanuman resembled a densely forested mountain. Then, ripping up yet 
another tree and exerting unsurpassed force, he quickly struck the raksasa 
lord Akampana on the head. Struck with that tree by the wise monkey lord 
in his wrath, the rdksasa fell and died. 

[30-33] When the raksasas saw the raksasa lord Akampana lying on the 
ground slain, they all trembled, like trees in an earthquake. Terrified and 
defeated, the rdksasas all dropped their weapons and fled to Lanka, pursued 
by the monkeys. Their hair flying, their pride shattered, their limbs running 
with sweat, they fled, panicked in defeat, gasping for breath. Trampling one 
another and glancing behind them again and again in their terror, they 
entered the city in total disarray. 

[34-38] Once the rdksasas had entered Lanka, all the immensely 
powerful tawny monkeys gathered and honored Hanuman. And for his part, 
Hanuman, endowed with strength, in great delight graciously honored all 
the tawny monkeys according to their merit. With a victorious air the tawny 
monkeys roared at the top of their lungs and dragged about those raksasas 
who were still alive. In encountering and slaughtering the rdksasas, the 
great monkey Maruti achieved as much heroic glory as did Visnu in slaying 
the great, terrible, and mighty asura, destroyer of his foes, in the vanguard 
of the hosts. Then the hosts of the gods, Rama himself, and the exceedingly 
powerful Laksmana, as well as mighty Vibhisana, and the leaping monkeys, 
headed by Sugriva, honored that monkey. 


Sarga 45 

[1-4] When the lord of the raksasas heard about the slaying of Akampana, 
he was enraged. His face somewhat downcast, he looked at his ministers. 
He brooded for a while, and then, after taking counsel with his counselors, 
he made a tour of the city of Lanka in order to inspect all its military 
encampments. He saw that the city of Lanka was protected by hosts of 
rdksasas, surrounded by military encampments, and garlanded with 
pennants and banners. Perceiving that the city was besieged, Ravana, lord 
of the raksasas, angrily spoke at that critical moment to Prahasta, who was 
skilled in warfare. 


[S5—11] “You are skilled in warfare. I can see no means other than war to 
free this city, which is hard-pressed and closely besieged. Only 
Kumbhakarna, you—the general of my army—Indrajit, Nikumbha, or I 
would be capable of bearing such a burden. So you must take the troops 
from here and, placing them under your command, march forth swiftly for 
victory, to where all the forest-dwelling monkeys are. In the face of your 
sortie, the irresolute army of tawny monkeys, hearing the roar of the roaring 
lords of the rdksasas, will surely flee. For monkeys are irresolute, 
undisciplined, and fickle minded. They will no more be able to withstand 
your roaring than are elephants the roaring of lions. Once the army has fled, 
Rama, along with Saumitri, powerless and lacking support, will fall into 
your hands, Prahasta. We risk a great calamity, and victory is far from 
certain in this matter. So tell me what you think is best for us, whether I find 
it agreeable or not.” 

[12—16] Addressed in this fashion by Ravana, Prahasta, the general of 
the army, said this to the lord of the rdksasas, just as USanas might to the 
lord of the asuras: “We discussed this earlier, your majesty, together with 
your able counselors. We debated the matter with due consideration for one 
another. I concluded that our well-being could be assured only through the 
return of Sita. I foresaw that, if she were not returned, it would mean war, 
and that is exactly what has come upon us. You have always honored me 
with gifts, tokens of respect, and all manner of kind words. Would I not 
now, at such a critical moment, do what pleases you? For I do not care for 
my life, my sons, my wives, or my wealth. Just watch me as I strive to 
sacrifice my life for your sake in battle.” 

[17-19] When Prahasta, the general of the army, had addressed his 
master, Ravana, in this fashion, he said this to the troop commanders who 
stood before him: “Assemble a large force of raksasas for me at once. Once 
I have slain the forest-dwelling monkeys on the battlefield today with the 
crushing force of those thunderbolts that are my arrows, the carrion birds 
may eat of their flesh to their heart’s content.” Addressed in this fashion by 
Prahasta, the troop commanders, making haste, mustered their forces at the 
raksasa’s palace. 

[20-23] Within the hour Lanka was filled with raksasa heroes who, 
armed with every sort of sharp weapon, resembled elephants. As they 
gratified the sacred fire, eater of oblations, and made obeisance to the 


brahmans, a fragrant breeze began to blow, bearing the aroma of clarified 
butter. Prepared for battle and in great excitement, they took garlands of 
various kinds that had been consecrated with sacred spells and adorned 
themselves with them. When they saw their king, Ravana, the rdksasas, 
clad in armor and armed with their bows, leapt up swiftly and encircled 
Prahasta. 

[24-27] Then, taking leave of the king, Prahasta bid them beat the 
fearsome bheri drum as he mounted a celestial chariot well equipped for 
war. Yoked to the swiftest of horses and driven by a skilled charioteer, it 
rumbled like a great storm cloud and blazed with the brilliance of the moon 
and sun. With its serpent battle standard, it was irresistible. It had a splendid 
fender and was beautiful in every part. It was covered with a fretwork of 
gold and seemed almost to be laughing with its splendor. Then, once he had 
received his orders from Ravana, Prahasta mounted that chariot and, 
surrounded by his vast army, drove swiftly out of Lanka. 

[28-30] As the general of the armies sallied forth, the rumble of war 
drums, like that of thunderclouds, and the sound of conches could be heard. 
In the vanguard, preceding Prahasta, marched huge rdksasas with terrifying 
forms, uttering dreadful cries. And so, surrounded by that vast and dreadful 
army in military array and resembling a herd of elephants, he sallied forth 
from the eastern gate. 

[31—926*—38] As Prahasta went forth swiftly in anger, surrounded by 
that army whose vast multitude was like the ocean, he resembled Kala, the 
ender of all things. As he and the roaring raksasas set forth, their clamor 
caused all the creatures of Lanka to utter unnatural cries. Rising into the 
cloudless sky, birds that feed on flesh and blood wheeled in clockwise 
circles around his chariot. Dreadful jackals howled, belching forth flames of 
fire, the purifier. A blazing meteor fell from the sky, and a harsh wind blew. 
The heavenly bodies, occluding one another, were no longer visible. °And 
over the rdaksasa’s chariot, harshly thundering clouds poured down blood, 
drenching his followers. Meanwhile, a vulture, facing to the south, perched 
on the top of his battle standard. Although his charioteer was of the sata 
caste and was a skilled driver of horses, his whip repeatedly slipped from 
his hand as he plunged into battle. And the extraordinary and radiant 
splendor that he displayed as he set forth vanished in an instant while his 
horses stumbled on the level ground. 


[39-42] As Prahasta, famed for his strength and valor, marched forth, the 
monkey army advanced upon him for battle, armed with various weapons. 
Then a tumultuous sound arose from the tawny monkeys as they broke off 
trees and seized heavy boulders. Both armies—that of the hosts of raksasas 
and that of the forest-dwelling monkeys—were in a frenzy of excitement. 
They were swift, capable, and intent upon slaughtering one another. As they 
hurled their challenges at one another, one could hear a tremendous din. 
Then the evil-minded Prahasta hurled himself upon the army of the monkey 
king. He plunged into that fast-moving host, as a moth, intent upon death, 
plunges into the fire. 


Sarga 46 

[1-5] The vast army of roaring monkeys, powerful and infuriated, watched 
as Prahasta—huge, terrifying, of terrifying valor, and surrounded by 
raksasas—marched forth, bellowing. As the raksasas, eager for victory, 
hurled themselves upon the monkeys, the swords, javelins, broadswords, 
arrows, lances, cudgels, maces, iron clubs, darts, various battle-axes, and 
splendid bows they had taken up glittered. Bounding toward them, the bulls 
among the leaping monkeys, eager for battle, seized flowering trees and 
boulders that were long and broad. 

[6-10] As the two vast forces clashed with each other, the one side 
raining stones, the other arrows, a huge battle broke out between them. 
Numerous rdksasas slaughtered numerous leaders of the monkey troops in 
battle, while numerous monkeys slaughtered numerous raksasas. Some of 
the monkeys were rent with lances, others by discuses. Some were struck 
with iron clubs, while others were hacked with battle-axes. Still others fell 
to the ground, robbed of their life breaths, while some, ensnared in the 
continuous volley of arrows, were pierced to the heart. Some, cut in two 
with swords, fell to the ground, twitching. Still other monkeys were pierced 
by raksasas through their flanks with lances. 

[11-14] But as for the monkeys, in their fury, they crushed hordes of 
raksasas to the ground on every side with trees and mountain peaks. Struck 
violently with fists and open hands, whose palms had the force of 
thunderbolts, the raksasas, their teeth and eyes knocked out, vomited blood 
from their mouths. A tumultuous sound—the cries of those screaming in 
their affliction and the lionlike roars of those who were bellowing—arose 


from the tawny monkeys and the rdksasas in battle. Rolling their eyes in 
rage, the pitiless monkeys and raksasas, following the path of heroes, 
fearlessly performed great feats. 

[15-19] Prahasta’s companions, Narantaka, Kumbhahanu, Mahanada, 
and Samunnata, all slaughtered forest-dwelling monkeys. But as they 
launched their swift attack, slaughtering the monkeys, Dvivida killed one of 
them, Narantaka, with a mountain peak. Then the nimble-handed monkey 
Durmukha ripped up a huge tree by the roots and, with it, killed the raksasa 
Samunnata. Next, powerful Jambavan, in a towering rage, seized a huge 
boulder and brought it down upon Mahanada’s chest. Then the mighty 
raksasa Kumbhahanu, confronted by Tara, was struck on the head with a 
tree and so died. 

[20—22] Unable to endure this deed, Prahasta, mounted in his chariot, 
bow in hand, began a fearsome slaughter of the forest-dwelling monkeys. 
Then both armies swirled about like a maelstrom, and from them arose a 
sound like that of the immeasurable ocean when it is agitated. Skilled in 
combat, the furious Prahasta massacred the monkeys in that great battle 
with an immense torrent of arrows. 

[23—29] Heaped up with the corpses of monkeys and raksasas, as if 
covered with fallen mountains, the earth looked ghastly. The ground, 
covered with torrents of blood, looked as if it were covered with 
blossoming paldsa trees in the month of Madhava. Indeed, the battleground 
resembled a river. Masses of slain heroes formed its banks, and shattered 
weapons, its great trees. Torrents of blood made up its broad waters, and the 
ocean to which it flowed was Yama. Livers and spleens made up its deep 
mud, scattered entrails its waterweeds. Severed heads and trunks made up 
its fish, pieces of limbs, its grass. It was crowded with vultures in place of 
flocks of hamsas, and it was swarming with adjutant storks instead of 
sarasa cranes. It was covered with fat in place of foam, and the cries of the 
wounded took the place of its gurgling. It was not to be forded by the faint 
of heart. Truly, it resembled a river at the end of the rains, swarming with 
hamsas and sdrasa cranes. Such was the river, all but impossible to cross, 
that the raksasas and the foremost of the monkeys forded, as might the 
leaders of elephant herds, a lotus pond covered with lotus pollen. 

[30-35] Then Nila spied Prahasta, who, mounted in his chariot and 
loosing torrents of arrows, was rapidly slaughtering the leaping monkeys. 


Ripping up a tree by its roots, the great monkey struck the supremely 
unassailable Prahasta, who was attacking him. Struck by that tree, that bull 
among rdksasas was enraged, and, roaring, he loosed hails of arrows upon 
the lord of the army of the leaping monkeys. Unable to deflect it, he shut his 
eyes and withstood it. Just as a prize bull might withstand a sudden 
autumnal squall, so did Nila, his eyes tightly closed, endure with fortitude 
Prahasta’s dreadful hail of arrows, so difficult to withstand. Enraged by that 
hail of arrows, Nila killed Prahasta’s horses, swift as thought, with a huge 
sala tree. 

[36-39] Stripped of his bow by him, Prahasta, the general of the army, 
seized a dreadful cudgel and leapt down from his chariot. Enraged, the two 
swift leaders of their armies, their bodies smeared with blood, stood there, 
like two bull elephants in rut. Slashing at each other with their razor-sharp 
fangs, they looked like a lion and a tiger and, indeed, moved just like them. 
Seeing victory within their grasp, those two heroes, who never turned back 
from battle, were as eager to gain glory as were Vrtra and Vasava. 

[40-47] Then, making a supreme effort, Prahasta struck Nila on the 
forehead with his cudgel, so that his blood gushed forth. His body smeared 
with blood, the great monkey seized an enormous tree and, in a rage, hurled 
it at Prahasta’s chest. Disregarding that blow, the mighty rdksasa seized his 
huge cudgel and charged at the mighty leaping monkey Nila. Seeing 
Prahasta rushing furiously toward him with terrifying force, the swift and 
great monkey seized a huge boulder. In that battle, Nila then swiftly brought 
the boulder down upon the head of the cudgel-warrior Prahasta, who was 
eager for combat. Hurled by that foremost of monkeys, that huge and 
terrible boulder shattered Prahasta’s head into many pieces. Prahasta fell 
suddenly to the ground, like a tree cut off at the roots—stripped of life, 
stripped of splendor, stripped of strength, and stripped of his senses. Blood 
gushed copiously from his shattered head, as well as from his body, like a 
cataract from a mountain. 

[48-51] When Prahasta had been slain by Nila, his great and unshakable 
army of raksasas, who were now despondent, returned to Lanka. Once their 
general had been slain, they were no more able to hold their lines than 
would water upon reaching a shattered dam. With the leader of their army 
slain, the raksasas became dispirited. Proceeding to the palace of the 
raksasa lord, they stood silently, brooding. Then the immensely powerful 


and victorious troop leader Nila joined Rama and Laksmana. Being praised 
for the feat he had accomplished, he was greatly delighted. 


Sarga 47 

[1-6] When Prahasta, the protector of the rdksasa forces, was slain in battle 
by Nila, bull among leaping monkeys, the army of the rdksasa king, equal 
in force to the ocean and armed with fearsome weapons, fled. They went 
and reported to the lord of the rdksasas that his general had been slain by 
Nila, the son of Agni, the purifier. No sooner had the lord of the rdksasas 
heard their words than he gave way to anger. Upon hearing that Prahasta 
had been slain in battle, he was grief-stricken, and his mind was suffused 
with rage. He addressed the principal warriors of the raksasas, sons of 
chaos, just as Indra might the principal warriors of the immortal gods: “One 
ought not underestimate an enemy who has destroyed the guardian of my 
army—the destroyer of the army of Indra—along with his followers and 
elephants. Therefore, without further deliberation, I myself will proceed to 
that extraordinary battlefront for the sake of victory and for the destruction 
of my enemies. I shall this very day with a hail of arrows consume that 
army of monkeys, Rama and Laksmana included, as with blazing fires one 
might a forest.” 

[7-10] When he had spoken in this fashion, the enemy of the king of the 
immortal gods mounted a chariot yoked to a team of superb horses. It was 
as luminous as fire, and it glowed, blazing with splendor. Then, to the 
sounds of conches and bheri and pataha drums and to the clapping of arms, 
war shouts, and lionlike roars, the foremost of rdksasa lords went forth, 
honored with auspicious hymns of praise. Surrounded by the foremost of 
the raksasa lords, flesh-eaters whose bodies resembled mountains or clouds 
and whose eyes blazed like fire, the purifier, he resembled Rudra, lord of 
the immortal gods, surrounded by his malignant spirits. Then, racing swiftly 
forth from the city, the immensely powerful raksasa spied the formidable 
army of monkeys. It was well prepared, armed with trees and boulders, and 
was roaring like the mighty ocean or a thundercloud. 

[11-12] Closely followed by his army, Rama, whose arms resembled 
serpent lords and whose majesty was immense, spied the exceedingly 
wrathful raksasa host and addressed Vibhisana, foremost among those who 
bear weapons: “Who is in command of this unassailable army with its 


various pennants, battle standards, and weapons, its darts, swords, lances, 
bows, and discuses, its war-elephants as huge as Himalaya, lord of 
mountains, and its fearless warriors?” 

[13-18] And when Vibhisana, who was equal in valor to Sakra, had 
heard those words of Rama, he described for him the splendid army of 
those great bulls among the rdksasas: “Your majesty, know that that huge 
rdksasa, whose face is as red as the newly risen sun and who approaches 
mounted on an elephant’s back, making its head tremble, is Akampana. The 
one who is mounted in a chariot and whose battle standard bears the king of 
beasts, he who brandishes a bow that resembles the bow of Sakra, and who, 
with his fierce and protuberant fangs, resembles an elephant, is called 
Indrajit, preeminent by virtue of a boon. And that immensely powerful 
bowman and superb chariot-warrior, who, with his gigantic body, resembles 
the Vindhya mountain, the western mountain, or Mount Mahendra, and who 
is twanging a bow of unparalleled size, is called Atikaya. And that huge 
hero, his eyes as red as the newly risen sun, who bellows harshly as he sits 
astride an elephant, its bells clanging, is called Mahodara. And the one 
mounted on a horse, which, with its trappings bright with gold, resembles a 
mountain shrouded in evening clouds, and who holds aloft a dart haloed 
with light, is Pisaca, equal in power to a thunderbolt. 

[19-22] “And mounted upon a lordly and mountainous bull, he who 
comes grasping a keen lance that flashes like lightning, its power surpassing 
that of the thunderbolt, is the illustrious Trisiras. And there we see Kumbha, 
his form like that of a storm cloud, his chest broad, muscular, and splendid. 
His battle standard bears the king of serpents, and he is utterly intent, 
brandishing and twanging his bow. And the one who comes holding a 
blazing, smoking iron club, studded with diamonds and jambiinada gold, is 
the standard-bearer of the rdksasa hosts, Nikumbha, of wondrous and 
fearsome deeds. And that huge warrior who appears mounted on a chariot 
—equipped with masses of bows, swords, and arrows, decked with 
pennants, and blazing like fire, the purifier—is Narantaka, who can battle 
even mountain peaks. 

[23—25] “And over there, where that fine white umbrella with its slender 
ribs is gleaming like the moon, that is where the great overlord of the 
raksasas, he who crushes the pride of even the gods, has appeared. 
Surrounded by his servants, whose faces are those of tigers, camels, 


elephant lords, and the king of beasts—all rolling their eyes—he resembles 
Rudra, surrounded by his malignant spirits. He wears a crown, and, with his 
face adorned with swinging earrings and his body as fearsome as that of an 
elephant lord or the Vindhya mountain, that overlord of the rdksasas, who 
crushes the pride of great Indra and Vaivasvata, shines like the sun.” 

[26-31] Then Rama replied to Vibhisana, subduer of his foes: “Ah! How 
resplendent is Ravana, lord of the raksasas, with his tremendous blazing 
energy! Ravana is as hard to gaze upon as is the sun with its shining rays. 
Yet I can clearly make out his form, haloed with blazing energy. Not even 
the heroes among the gods and ddnavas could possess a brightly shining 
form like that of the lord of the rdksasas. And all the warriors of that 
immensely powerful raksasa bear blazing weapons. They all look like 
mountains, and they can all give battle even to mountains. Surrounded by 
those blazing warriors, fearsome in their valor, the king of the rdksasas 
looks like Yama, the ender of all things, surrounded by fierce malignant 
spirits in bodily form.” When he had spoken in this fashion, mighty Rama 
took up his bow, drew forth a splendid arrow, and, accompanied by 
Laksmana, took his stand. 

[32—33] Meanwhile, the great overlord of the raksasas addressed his 
powerful raksasas: “You are to remain calm and free from care at the city 
gates and the gates of the buildings on the main thoroughfares.” Then, when 
he had summarily dismissed them and they had departed according to their 
orders, he clove through the flood of that ocean of monkeys, as might a 
great fish cleave the brimming waters of the sea. 

[34-37] When Sugriva, lord of the tawny monkeys, spied the raksasa 
lord racing suddenly toward him in battle with blazing bow and arrows, he 
tore off a huge mountain peak and charged at him. Seizing that mountain 
peak, whose slopes were thick with trees, he hurled it at the night-roaming 
rdksasa. But Ravana, seeing it hurtling suddenly toward him, shattered it 
with arrows fletched with burnished gold. Once that mountain peak, with 
huge and splendid trees on its slopes, had fallen, shattered, to the ground, 
the lord of the rdksasa folk took up an arrow that resembled a huge serpent. 
It looked like Yama, the ender of all things. In a rage, he grasped that arrow, 
whose force was equal to that of the wind or great Indra’s thunderbolt and 
whose brilliance was that of a fire shooting out sparks. Then he loosed it in 
order to kill Sugriva. 


[38-40] Loosed by RAavana’s arm, the sharp-tipped arrow, whose 
appearance was like that of Sakra’s thunderbolt, struck Sugriva with full 
force, piercing him, just as the fearsome javelin hurled by Guha once 
pierced Mount Kraufica. Agonized by that arrow, his mind reeling, the hero 
fell to the earth groaning. But when the yatudhanas saw him fallen 
senseless to the ground in battle, they roared with delight. But then the 
immense monkeys Gavaksa, Gavaya, Sudamstra, Rsabha, Jyotimukha, and 
Nala took up boulders and charged the lord of the raksasas. 

[41-43] But the overlord of the raksasas warded off their blows with 
swarms of sharp-tipped arrows. He then pierced the monkey lords with 
masses of arrows, whose feathers were adorned with jambtinada gold. 
Pierced by the arrows of that enemy of the thirty gods, the fearsome 
monkey lords fell to the ground. Then he completely covered the fierce 
monkey army with masses of arrows. Afflicted by Ravana’s arrows, their 
heroic leaders fallen, and riven by the dart of fear, the tree-dwelling 
monkeys, wailing loudly, sought refuge with Rama, the refuge of all. 

[44-50] At once, the mighty bowman, great Rama, took up his bow and 
came running, but Laksmana accosted him and, his hands cupped in 
reverence, spoke these deeply significant words: “Granted, my noble lord, 
you are perfectly capable of killing this evil-minded radksasa. Nonetheless, I 
should kill this despicable creature. Just grant me permission, my lord.” 
Rama of true valor and tremendous power replied to him: “Go, Laksmana. 
You must exert yourself to the fullest in battle. For Ravana is enormously 
powerful and astonishingly valorous in battle. There is no doubt that, once 
his fury is aroused, it is impossible even for all the three worlds together to 
withstand him. You must seek out his weak points and defend your own. 
Stay focused and strive to protect yourself with your eye as well as your 
bow.” Upon hearing those words of Rama Raghava, Saumitri embraced 
him. Then, after doing him honor and respectfully saluting him, he went off 
to battle. He whose arms resembled the trunks of elephants gazed upon 
Ravana, who, with his blazing, fearsome bow held high, was covering the 
monkeys—their bodies torn and scattered—with a massive hail of arrows. 

[51-57] But when the immensely powerful Hanuman, son of Maruta, 
spied Ravana, he charged toward him, evading those masses of arrows. 
Reaching his chariot, wise Hanuman raised his right arm and, menacing 
Ravana, spoke these words: “Because of your invulnerability, you 


vanquished the gods, danavas, gandharvas, and yaksas, along with the 
raksasas. But you should fear the monkeys. This upraised right hand of 
mine, with its five fingers, will drive the living spirit from your body where 
it has long dwelt.” When Ravana, of fearsome valor, heard those words of 
Hanuman, he spoke these words, his eyes red with rage: “Then strike 
quickly and without hesitation and so acquire eternal fame. Once I have 
thus determined your prowess, I will destroy you, monkey.” When the son 
of Vayu heard those words of Ravana, he said these words: “Please keep in 
mind that, on an earlier occasion, I struck down your son Aksa.” 

[58-61] Addressed in this fashion, the immensely powerful Ravana, 
mighty lord of the raksasas, struck the son of Anila on the chest with the 
palm of his hand. Struck by him with the palm of his hand, he staggered 
back and forth. Then, infuriated, he struck that enemy of the immortal gods 
with the palm of his own hand. When that great monkey had struck him 
with the palm of his hand, ten-necked Ravana shook like a mountain during 
an earthquake. Seeing Ravana slapped down in this fashion in battle, the 
seers, monkeys, perfected beings, gods, and asuras cheered. 

[62-65] Steadying himself, the immensely powerful Ravana spoke these 
words: “Well done, monkey! Your strength makes you a praiseworthy 
opponent for me.” But when Maruti was addressed in this fashion by 
Ravana, he said these words: “Since you are still alive, Ravana, then I say 
to hell with my strength! But why bother praising me? Now strike once 
again, fool! Then my fist shall lead you to the abode of Yama.” At these 
words of Maruti, Ravana’s anger blazed up once more. His eyes reddened, 
the mighty raksasa energetically raised his right fist and brought it down 
with force on the monkey’s chest. Struck once again on his broad chest, 
Hanuman staggered. 

[66-71] Seeing that mighty Hanuman was stunned, the great chariot- 
warrior raced swiftly in his chariot toward Nila. With his fearsome arrows 
that resembled serpents and pierced the vitals of his foes, he tormented 
Nila, lord of the army of tawny monkeys. Hard-pressed by that stream of 
arrows, Nila, lord of the monkey army, with one hand, hurled a mountain 
peak at the overlord of the raksasas. Meanwhile, wise and powerful 
Hanuman, now recovered and eager for battle, saw that Ravana, the lord of 
the rdksasas, was engaged in battle with Nila. Angrily he said, “It is not 
appropriate to attack someone who is locked in battle with another.” Then, 


powerful Ravana smashed that peak with seven sharp-tipped arrows so that 
it fell, shattered. 

[72-76] Seeing the mountain peak shattered, Nila, the lord of the army 
of tawny monkeys, slayer of enemy heroes, flared up with anger, like the 
fire of universal destruction. In that battle, Nila then hurled asvakarnas, 
dhavas, salas, mangoes in full bloom, and various other trees as well. But 
Ravana splintered those trees as they came toward him. He then deluged 
Nila, the son of Agni, the purifier, with a very fearsome hail of arrows. But 
inundated by that hail of arrows, like a great mountain by a storm cloud, he 
shrunk his body and alighted on the tip of Ravana’s battle standard. Seeing 
the son of Agni, the purifier, perched on the tip of his battle standard, 
Ravana flared up in anger. Nila then roared. 

[77-79] When Laksmana, Hanuman, and Rama saw that tawny monkey 
first on the tip of Ravana’s battle standard, next on the point of his bow, and 
then on the top of his crown, they were amazed. Even the immensely 
powerful Ravana himself was astonished at the monkey’s swiftness. He 
then invoked the wondrous and blazing divine weapon-spell of Agni. Then 
the leaping monkeys, observing that Ravana was baffled in combat by 
Nila’s swiftness, chattered in delight as they watched intently. 

[80-84] Enraged by the screeching of the monkeys, his mind utterly 
confused, Ravana could do nothing. Taking up an arrow charged with the 
divine weapon-spell of Agni, the night-roaming raksasa Ravana fixed his 
glance on Nila, who was perched on the head of his battle standard. Then 
Ravana, the powerful lord of the rdksasas, spoke: “Your swiftness derives 
from this extraordinary trickery of yours, monkey. Now try to save your 
life, if you can, monkey. You seem to appear in many different forms. 
Nonetheless, this arrow, loosed by me and charged with a divine weapon- 
spell, will rob you of your life, even as you seek to save it.” 

[85-89] When he had spoken in this fashion, great-armed Ravana, lord 
of the rdksasas, nocked the arrow and, with that divine weapon, struck the 
lord of the army. Struck in the chest and burned by that arrow charged with 
the divine weapon-spell, Nila fell at once to the ground. Although he had 
fallen to the ground on his knees, nonetheless, because he was endowed 
with his father’s divine power as well as his own blazing energy, he was not 
killed. Seeing that the monkey had lost consciousness, ten-necked Ravana, 
still eager for battle, raced toward Saumitri in his chariot that thundered like 


a storm cloud. His spirit undaunted, Saumitri addressed Ravana, who was 
twanging his immeasurable bow: “Come after me, lord of the night-roaming 
raksasas! You shouldn’t be fighting with monkeys.” 

[90-93] Hearing his words and the fearsome resonant twanging of his 
bowstring, the raksasa king confronted Saumitri where he stood and spoke 
these wrathful words: “How fortunate for me, Raghava, that you, headed 
for destruction, your wits disordered, have come into my sight. This very 
moment, stricken by my streams of arrows, you shall depart for the land of 
death.” As Ravana was bellowing in this fashion, exposing the white tips of 
his fangs, Laksmana, undaunted, replied: “The truly powerful do not 
bellow, your majesty. Foremost of evildoers, you are merely boasting. I 
know all about your courage, lord of the raksasas, your strength, your valor, 
and your prowess. Here I stand, bow and arrows in hand. Come on! What is 
the use of this vain boasting?” 

[94-98] The overlord of the raksasas was furious at being spoken to in 
this fashion, and he loosed seven beautifully fletched arrows. But Laksmana 
cut them to pieces with arrows whose tips and edges were honed and whose 
fletching was adorned with gold. When the lord of Lanka saw them 
suddenly cut to pieces, like serpent lords whose coils are cloven, he gave 
way to anger and loosed still other sharp arrows. But Rama’s younger 
brother released from his bow a fierce shower of arrows. With these arrows 
—razor-tipped, half-moon-headed, barbed, and crescent-headed—he calmly 
cut Ravana’s arrows to pieces. Then, swiftly fitting to his bow sharp-tipped 
arrows whose luster was that of blazing fire and whose impact was equal to 
that of great Indra’s vajra or the thunderbolt, Laksmana released them in an 
effort to kill the overlord of the rdksasas. But the lord of the rdksasas cut 
them to pieces. Then, when he had done so, he struck Laksmana in the 
forehead with an arrow given to him by self-existent Brahma—its luster 
equal to that of the fire of universal destruction. 

[99-103] Tormented by Ravana’s arrow, Laksmana staggered and 
slackened his grip on his bow. Then, regaining consciousness with 
difficulty, he cut to pieces the bow of that enemy of Indra, lord of the thirty 
gods. Then, with three sharp-tipped arrows, Dasarathi struck him whose 
bow was shattered. Tormented by those arrows, the king staggered but with 
difficulty regained consciousness. Tormented by arrows, his limbs bathed in 
sweat, drenched in blood, his bow shattered, the immensely powerful 


enemy of the gods then, in that battle, seized a javelin he had been given by 
self-existent Brahma. The lord of the raksasa kingdom then swiftly hurled 
that blazing lance at Saumitri. Terrifying the monkey armies, it resembled a 
smokeless fire. As it flew toward him, the younger brother of Bharata 
struck it with divine weapons and with arrows that blazed like sacrificial 
fires. Nonetheless, the javelin plunged deep into Dasarathi’s broad chest. 

[104-107] Wounded in the breast by the javelin of Brahma, Saumitri 
recalled that he himself was an inconceivable portion of Visnu. Then, 
although he grasped Saumitri, humbler of the danavas’ pride, with both his 
arms, that thorn in the side of the gods was unable to budge him. With his 
two arms, he was able to lift the Himalayas, Mount Mandara, Mount Meru, 
or even the three worlds along with the immortal gods; yet, in that battle, he 
could not lift Bharata’s younger brother. When Ravana saw that Laksmana, 
who was a portion of Visnu in a human body, was unconscious, he was 
astonished. 

[108-112] At this juncture, Hanuman, son of Vayu, enraged, rushed at 
Ravana. In his rage, he struck him on the chest with a fist like adamant. The 
blow of that fist made Ravana, lord of the raksasas, slump to his knees on 
the floor of his chariot. He swayed for a moment and collapsed. Seeing 
Ravana of fearsome valor unconscious in battle, the seers, monkeys, and 
gods, together with Vasava, cheered. But powerful Hanuman picked up 
Laksmana, who had been wounded by Ravana, in both his arms and carried 
him to Raghava. For on account of the affection and supreme devotion of 
the son of Vayu, Laksmana became light for that monkey, even though he 
could not be budged by his enemies. 

[113-115] Meanwhile, the javelin extracted itself from Saumitri, who 
was unconquerable in battle, and returned to its place in Ravana’s chariot. 
But powerful Ravana, regaining consciousness in that great battle, took up 
sharp arrows and grasped a great bow. And Laksmana, destroyer of his foes, 
recalling that he himself was an inconceivable portion of Visnu, was freed 
of that arrow and restored to health. 

[116-119] Meanwhile, when Raghava saw that the great heroes of that 
vast host of monkeys had been struck down in battle, he raced toward 
Ravana. But Hanuman, intercepting him, spoke these words: “You should 
climb on my back and punish this raksasa.” When Raghava heard the 
words uttered by Hanuman, son of Vayu, that hero immediately climbed up 


on the great monkey. Then the overlord of men gazed upon Ravana 
mounted on his chariot in battle. Keeping him in sight, immensely powerful 
Raghava raced toward him, as did the wrathful Visnu, his weapon raised, 
toward Vairocana. 

[120-125] He made his bowstring resound sharply with a sound like the 
crash of a thunderbolt. Then, in a deep voice, he addressed the lord of the 
raksasas: “Stay where you are! For after doing me such an injury, tiger 
among rdksasas, where can you go to escape me? If you were to fly for 
refuge to Indra, Vaivasvata, Surya, bringer of light, self-existent Brahma, 
Agni Vaisvanara, or even Siva, bringer of auspiciousness—even if you were 
to flee to the ten directions—still, no matter where you might go, you would 
not escape me now. And he whom you struck with your javelin this day will 
soon return in his desire to cause you sorrow. This very day, he will bring 
death to you in battle, king of the rdksasa hosts, and to your sons and wives 
as well.” Upon hearing Raghava’s words, the rdksasa lord struck the great 
monkey with sharp arrows that were like the flames of the fire at the end of 
time. But since he was endowed with innate blazing energy, that blazing 
energy only increased as he was struck with those arrows by the radksasa in 
battle. 

[126-132] But immensely powerful Rama, seeing that that tiger among 
leaping monkeys had been wounded by Ravana, was overwhelmed with 
rage. Advancing toward Ravana’s chariot, Rama cut it to pieces with his 
well-fletched arrows along with its wheels, horses, battle standard, 
umbrella, and great pennants, as well as its charioteer, missiles, lances, and 
swords. Then he swiftly struck that enemy of Indra on his broad and 
beautiful chest with an arrow that resembled Indra’s vajra or a thunderbolt, 
just as Lord Indra himself might strike Mount Meru with his vajra. That 
heroic king, who had neither trembled nor staggered at the blows of Indra’s 
vajra or of thunderbolts, now, struck by Rama’s arrow, was sorely afflicted. 
He staggered and dropped his bow. Perceiving that the overlord of the 
rdksasas was dazed, magnanimous Rama took up a blazing, half-moon- 
headed arrow and, with it, swiftly cut off his crown, which shone like the 
sun. Then, in the midst of the battle, Rama addressed the lord of the 
raksasas, who, with the top of his crown severed, had lost his royal 
splendor and resembled a serpent robbed of its venom or a darkened sun, its 
rays extinguished: “You have performed great and fearsome deeds and 


struck down my heroic warriors. Still, recognizing that you are exhausted 
from all that, I shall not bring you under the sway of death with my 
arrows.” 

[133-135] Addressed in this fashion, the king, wounded with arrows, his 
pride and excitement crushed, his bow cut to pieces, his horses and 
charioteer slain, and his great crown cut off, quickly entered Lanka. Once 
the mighty lord of the night-roaming raksasas, the enemy of the danavas 
and the gods, had returned to Lanka, Rama, along with Laksmana, removed 
those arrows from the tawny monkeys in the forefront of the great battle. 
When the enemy of Indra, lord of the thirty gods, had been humbled, the 
gods and the asuras, the hosts of creatures, the guardians of the directions, 
and the denizens of the deep, along with the seers, the great serpents, and 
the creatures of land and water, rejoiced. 


Sarga 48 

[1-4] Now, when the king, afflicted by the fear of Rama’s arrows, his pride 
humbled, reentered the citadel of Lanka, he was nearly insensible with 
agitation. For great Raghava had vanquished the king, as might a lion, an 
elephant, or Garuda, a serpent. Remembering Raghava’s arrows that, like 
the staff of Brahma, blazed with the brilliance of lightning, the lord of the 
rdksasas shuddered. Seated on his magnificent heavenly golden throne, 
Ravana gazed at the raksasas and said these words: 

[S—9] “Since I, who am the equal of great Indra, have been defeated by a 
mere human, it is clear that the supreme austerities I performed have all 
been in vain. And those frightening words of Brahma, ‘Know that you still 
must fear humans,’ have now come back to haunt me, for they have proven 
true. For although I obtained invulnerability with respect to the gods, 
danavas, gandharvas, yaksas, raksasas, and great serpents, I did not request 
it with respect to humans. Bearing this in mind, you must exert yourselves. 
Let raksasas be stationed on top of the gateways at the main thoroughfares. 
And you must awaken the incomparably profound Kumbhakarna, crusher 
of the pride of the gods and danavas, who has been overcome by Brahma’s 
curse.” 

[10-15] Realizing that Prahasta had been slain and he himself defeated, 
mighty Ravana dispatched a fearsome army of raksasas: “Exert yourselves 
at the gateways! Ascend the ramparts! Kumbhakarna, who is overwhelmed 


by sleep, must be awakened! That rdksasa sleeps for six, seven, eight, even 
nine months at a time. Nonetheless, you must awaken mighty Kumbhakarna 
immediately. For that great-armed warrior, greatest of all the raksasas, will 
quickly slaughter the monkeys and the two princes in battle. Addicted to 
this vulgar pleasure, Kumbhakarna sleeps all the time in a stupor. But once 
Kumbhakarna is awakened, my grief at being humiliated by Rama in that 
terrible battle will be banished. For of what use to me is that hero, whose 
strength is equal to that of Sakra, if he can be of no assistance to me when I 
am in such trouble?” 

[16-19] Upon hearing those words of the rdksasa lord, the raksasas 
proceeded in great agitation to the residence of Kumbhakarna. As instructed 
by Ravana, those eaters of flesh and blood gathered perfumes, garlands, and 
food and went on their way hurriedly. As they passed through the huge 
gates into Kumbhakarna’s lovely cavern, which extended a league on every 
side and was redolent with every fragrance, the immensely powerful 
raksasas were driven back by the force of his breath. Nonetheless, retaining 
their footing with difficulty, they managed to enter the cavern with effort. 

[20-23] Once they had entered that charming and splendid cavern, its 
floors inlaid with gold, they spied that tiger among rdksasas, sons of chaos, 
sleeping. He was fearsome to behold. All together they began to rouse 
grotesque Kumbhakarna, who lay sleeping in the midst of his long sleep, 
like some crumbled mountain. They stared at the immensely powerful 
Kumbhakarna, tiger among rdksasas, sons of chaos, as he lay there, his 
body hairs bristling, hissing like a great serpent, and terrifying them with 
his stertorous breathing. With his fearsome nostrils and his huge mouth as 
wide as the underworld Patala, he was fearsome to behold. 

[24-27] Then those mighty rdksasas placed before Kumbhakarna a 
supremely gratifying heap of meats as huge as Mount Meru. Those tigers 
among rdaksasas, sons of chaos, set down massive quantities of deer, 
buffalo, and boar—an astonishing heap of food. Then those foes of the 
thirty gods placed before Kumbhakarna pots of blood and strong drink of 
various kinds. And they smeared that scorcher of his foes with costly 
sandalwood paste and covered him with heavenly garlands and fragrant 
perfumes. 

[28-31] The yatudhdanas released fragrant incense and sang the praises 
of that scorcher of his foes, roaring loudly in their thousands, like storm 


clouds. They sounded conches, whose luster was like that of the hare- 
marked moon, and they roared tumultuously all together in their 
impatience. Those night-roaming rdksasas roared, clapped their upper arms, 
and shook him. Thus, they made a huge commotion in order to awaken 
Kumbhakarna. Upon hearing that din—the sound of conches and bheri and 
pataha drums, along with the clapping of the upper arms, the shouting, and 
the lionlike roars—the birds, who were flying in all directions and soaring 
into the heavens, suddenly came crashing down. 

[32-36] When the huge, sleeping Kumbhakarna was still not awakened 
by those cacophonous sounds, all the rdksasa troops took up bludgeons, 
cudgels, and maces. Then, with mountain peaks, cudgels, maces, trees, war 
hammers, and their palms and fists, those huge raksasas began to belabor 
Kumbhakarna as he slept there comfortably on the ground. However, 
because of the wind caused by the radksasa Kumbhakarna’s stertorous 
breathing, the raksasas, although powerful, were unable to remain standing 
before him. Then those rdksasas of fearsome valor, ten thousand strong, all 
together loudly sounded their mrdanga, panava, and bheri drums, along 
with many conches and jugs, right in front of him. Roaring and beating him, 
they tried to rouse him as he lay there, like a mass of collyrium. But he was 
oblivious to it all. 

[37-41] When they were still unable to wake him, they resorted to more 
drastic and more violent efforts. With staves, whips, and goads, they drove 
horses, camels, donkeys, and elephants over him, and they sounded conches 
and bheri and mrdanga drums with all their might. They struck his limbs 
with great bundles of sticks, war hammers, and cudgels, wielded with all 
their might. That tremendous din filled all of Lanka together with its 
surrounding woods and mountains. But still he did not awaken. Next, they 
incessantly and simultaneously beat a thousand bheri drums _ with 
drumsticks of refined gold, all around him. 

[4246] But when in that profound slumber brought about by the power 
of the curse he still did not awaken, the night-roaming rdksasas became 
furious. All those raksasas of fearsome valor were in a towering rage. Some 
of them, in their effort to awaken the rdksasa, actually assaulted him. Some 
beat bheri drums, while others raised a tremendous racket. Some of them 
tore out his hair, while others bit his ears. Nonetheless, Kumbhakarna, 
plunged in his profound slumber, did not stir. Other powerful raksasas, 


armed with mallets and war hammers, brought them down on his head, 
chest, and limbs. Even though that huge rdksasa was hammered all over 
with hundred-slayers tied to ropes and straps, he still did not awaken. 

[47-51] But finally, when they made a thousand elephants trample 
across his body, Kumbhakarna, aware of a slight sensation, at last awoke. 
Ignoring the tremendous blows of mountaintops and trees that were being 
hurled down upon him, he suddenly leapt up at the violent interruption of 
his sleep, yawning and oppressed by fear and hunger. Stretching wide his 
arms, which were as strong as mountain peaks and resembled two mountain 
peaks or great serpents, that night-roaming rdksasa yawned grotesquely, 
opening his mouth, which was like the gaping mare’s head fire that lies 
beneath the sea. And as he yawned prodigiously, his mouth, as wide as the 
underworld Patala, resembled the sun, maker of day, risen over the summit 
of Mount Meru. Yawning, the enormously powerful night-roaming rdaksasa 
was at last fully awake. His breath was like a gale from the mountains. 

[52-55] As Kumbhakarna arose, his appearance was like that of a 
drenching storm cloud crossed by balaka cranes at summer’s end. His 
enormous eyes, which resembled blazing fires and whose luster was like 
that of lightning, looked like two great blazing planets. Since he was 
hungry, he ate the meat. And since he was thirsty, he drank the blood. Then 
that foe of Sakra drank wine and a pot of marrow. At last, when the night- 
roaming rdksasas reckoned that he was sated, they approached him and 
surrounded him on every side with their heads bowed. 

[56-60] First, that bull among raksasas, sons of chaos, reassured the 
raksasas, sons of chaos. Then, astonished at having been awakened, he said 
this to the raksasas: ““Why have you gentlemen put so much effort into 
waking me? I trust that all is well with the king and that no danger of any 
kind presents itself. On the other hand, some great danger from enemies 
must surely have presented itself, on account of which you gentlemen have 
so urgently awakened me. | shall this very day eliminate the danger to the 
king of the raksasas. I shall cast down great Indra or smash Anala, god of 
fire. For no one would have awakened me so violently from my slumber for 
some trivial reason. So now tell me truthfully the reason for awakening 
me.” 

[61-66] Then Yutpaksa, a minister of the king, cupping his hands in 
reverence, replied to that tamer of his foes, Kumbhakarna, who was 


speaking so agitatedly in this fashion: “The gods have never presented us 
with any danger, nor have we been presented with any danger from the 
daityas or danavas such as now presents itself to us from a man, your 
highness. Lanka is surrounded by monkeys who look like mountains. A 
catastrophic danger from Rama, inflamed at the abduction of Sita, now 
confronts us. Earlier, a single monkey burned down the great citadel and 
slaughtered Prince Aksa along with his troops and elephants. Even the lord 
of the raksasas himself, Ravana Paulastya, the thorn in the side of the gods, 
was dismissed in battle by Rama, whose splendor is that of the sun, with the 
words, ‘You are as good as dead.’ What neither the gods nor the daitvas and 
danavas could do to the king has been done to him by Rama, who then 
released him, sparing his life.” 

[67-71] When Kumbhakarna had heard these words of Yupaksa and had 
learned of his brother’s defeat in battle, he opened his eyes wide and said 
this to him: “This very day, Yupaksa, I shall slaughter in battle the entire 
army of tawny monkeys along with Laksmana and Raghava. Only then will 
I go to see Ravana. I shall sate the raksasas with the flesh and blood of the 
tawny monkeys, and then I shall drink the blood of Rama and Laksmana all 
by myself.” Upon hearing those arrogant words of which the defects were 
magnified by anger, Mahodara, one of the principal warriors of the 
raksasas, sons of chaos, cupped his hands in reverence and said these 
words: “Only after you have heard Ravana’s words and carefully 
considered the advantages and disadvantages of any action should you 
attempt to conquer our enemies in battle, great-armed warrior.” 

[72-78] Upon hearing these words of Mahodara, the mighty and 
enormously powerful Kumbhakarna prepared to set forth, surrounded by 
raksasas. Once they had awakened Kumbhakarna, fearsome in eye, form, 
and valor, the rdksasas went in haste to the palace of ten-necked Ravana. 
When they arrived there, all those night-roaming raksasas, joining their 
cupped palms in reverence, addressed ten-necked Ravana as he sat on his 
splendid throne. “Your brother Kumbhakarna is awake, bull among 
raksasas. How should he proceed? Should he sally forth directly or will you 
first see him here?” Delighted, Ravana replied to those raksasas who had 
come there, “I wish to see him here, duly honored.” Saying, “So be it,” all 
those rdksasas went back again and, as instructed by Ravana, said these 


words to Kumbhakarna: “The king, that bull among all the raksasas, wishes 
to see you. So set your mind on going and bring delight to your brother.” 

[79-83] Upon receiving his brother’s command, mighty and unassailable 
Kumbhakarna said, “So be it,” and leapt up from his bed. In high spirits, he 
rinsed his mouth, bathed, and adorned himself splendidly. As he was thirsty, 
he urgently sent for invigorating drink. Then, hastening on his account, the 
raksasas, at Ravana’s command, quickly brought intoxicating drink and 
various kinds of food. After first drinking a thousand jars, he made ready to 
go. Filled with energy and strength, exhilarated, and slightly intoxicated, 
Kumbhakarna, in his frenzy, resembled Yama, who brings time itself to an 
end. 

[84-87] As Kumbhakarna made his way toward his brother’s palace, 
accompanied by an army of rdksasas, his footsteps shook the very earth. As 
he went on his way, Kumbhakarna flooded the royal highway with light 
through his own bodily radiance, as does the thousand-rayed sun the earth 
with its beams. Encircled with a garland of hands cupped in reverence, he 
resembled Indra of the hundred sacrifices on his way to the abode of self- 
existent Brahma. Seeing him, so huge and extraordinary, diademed and tall 
as a mountain peak, as if matching the sun itself with his innate splendor, 
the forest-dwelling monkeys were stricken with fear and fled in all 
directions. Some ran for refuge to Rama, the refuge of all, while others, in 
their panic, fell down. Some, in their panic, fled in all directions, while 
others, stricken with fear, simply lay on the ground. 


Sarga 49 
[1-3] Huge, diademed Kumbhakarna looked like a mountain. Seeing him 
striding along as did Lord Narayana long ago through the heavens, mighty 
and immensely powerful Rama took up his bow and stared at him. But 
when the great army of monkeys spied Kumbhakarna, who, adorned with 
his golden armlets, looked like a storm cloud charged with rain, it broke and 
ran once more. 

[4-7] When he saw his army on the run and the rdksasa looming above 
him, Rama, in his amazement, said this to Vibhisana: “Who is that tawny- 
eyed, diademed hero, who looks like a mountain and looms over Lanka, 
like a storm cloud laced with lightning? From here he looks like some great 
and solitary flagstaff raised high above the earth. At the sight of him all the 


monkeys are scattering every which way. Tell me, who is this enormous 
creature? Is he a rdksasa or an asura? I have never seen a creature like him 
before.” 

[8—12] Thus questioned by Prince Rama Kakutstha, tireless in action, 
wise Vibhisana said this to him: “That is Kumbhakarna, the valorous son of 
Visravas, who defeated both Vaivasvata and Vasava in battle. In battle, 
Raghava, he has crushed thousands of gods, ddnavas, yaksas, great 
serpents, flesh-eating demons, gandharvas, vidyddharas, and kinnaras. The 
thirty gods themselves were unable to kill him, mistakenly thinking that 
mighty Kumbhakarna with his dreadful eyes and lance in hand was, in fact, 
Kala himself. For mighty Kumbhakarna is powerful by nature, while the 
power of the other raksasa lords derives from the gift of boons. 

[13—18] “No sooner had this huge rdksasa been born than, tormented by 
hunger, he devoured many thousands of living beings. As they were being 
devoured, the creatures, stricken with terror, ran for refuge to Sakra and 
reported the matter to him. In a rage, great Indra, the wielder of the sharp 
vajra, struck Kumbhakarna with it. Struck by Sakra’s vajra, the huge 
rdksasa staggered and roared loudly in his rage. Upon hearing the roars of 
wise Kumbhakarna, who was roaring loudly, the earth, already terrified, 
became still more so. And in his rage at great Indra, mighty Kumbhakarna 
tore out one of Airavata’s tusks and, with it, struck Vasava on the chest. 
Wounded by Kumbhakarna’s blow, Vasava staggered. Then all at once the 
gods, brahman-seers, and danavas despaired. 

[19-23] “‘Sakra then proceeded with all creatures to the abode of self- 
existent Brahma Prajapati, where they told him about Kumbhakarna’s 
vicious nature, his devouring creatures and assaulting the gods: ‘If he 
continues to devour creatures in this fashion, the whole world will be empty 
within no time.” When Brahma, grandfather of all the worlds, had heard 
those words of Vasava, he sent for the raksasas and fixed his gaze on 
Kumbhakarna. When Prajapati, lord of creatures, saw Kumbhakarna, he 
was frightened. Fixing him with his glance, self-existent Brahma took a 
deep breath and said this: ‘Undoubtedly, you were created by Paulastya for 
the destruction of the world. Therefore, you shall sleep from this day 
forward as if you were dead.’ That very instant, overcome by Brahma’s 
curse, he collapsed right in front of the Lord. 


[24-27] “Then, profoundly agitated, Ravana spoke these words: ‘You are 
cutting down a full-grown golden tree, just as it is about to bear fruit. It is 
not right, Prajapati, to curse one’s own grandson in this fashion. Since your 
words may never prove false, there is no doubt but that he will sleep. Still, 
you should set some time limit to his sleeping and waking.’ Upon hearing 
Ravana’s words, self-existent Brahma said this: ‘He shall sleep for six 
months and wake for but a single day. But on that one day, this ravening 
hero will roam the earth with gaping mouth, devouring all creatures, like a 
raging conflagration.’ 

[28—31] “But now King Ravana, in a desperate situation and terrified of 
your valor, has had Kumbhakarna awakened. That hero of terrifying valor 
has emerged from his lair. Soon, in a towering rage, he will race about, 
devouring the monkeys. At the mere sight of Kumbhakarna, the tawny 
monkeys have fled. How then will the monkeys stand up to him when he is 
in the fury of battle? Let’s tell all the tawny monkeys that he is just some 
giant mechanical man. Once they accept that, they will lose their fear of 
him.” 

[32—37] Upon hearing Vibhisana’s reasonable and encouraging words, 
Raghava addressed Nila, the general of the army: “Go, Nila Pavaki! Put all 
the troops into battle formation and take up your post. Seize control of the 
gateways, thoroughfares, and bridges of Lanka. Let all the monkeys collect 
mountain peaks, trees, and boulders and take up their posts, well armed and 
boulders in hand.” Thus instructed by Raghava, Nila, that elephant among 
monkeys and general of the army of tawny monkeys, gave his orders 
accordingly to the monkey troops. Then Gavaksa, Sarabha, Hanuman, 
Angada, and Nala, who themselves resembled mountains, seized mountain 
peaks and approached the gateways. With boulders held aloft and trees in 
their hands, the formidable army of tawny monkeys resembled a vast and 
formidable mass of huge storm clouds, looming up against a mountain. 


Sarga 50 
[1-4] Meanwhile, that tiger among the raksasas Kumbhakarna, whose valor 
was tremendous, proceeded along the majestic royal highway, groggy with 
sleep and drink. As that supremely invincible warrior continued on his way, 
he was surrounded by thousands of rdksasas and strewn with showers of 
blossoms raining from the houses along his route. At length he spied the 


vast and beautiful mansion of the rdksasa lord, which, covered with a 
fretwork of gold, blazed with the radiance of the sun. Then he entered the 
dwelling of the rdksasa lord, as might the sun a mass of clouds. There, just 
as Sakra might behold the self-existent Brahma seated on his throne, he 
beheld from afar his elder brother seated on his. 

[5—10] Now that he had arrived at his brother’s house and had entered its 
innermost chamber, he spied his elder seated dejectedly in the flying palace 
Puspaka. But when ten-necked Ravana saw that Kumbhakarna had arrived, 
he quickly sat up in great excitement and had him ushered into his presence. 
Immensely powerful Kumbhakarna made his obeisance at the feet of his 
brother, who sat upon his throne, and said, “What task must I perform?” 
Then, springing up in great delight, Ravana embraced him. When he had 
been embraced by his brother and duly welcomed, Kumbhakarna took a 
superb, splendid, and heavenly seat. Immensely powerful Kumbhakarna 
settled himself on his seat. Then, his eyes red with rage, he said these words 
to Ravana: “Why have you put such effort into waking me, your majesty? 
Tell me. Who are you afraid of? Who will become a ghost this very day?” 

[11—15] His eyes rolling slightly, Ravana spoke these words to his angry 
brother Kumbhakarna, who sat beside him: “As of today, you have been 
asleep for a very long time, mighty warrior. Since you were resting 
comfortably, you do not know of the danger Rama poses to me. This 
powerful Rama Dasarathi has crossed the ocean with Sugriva and an army 
and is cutting us off at the roots. Just look at the woods and parklands of 
Lanka! He has turned them all into one big sea of monkeys after easily 
coming here via a bridge. The very foremost among the raksasas have been 
slaughtered in battle by the monkeys. But never do I see the destruction of 
the monkeys in battle. 

[16-19] “You must understand that I have exhausted all my resources. 
You must save the city of Lanka in which only the children and the aged 
remain. Great-armed warrior, you must accomplish this most formidable 
task for your brother’s sake. I have never before spoken in this fashion to 
anyone, scorcher of your foes. For, my brother, I have placed my love and 
my fullest confidence in you. Many times, bull among rdksasas, in our wars 
with the gods and asuras, you faced off against them and defeated them in 
battle. For there is not to be found among all living beings any one as 
mighty as you. You must do me this supreme favor and service. You, who 


love battle and love your kinsmen, must, according to your pleasure, scatter 
the army of our enemies with your own blazing energy, just as a strong gale 
might spring up to scatter the clouds of autumn.” 


Sarga 51 

[1-4] When Kumbhakarna had heard the lamentation of the king of the 
raksasas, he laughed and then said these words: “Since you paid no heed to 
those who had your welfare at heart, you have now met with that very 
calamity that we foresaw earlier, at the council of ministers. You are 
suffering the immediate consequences of your wicked deed, just as 
evildoers suffer an instant descent into their respective hells. You carried 
out this action, your majesty, without first reflecting upon it. In the sheer 
arrogance of your strength, you did not consider the consequences. 

[S5—10] “A person who, relying upon his royal authority, does later what 
ought to be done first, and first what ought to be done later, has no 
comprehension of the distinction between sound and unsound policy. 
Actions that are performed in inverted order, without reference to the proper 
time and place, are harmful, just as are offerings of food to impious persons. 
A king who perceives the fivefold application of the three types of action 
after coming to a decision with his ministers remains on the proper path. So 
does a king who desires to reach a decision in conformance with the texts 
on polity, who pays heed to his ministers, and who recognizes his true 
friends by virtue of his own intelligence. A man should pursue all three 
human ends—trighteousness, profit, and pleasure—at their proper times, 
lord of the raksasas, either all at once or two at a time. And a king or one 
exercising royal power who learns which among these three is foremost and 
yet does not take it to heart finds all his great learning to be in vain. 

[11-13] “But, foremost among rdksasas, the self-possessed monarch 
should consult with his ministers concerning the timely use of bribery, 
conciliation, sowing dissension, coercive force, or any combination of these 
means, as well as the proper and improper ways of applying them. He who 
does so and practices righteousness, profit, and pleasure at their appropriate 
times never comes to grief in this world. And the king who, together with 
ministers who understand the true nature of things and have his interests at 
heart, deliberates over what he ought and ought not do in this world in order 
to achieve a beneficial result thrives. 


[14—20] “There are some men—dumb brutes, in fact—utterly ignorant of 
the import of the sastras, who, once they are brought into discussions of 
policy, wish to speak out of sheer arrogance. One should not follow the 
pernicious advice of those who are ignorant of the sdastras, and unfamiliar 
with the treatises on statecraft, and simply eager to enhance their own 
positions. And those men who undermine all undertakings by foolishly 
uttering in their insolence pernicious advice that only seems beneficial 
should, after careful examination, be excluded from discussions of policy. 
For in this world some counselors, acting in concert with cunning enemies, 
persuade their master to engage in self-destructive actions, thus bringing 
him to ruin. When it comes to evaluating counsel, a master must, through a 
full investigation, determine which of his ministers are, in fact, enemies 
who are posing as friends although they have actually been suborned. For 
his enemies find the weak points of a rash king who suddenly rushes into 
undertakings, just as birds plunge into the gap in the Kraufica mountain. 
And so a king who underestimates his enemy and fails to protect himself 
meets with calamities and falls from his lofty state.” 

[21—26] But when ten-necked Ravana had heard Kumbhakarna’s speech, 
he knit his brows in anger and said this to him in a rage: “How dare you 
lecture me like some venerable elder or preceptor? Why waste your effort 
on words like this? You must do what suits the present situation. It 1s 
useless now to keep on repeating what I failed to do then, whether from 
error, mental confusion, or reliance on my strength and valor. If you truly 
love me, if you truly understand what it means to be a brother, or if you 
believe in your heart that this mission is of the utmost urgency, then you 
must immediately do what suits the present situation. Please remedy 
through your valor this catastrophic result of my unsound policy. A true 
friend is one who stands by a poor wretch who has lost everything. A true 
kinsman is one who renders assistance to those who have gone astray.” 

[27-32] As Ravana was speaking these firm and harsh words in this 
fashion, Kumbhakarna, thinking, “He is angry!” addressed him softly and 
gently. Recognizing that his brother was extremely agitated, Kumbhakarna 
now spoke softly, soothing him: “Enough of this agonizing, foremost king 
of the raksasas! You must put aside your anger and regain your composure. 
You need not give way to despondency as long as I am alive, your majesty. 
I will destroy him on whose account you are so anguished. Regardless of 


your mood, my bond of kinship and brotherly affection forced me to offer 
beneficial advice, your majesty. What is appropriate for a loving kinsman to 
do in the present circumstances is to slaughter your enemies. Now watch, as 
I do just that in battle. 

[33-38] “This very day, great-armed warrior, you shall see the hosts of 
tawny monkeys fleeing, once I have slain Rama and his brother in the 
forefront of battle. This very day, you shall be happy, great-armed warrior, 
while Sita will be desolated upon seeing me bring Rama’s head back from 
the battle. This very day, all the raksasas in Lanka whose kinsmen have 
been slain shall witness the most welcome death of Rama. This very day, 
through the destruction of the enemy in battle, I shall wipe away the tears of 
those afflicted with grief on account of the slaughter of their kinsmen. This 
very day, you shall see the lord of the leaping monkeys, Sugriva—huge as a 
mountain—torn to pieces in battle, like a storm cloud when the sun breaks 
through. You should not send out anyone else to fight, warrior of unequaled 
valor. I myself will slaughter your enemies, mighty king. 

[39-42] “I shall fight them, whether they be Sakra, Yama, Agni the 
purifier, Maruta, or even Varuna and Kubera. For even Indra himself, the 
smasher of citadels, would be terrified of me—with my sharp fangs and my 
body the size of a mountain—when I roar, holding aloft my keen lance. Or 
even were I to cast my weapon aside and swiftly trample our enemies, not 
one of them, if he valued his life, would be able to stand and face me. Not 
with a javelin, not with a mace, not with a sword, nor with keen arrows, but 
with my own two hands I shall, in my fury, slay even Indra himself, the 
wielder of the vajra. 

[43-47] “Even should Raghava withstand the impact of my fist this day, 
then a hail of arrows will drink his blood. Why are you oppressed by 
anxiety while I am here, your majesty? I stand poised to sally forth for the 
destruction of your foes. Give up this fear of Rama, your majesty. I shall 
slay Raghava in battle as well as Laksmana and mighty Sugriva. For I wish 
to confer upon you great and extraordinary renown. I am off to bring you 
pleasure, the greatest of all pleasures, through the slaughter of Dasarathi. 
Once I have slain Rama along with Laksmana, I shall devour all the leaders 
of the troops of tawny monkeys. So enjoy yourself to your heart’s content. 
Drink fine wines. Attend to your duties and banish all cares. Once I have, 


this very day, sent Rama to the abode of Yama, Sita will at long last submit 
to your will.” 


Sarga 52 

[1-5] Now, when Mahodara had heard those words uttered by huge, 
powerful Kumbhakarna with his immense arms, he said this: “Although you 
were born in a noble family, Kumbhakarna, you are presumptuous and have 
a vulgar mind. You are arrogant and incapable of understanding what is to 
be done in any situation. It is not the case that the king does not understand 
sound and unsound policy, Kumbhakarna. But you, presumptuous in your 
childishness, just like to prattle. He is quite familiar with the distinctions of 
place and time; and he knows all about stasis, increase, and diminution of 
both himself and his enemies, bull among raksasas. For what wise man 
would engage in an action such as could only be performed by a vulgar- 
minded man of brute strength who does not honor his elders? 

[6-10] “And as for righteousness, profit, and pleasure, which you claim 
can be practiced separately, you lack the capacity to understand them as 
they truly are. For action alone is the motivating force behind all things. 
And in this world, even the most wicked actions may bear excellent fruit. 
Righteousness and sound policy may yield excellent results, but so may 
their opposites. Still, unrighteousness and unsound policy may also yield 
results that are calamitous. Men engage in actions with reference to this 
world and the next. So a person who indulges in pleasure may still attain 
excellent consequences. The king set his heart on this deed, and we all 
approved it. And besides, what is wrong with the use of violence against an 
enemy? 

[11-18] “Furthermore, as to your rationale for going forth to battle on 
your own, I shall explain to you why that is both inappropriate and harmful. 
How can you single-handedly defeat that very same Raghava who earlier 
slaughtered so many immensely powerful raksasas in Janasthana? You can 
see throughout the city all those mighty raksasas whom he earlier defeated 
in Janasthana. They are still terrified to this day. In your ignorance you wish 
to rouse Dasaratha’s son Rama, who is like a raging lion, as one might 
rouse a sleeping serpent. For who can possibly assail him who is as 
irresistible as death, unassailable in his wrath, and ever blazing with 
energy? Our whole army would be in danger if it faced this enemy. 


Therefore, I do not approve of your going there alone. Who, moreover, 
lacking all resources, could hope, like some common fool, to subdue an 
enemy who possesses a wealth of resources and is determined to lay down 
his life? How, best of raksasas, can you possibly hope to fight someone 
who has no peer among men, but 1s equal to Indra or Vivasvant?” 

[19-23] Having spoken in this fashion to the enraged Kumbhakarna, 
Mahodara then, in the midst of the radksasas, addressed Ravana, who makes 
the worlds cry out: “Since you already have Vaidehi, why do you go on 
talking? Sita will submit to your wishes whenever you desire. I have 
devised a ruse whereby Sita will come to you. If it appeals to your way of 
thinking, lord of the rdksasas, then hear me out. Have it proclaimed that 
these five—Dvyihva, Samhradin, Kumbhakarna, Vitardana, and I—are 
going forth to kill Rama. Then we will go out and engage Rama in fierce 
battle. If we should defeat your enemies, then we shall have no further need 
of such a ruse. 

[24-27] “If, on the other hand, when we have finished the battle, our 
enemy should survive, then we shall adopt the ruse that I have devised in 
my mind. Our bodies rent by sharp arrows marked with Rama’s name, we 
shall return from the battle, covered with blood. Announcing, ‘We have 
devoured Raghava and Laksmana,’ we shall reverently clasp your feet. You 
must then reward us to our heart’s content. Then, your majesty, you must 
have the following proclaimed throughout the city from elephant-back: 
‘Rama has been slain along with his brother and his troops!’ 

[28—1138*—35] “Then, feigning the greatest delight, subduer of your 
foes, you must cause your attendants to be given delicacies, servants, 
various desirable things, and wealth. Also have your heroic warriors given 
garlands, garments, and unguents. Your soldiers should be given copious 
drink, and you yourself must drink, feigning delight. Once this vicious 
rumor “The rdksasas have devoured Rama along with his companions!’ has 
been heard and spread everywhere, you must go to Sita privately and 
comfort her with consoling words. Then you should seduce her with wealth, 
grain, jewels, and various desirable things. By means of this deception, your 
majesty, which will give rise to fear and grief, Sita, believing her husband 
dead, will come under your sway, unwilling though she may be. For once 
she grasps that her beloved husband is dead, she will come under your sway 
in her despair and feminine frailty. Previously she was raised in comfort, 


and though that is what she deserves, she has been racked with suffering. 
Once she realizes that her comfort is dependent upon you, she will, by all 
means, come to you. In my view this is the best policy. It would be 
catastrophic for you to confront Rama. Don’t be so anxious. If you remain 
here without fighting, you will surely gain great happiness. And so, 
conquering one’s enemies without a fight, without the loss of one’s army, 
and without placing oneself in danger, lord of the people, one can long 
enjoy fame, great merit, majesty, and glory, lord of the earth!” 


Sarga 53 

[1-8] When Kumbhakarna had been addressed in this fashion, he first 
reviled Mahodara and then addressed his brother Ravana, foremost of the 
raksasas: “In killing that evil-minded Rama this very day, I shall remove a 
terrible danger to you. With your enemy out of the way, may you be 
content. True heroes do not boast in vain, like empty clouds thundering. 
Watch now as my boasts are proven true by my feats in battle. True heroes 
do not tolerate insult, nor do they indulge in self-praise. But without 
swaggering, they perform seemingly impossible feats. ‘It was through 
heeding the advice of cowards like you, Mahodara, ignorant fools, who 
think that they are wise, that the king has been brought to such a sorry state. 
It is people like you—cowards in battle and sycophants of the king, saying 
only what he wants to hear—that have constantly subverted this 
undertaking. Moreover, in counseling the king in the guise of friendship, 
you have acted, in fact, like an enemy. For Lanka has been virtually 
emptied save for the king, the treasury has been drained, and the army 
decimated. In order to remedy your unsound policy, I shall this very day go 
forth to war, fully prepared to defeat the enemy in battle.” 

[9-11] When wise Kumbhakarna had spoken these words in this fashion, 
the lord of the raksasas, laughing, replied in these words: “There is no 
doubt that Mahodara is terrified of Rama. That’s why the idea of battle does 
not appeal to him, dear boy so skillful in battle. I have no one who can 
equal you in loyalty and in strength. So go forth, Kumbhakarna, for the 
slaughter of our enemy and for victory!” 

[12—15] That slayer of his enemies swiftly seized his sharp lance. It was 
made entirely of black iron, but it glittered with ornaments of burnished 
gold. The equal of Indra’s thunderbolt, it was fearsome and as heavy as the 


vajra. It was a killer of gods, danavas, gandharvas, yaksas, and kinnaras. It 
was adorned with massive garlands of red blossoms and stained red with 
the blood of his enemies. It spewed forth its inner fire. Seizing that sharp 
lance, the immensely powerful Kumbhakarna spoke these words to Ravana: 
“Let your vast army stay here. I shall go forth alone. This very day, in my 
rage and ravenous hunger, I shall devour the monkeys!” 

[16-21] Upon hearing Kumbhakarna’s speech, Ravana uttered these 
words: “You had best go forth accompanied by soldiers armed with lances 
and war hammers. For those great monkeys are swift and determined. They 
would surely kill you with their fangs should you be alone or caught off 
guard. Therefore, you had best go forth accompanied by unassailable 
soldiers. You must annihilate the entire enemy force, which is such a 
menace to the raksasas.” Then, rising from his throne, immensely powerful 
Ravana bound upon Kumbhakarna’s head a chaplet with a jewel at its 
center. And he fastened upon great Kumbhakarna armlets, rings, a necklace 
of pearls that shone like the hare-marked moon, and other fine ornaments. 
And Ravana hung upon him fragrant and celestial garlands of blossoms and 
placed magnificent earrings on his ears. 

[22—26] Wearing his golden bracelets and armlets and adorned with 
golden necklaces and other ornaments, huge-eared Kumbhakarna resembled 
a fire blazing up with oblations. With his great black sword belt, he was as 
resplendent as Mount Mandara girded with the great serpent when the 
nectar of immortality was churned forth. Girding on his impenetrable 
golden armor, which could withstand any blow and, blazing with its own 
luster, glittered like lightning, he resembled the king of the mountains, 
shrouded in clouds at sunset. His body adorned with every ornament and, 
his lance in hand, the raksasa resembled Narayana when he had resolved to 
take his three strides. He embraced his brother and _ reverently 
circumambulated him. Then, bowing his head to him, the immensely 
powerful warrior set forth. Ravana sent him off with auspicious blessings. 

[27-32] Chariot-warriors accompanied that great hero, himself the 
foremost of chariot-warriors, to the blare of conches and the beating of war 
drums. They were accompanied in turn by well-armed soldiers, elephants, 
horses, and chariots that rumbled like storm clouds. They followed the 
fearsome and immensely powerful Kumbhakarna on serpents, camels, 
donkeys, horses, lions, elephants, and various other beasts and birds. Strewn 


with showers of blossoms, a parasol held above him, and his sharp lance in 
hand, that foe of gods and ddnavas went forth, intoxicated with strong drink 
and frenzied with the smell of blood. Behind him, making a huge uproar, 
came many fearsome and immensely powerful radksasa foot soldiers. They 
had fearsome eyes and held weapons in their hands. With their red eyes and 
their huge bodies, they looked like masses of black collyrium. They 
brandished lances, swords, keen battle-axes, iron clubs many fathoms long, 
maces, cudgels, huge trunks of ¢d/a trees, and slings that were not to be 
withstood. 

[33-38] Then, taking on a different form—horrific and hair-raising—the 
highly energetic and immensely powerful Kumbhakarna marched forth. He 
was now a hundred bow lengths wide and six hundred tall. Terrifying, his 
eyes as big as cartwheels, he looked like a huge mountain. Resembling a 
scorched mountain, the huge Kumbhakarna, with his enormous mouth, 
arranged the rdksasas in battle order. Then, laughing, he said this: “This 
very day, in my wrath, I shall burn up the troops of the monkey leaders, one 
after another, just as a fire would so many moths. Granted, these forest- 
ranging monkeys have done me no harm. In fact, their kind is an ornament 
to the city parks of folks like us. However, it is Raghava, along with 
Laksmana, who is the root cause of the blockade of our city. Once he is 
killed, all of them will be destroyed, and I am going to kill him in battle.” 

[39-45] As Kumbhakarna was speaking in this fashion, the raksasas sent 
up an extremely dreadful roar that seemed to make the very ocean tremble. 
But as wise Kumbhakarna marched swiftly forth, dreadful omens appeared 
on every side. Extremely dreadful clouds thundered, shedding meteors and 
lightning bolts, while the earth, together with its seas and forests, trembled. 
Dreadful-looking jackals howled, their mouths emitting flames, while sky- 
going birds wheeled in clockwise circles. As he marched along the road, a 
vulture perched upon his lance. His left eye throbbed and his left arm 
trembled. A blazing meteor crashed down with a horrific sound. The sun 
grew dim, and an ill wind began to blow. But driven by the power of fate, 
Kumbhakarna marched on, heedless of the great and hair-raising portents 
that had appeared. 

[46-50] Stepping over the ramparts, that hero, who resembled a 
mountain, gazed upon the extraordinary monkey army, which looked like a 
mass of clouds. And like clouds driven by the wind, the monkeys fled in all 


directions when they saw the foremost of the raksasas, who looked like a 
mountain. Seeing that immensely fierce monkey army fleeing in all 
directions, like a scattered mass of clouds, Kumbhakarna, who resembled a 
cloud, in his joy roared thunderously like a cloud. Upon hearing his 
dreadful roaring, which was like the rumbling of a rain-charged cloud in the 
sky, many of the leaping monkeys fell to the ground, like sd/a trees cut off 
at the roots. Great Kumbhakarna marched forth wielding a huge iron club 
for the destruction of his enemies. He looked like Lord Yama, with his 
servants and his rod, at the end of a cosmic era. Thus, he inspired a 
paralyzing fear in the ranks of the monkeys. 


Sarga 54 

[1-6] Kumbhakarna let loose a mighty roar that caused the ocean to 
resound, producing, as it were, thunderclaps and shattering, so it seemed, 
the very mountains. When the monkeys saw him approaching, with his 
terrible eyes—he whom not even munificent Indra, Yama, or Varuna could 
kill—they scattered. Seeing them scatter, Angada, Valin’s son, addressed 
Nala, Nila, Gavaksa, and the immensely powerful Kumuda: “Where are you 
going in such an access of panic, like vulgar tawny monkeys, forgetting 
who you are, your heroic deeds, and your noble lineage? Enough of this, 
gentle friends! Turn back! Why are you trying to save yourselves? This is 
no raksasa capable of fighting. It is just some huge scarecrow. With our 
valor we shall smash this huge scarecrow towering amid the raksasas. Turn 
back, leaping monkeys!” 

[7-10] When the tawny monkeys, with some difficulty, had been 
reassured, they regrouped here and there. Then, with trees and boulders in 
hand, they advanced toward the battlefield. Turning back in a rage, the 
immensely powerful forest-dwelling monkeys, like wildly enraged bull 
elephants in rut, struck Kumbhakarna with lofty mountain peaks and 
boulders. Although he was struck with trees, their branches in blossom, he 
was not shaken. Falling on his limbs, the boulders shattered into hundreds 
of pieces, while the trees, their branches in blossom, fell to the ground, 
splintered. In a towering rage, he exerted himself mightily and wrought 
havoc upon the armies of the immensely powerful monkeys, just as a fire 
that has flared up might wreak havoc in a forest. 


[11-15] Hurled down, many of the bulls among monkeys lay there, 
drenched with blood, like crimson-blossomed trees that have fallen. 
Leaping and running, the monkeys did not watch where they were going. 
Some fell into the sea, while others took to the sky. As they were being 
slaughtered by the immensely powerful rdksasa, those heroes fled along the 
same path by which they had crossed the ocean. Some, their faces dejected 
through fear, fled down to the shore. Some apes climbed trees, while others 
fled to the mountain. Some of them plunged into the sea, while others took 
refuge in caves. Some of the leaping monkeys sank down; none of them 
stood their ground. 

[16-24] Seeing that the monkeys had broken ranks, Angada said this: 
“Turn back, leaping monkeys! Stand fast! Let us fight! If you break ranks, I 
can see no safe place for you, even should you circle the earth itself. Turn 
back, all of you! Why are you trying to save yourselves? Nothing can 
hinder your progress and your valor. But if you flee weaponless, your wives 
will mock you. But though you will have survived, that will be like death to 
you. Surely you were all born in long and great lineages. If, abandoning 
your valor, you flee in fear, you will certainly become contemptible. Where 
have they gone now, your great and lofty boasts that we heard before in the 
public assembly? When someone survives but is subject to censure, tales of 
his cowardice are bandied about. So follow the path that is fit for honorable 
men; abandon your fear. If, our life spans being short, we should lie slain 
upon the earth, then, since we would have died in battle, we would attain 
the Brahmaloka, so difficult to reach. But if we should slay the enemy in 
battle, we would attain glory. In any case, once Kumbhakarna sees 
Kakutstha, he will no more escape with his life than would a moth that flies 
into a blazing fire. If we who are so renowned should save our lives by 
fleeing, our reputations would be destroyed, since we, who are so many, 
would have been routed by a single warrior.” 

[25-29] As heroic Angada of the golden armlets was speaking in this 
fashion, the monkeys, still fleeing, responded to him in words that are to be 
condemned by the brave: “The raksasa Kumbhakarna has wrought terrible 
slaughter among us. This is no time to stand our ground. We value our lives; 
so we’re getting out of here.” Having said this much, all the leaders of the 
monkey troops, keeping their eyes on the advancing rdksasa, so terrible 
with his terrible eyes, fled in all directions. But with soothing and respectful 


words, Angada managed to get those heroic, wrinkle-faced monkeys to turn 
back, even as they fled. Then Rsabha, Sarabha, Mainda, Dhimra, Nila, 
Kumuda, Susena, Gavaksa, Rambha, and Tara, led by Dvivida, Panasa, and 
Hanuman, the son of Vayu, swiftly turned and headed back to the 
battlefield. 


Sarga 55 

[1-4] And so, when those gigantic monkeys had heard Angada’s words, 
they turned back, eager for battle, resigning themselves to death. At the 
words of Angada, the wrinkle-faced monkeys were calmed, infused with 
courage, and incited to valor. Then, marching forward in great excitement 
and resigned to death, the monkeys fought furiously, heedless of their lives. 
Holding aloft trees and huge mountain peaks, those gigantic monkeys 
charged swiftly at Kumbhakarna. 

[5—7] But the valiant and colossal Kumbhakarna raised his mace and, in 
a towering rage, struck at his enemies, sending them flying in all directions. 
Struck down by Kumbhakarna, the monkeys lay sprawled on the ground in 
groups of seven and eight hundred, and even in groups of thousands. He 
raced about sweeping up groups of monkeys—sixteen, eight, ten, twenty, 
and thirty at a time—in his two arms and devouring them, just as Garuda, in 
his towering rage, devours the great serpents. 

[8—13] Hovering in the sky, Hanuman rained down mountain peaks and 
many different kinds of trees on Kumbhakarna’s head. But with his lance, 
mighty Kumbhakarna shattered the mountain peaks and deflected the 
cascade of trees. Then, grasping his keen lance, he raced toward the 
fearsome army of tawny monkeys. But Hanuman, seizing a mountain, stood 
directly in the path of the charging Kumbhakarna. With it, the enraged 
monkey forcefully struck Kumbhakarna, whose body was as fearsome as a 
great mountain. Overwhelmed by that blow, the blood-splattered rdksasa 
staggered, his limbs moistened with fat. Brandishing his lance, which 
glittered like lightning and resembled a mountain, its highest peak in 
flames, he struck Maruti full in the chest, just as Guha struck Mount 
Kraufica with his fearsome javelin. His mighty chest pierced by the lance, 
Hanuman was dazed and vomited blood from his mouth. There, in that 
great battle, he loosed a horrendous cry that was like the thundering of the 
clouds at the end of a cosmic era. 


[14-18] Then the rdaksasa hosts, seeing him afflicted, were suddenly 
delighted and sent up a cheer. But the leaping monkeys themselves were 
afflicted, and, overwhelmed with fear of Kumbhakarna, they fled in the 
midst of battle. Nila then hurled a mountaintop at wise Kumbhakarna; but 
the latter, seeing it rushing toward him, struck it with his fist. Struck by his 
fist, the mountaintop shattered and fell to the earth, shooting forth sparks 
and flames. Then five tigers among monkeys—Rsabha, Sarabha, Nila, 
Gavaksa, and Gandhamadana—rushed Kumbhakarna. Those immensely 
powerful monkeys battered gigantic Kumbhakarna on all sides with 
mountains and trees and with their palms, feet, and fists. 

[19-22] But those blows felt like mere caresses to him, and he was not 
shaken in the least. He crushed swift Rsabha with both arms. Crushed in 
Kumbhakarna’s arms, the fearsome Rsabha, bull among monkeys, 
collapsed, blood oozing from his mouth. Then, in battle, Kumbhakarna, 
Indra’s foe, struck Sarabha with his fist, Nila with his knee, and Gavaksa 
with the palm of his hand. Shaken by the blows they had been dealt, dazed, 
and spattered with blood, they fell to the ground, like Aimsuka trees that 
have been cut down. 

[23—26] When those great monkey leaders had fallen, thousands of 
monkeys rushed Kumbhakarna. And all those mighty bulls among leaping 
monkeys, who resembled mountains, began to bite him as they jumped and 
climbed up upon him, as if he were a mountain. Those bulls among leaping 
monkeys struck at the gigantic Kumbhakarna with their claws, fangs, fists, 
and knees. Covered with those thousands of monkeys, that tiger among 
raksasas, who already resembled a mountain, now looked like one 
overgrown with trees. 

[27-32] Then the mighty rdaksasa seized all those monkeys in his arms 
and devoured them, just as Garuda, in his rage, devours the great serpents. 
Kumbhakarna crammed the monkeys into his mouth—as wide as the 
underworld Patala—until they came out of his nose and ears. As he 
furiously devoured those tawny monkeys in his towering rage, the best of 
rdksasas, who looked like a mountain, routed the entire monkey host. 
Drenching the earth with blood and flesh, the frenzied raksasa rampaged 
through the ranks of the tawny monkeys like the fire of universal 
destruction. In that battle, with his lance in hand, powerful Kumbhakarna 
resembled Sakra, vajra in hand, or Yama, ender of all things, with his noose 


in hand. Kumbhakarna raged through the monkey ranks like Agni, the 
purifier, blazing through the dry woodlands in the summer. 

[33-37] Then, their troops decimated and their leaders slain, the 
monkeys, trembling with fear, cried out loudly and discordantly as they 
were slaughtered. With so many of them being slaughtered by 
Kumbhakarna, the monkeys fled to Raghava for refuge, shaken and 
despairing. But the heroic lord of the monkeys, Sugriva, seeing mighty 
Kumbhakarna rushing toward him, sprang up. The great monkey tore off a 
mountain peak and, brandishing it, charged swiftly at mighty Kumbhakarna. 
When Kumbhakarna, his every limb unscathed, saw that leaping monkey 
rushing toward him, he stopped and faced the monkey lord. 

[38-40] Seeing Kumbhakarna standing there devouring huge monkeys, 
his body smeared with their blood, Sugriva said these words: “You have 
struck down heroes; you have performed an impossibly difficult feat. You 
have devoured our troops and have gained the highest renown. But you 
should leave the monkey army alone. What have you to do with common 
soldiers? Now try to withstand a single blow of this mountain of mine, 
raksasa.” 

[41-45] When the tiger among raksasas, Kumbhakarna, had heard that 
speech of the king of the tawny monkeys—a speech that showed his 
strength and fortitude—he uttered these words: “You are the grandson of 
Prajapati, lord of creatures, and the son of Rksarajas, and you are endowed 
with learning and valor. That is why you boast so, monkey.” When Sugriva 
had heard these words of Kumbhakarna, he hefted the mountain and hurled 
it violently. He struck Kumbhakarna in the chest with that mountain, which 
was like Indra’s vajra or a thunderbolt. But the mountain peak shattered 
violently against his broad chest. At that, the leaping monkeys immediately 
grew despondent, while the hosts of raksasas roared with delight. 
Kumbhakarna was furious at being struck by that mountain peak. He 
opened his mouth and bellowed with rage. Hefting his lance, which 
glittered like lightning, he hurled it in order to kill the lord of the apes and 
tawny monkeys. 

[46-49] But Hanuman, son of Anila, swiftly leaping up, caught in both 
hands the sharp gold-corded lance hurled by Kumbhakarna’s arm and 
quickly broke it. Placing that immense lance, made of black iron and 
weighing many tons, across his knee, that bull among leaping monkeys 


snapped it in great excitement. When the great raksasa lord saw that his 
lance was broken, he was enraged. Tearing off the summit of Lanka’s 
Mount Malaya, he closed with Sugriva and struck him with it. Struck with 
that mountain peak in battle, the lord of the monkeys fell senseless to the 
ground. Seeing him fallen senseless to the ground in battle, the yatudhanas 
roared in delight. 

[50-53] Then Kumbhakarna rushed upon the lord of the monkeys, 
whose valor was fierce and wondrous. Seizing Sugriva, he carried him off, 
as a violent wind might a cloud. Moving through the battle, holding aloft 
Sugriva, who resembled a huge cloud, Kumbhakarna, whose form rivaled 
that of Mount Meru, now resembled Mount Meru with a new, fearsome 
peak soaring above it. The hero Kumbhakarna, holding Sugriva aloft, 
proceeded on his way, as the rdksasa lords sang his praises in the battle. He 
heard the cries of those who dwelt in heaven, home of the thirty gods, who 
were astonished at the capture of the king of the leaping monkeys. Then, as 
Indra’s foe, whose valor was that of Indra, was carrying off the lord of the 
tawny monkeys, the equal of Indra himself, he reflected, “With this one out 
of the way, the entire army, Raghava included, is as good as gone.” 

[54-63] When wise Hanuman, son of Maruta, saw that the monkey army 
had fled in all directions and that the monkey Sugriva had been taken by 
Kumbhakarna, he reflected: “What am I to do now that Sugriva has been 
captured in this way? By all means, I shall do what is proper for me to do. I 
shall become like a mountain and crush the rdksasa. Once I have slain 
mighty Kumbhakarna in battle, smashing his body with my fists, and freed 
the king of the monkeys, all the leaping monkeys shall rejoice. On the other 
hand, the king will surely free himself as he would even were he to be 
captured by the thirty gods together with the asuras and great serpents. I 
believe that because he was struck down in battle by Kumbhakarna with the 
blow of a mountain, the lord of the monkeys must not yet have regained 
consciousness. After a while, when he has regained consciousness, he will 
do what is best for himself and the monkeys in this great battle. On the 
other hand, if I were to free great Sugriva, it would incur his most severe 
displeasure, as his reputation would be forever tarnished. Therefore, I shall 
wait awhile until our king’s valor is recouped. Meanwhile, I shall rally the 
scattered army of the monkeys.” After reflecting in this fashion, Hanuman, 
son of Maruta, once more halted the flight of the vast monkey army. 


[64-70] Meanwhile, Kumbhakarna entered Lanka carrying the huge 
tawny monkey, who was still twitching. As he did so, he was strewn with 
showers of splendid blossoms by those standing on the palaces and at the 
gates of the buildings on the main thoroughfares. Then, still held in the 
arms of the much stronger rdksasa, the great monkey somehow regained 
consciousness. Gazing about him again and again at the city’s royal 
highway, he fell to thinking: “‘Since I have been captured in this fashion, 
how in the world can I now strike back? I must perform such a feat as will 
be both desirable and beneficial for the tawny monkeys.” Suddenly 
grasping the foe of Indra, lord of the immortal gods, with his fingertips, the 
king of the tawny monkeys rent his ears with his claws and his nose with 
his fangs. Then he slashed Kumbhakarna along his flanks. Bruised and 
wounded by him, robbed of his ears and nose, his body drenched in blood, 
Kumbhakarna was in a towering rage. Flinging Sugriva off, he smashed 
him to the ground. Smashed to the ground with terrible force and beaten all 
the while by those foes of the gods, the raksasas, Sugriva, jumping up, flew 
swiftly into the sky and once more joined Rama. Stripped of his ears and 
nose and gushing blood, mighty Kumbhakarna looked like a mountain 
covered with waterfalls. 

[71-76] Then the great raksasa Kumbhakarna, rushing swiftly from the 
city, began to devour that fierce monkey army, as the blazing fire at the end 
of a cosmic era devours all creatures. Ravenous and craving blood and 
flesh, Kumbhakarna plunged into the fierce monkey army and, in his 
madness, began to devour raksasas, tawny monkeys, pisdcas, and apes in 
battle. With one hand he seized monkeys in his rage—one, two, three, or 
more—and swiftly hurled them into his mouth, together with rdksasas. 
Streaming with blood and fat and pounded with the peaks of lordly 
mountains, the mighty raksasa devoured the monkeys. As they were being 
devoured, the tawny monkeys ran to Rama for shelter. At that moment, 
Sumitra’s son Laksmana, destroyer of enemy armies and conqueror of 
enemy citadels, entered the fight in a rage. Valiant Laksmana sunk seven 
arrows into Kumbhakarna’s body. Then he took up some more and let them 
fly. 

[77-83] But mighty Kumbhakarna bypassed Saumitri and raced directly 
toward Rama, seeming as he did so to tear up the very earth. Then Rama 
Dasarathi, invoking the divine weapon-spell of Rudra, loosed sharp arrows 


at Kumbhakarna’s breast. As he ran about violently in a rage, wounded by 
Rama, flames mixed with blazing coals poured from his mouth. As those 
arrows, fletched with peacock feathers, sank into his chest, his massive 
mace slipped from his hand and fell to the ground. When the immensely 
powerful rdksasa realized that he had no weapons left, he wrought 
tremendous slaughter with his fists and his feet. Drenched with blood, his 
body pierced all over with arrows, he poured forth blood, as a mountain 
does its waterfalls. Suffused with fierce rage and covered with blood, he 
raced about devouring monkeys, rdksasas, and apes. 

[84-89] At this point, righteous Laksmana, who was intent upon killing 
Kumbhakarna and who had been weighing many methods of doing so, 
spoke to Rama: “He cannot distinguish between monkeys and rdaksasas. 
Intoxicated with the smell of blood, he is devouring his allies and his 
enemies alike. Very well, let the bulls among monkeys swarm all over him 
so that the principal troop leaders may take their stand all around him. 
Then, after some time, that evil-minded rdksasa, falling to the ground, 
crushed by that heavy burden, will not kill any more of the leaping 
monkeys.” When the leaping monkeys had heard those words of the wise 
prince, they swarmed upon Kumbhakarna in great excitement. But 
Kumbhakarna was enraged at being swarmed all over by the leaping 
monkeys, and he shook them off violently, as a vicious elephant might 
riders mounted on his back. 

[90-96] Seeing them shaken off, Rama, thinking, “This raksasa is 
infuriated,” took up his splendid bow and sprang toward him. Rama, his 
splendid quiver of arrows fastened on him, took up his fearsome, tautly 
strung bow, variegated with burnished gold and resembling a serpent. He 
sprang forward, rallying the tawny monkeys. Accompanied by Laksmana 
and surrounded by the monkey troops, invincible and mighty Rama 
continued to advance. He gazed upon great and mighty Kumbhakarna, the 
diademed tamer of his foes, whose every limb was drenched with blood. 
Rushing upon them all in a mad fury, that raksasa was like one of the great 
elephants that support the earth. Furious and surrounded by rdksasas, he 
was hunting down the tawny monkeys. Adorned with golden armlets, he 
resembled the Vindhya mountain or Mount Mandara. He spewed blood 
from his mouth, like a towering storm cloud pouring rain. Drenched with 


blood, he lapped it up with his tongue. Crushing the monkey hosts, he 
resembled Yama or Kala, the ender of all things. 

[97-100] As he gazed upon that foremost of the raksasas, whose 
splendor was that of a blazing fire, the bull among men twanged his 
bowstring. Enraged at the sound of his bow and unable to endure it, that 
bull among raksasas, sons of chaos, charged at Raghava. Then, as the 
mountainous Kumbhakarna, his arms like the splendid coils of the king of 
great serpents, rushed toward him in battle, like a storm cloud driven by the 
wind, Rama addressed him: “Don’t lose heart now, lord of the rdksasas! 
Know, foe of Sakra, that it is I, Rama, who stand before you, wielding my 
bow. You are about to die.” 

[101—106] When Kumbhakarna realized, “It’s Rama!” he laughed with a 
hideous sound that caused the hearts of all the forest-dwelling monkeys to 
sink. With a fearsome and hideous laugh that was like the thundering of 
storm clouds, immensely powerful Kumbhakarna said these words to 
Raghava: “You should know that I am no Viradha, Kabandha, Khara, Valin, 
or Marica. It is I, Kumbhakarna, who have come. Gaze upon my huge and 
fearsome war hammer, all made of black iron. In the past, I defeated the 
gods and ddnavas with it. Nor should you treat me contemptuously, 
thinking, ‘He has lost his ears and nose!’ For the loss of my ears and nose 
causes me not the slightest discomfort. Now, tiger among the Iksvakus, you 
should demonstrate your puny strength against my limbs. Then, once I have 
witnessed your manliness and valor, I will devour you.” 

[107-110] Upon hearing these words of Kumbhakarna, Rama let fly 
beautifully fletched arrows. Though they struck him with the impact of a 
thunderbolt, that enemy of the gods was neither shaken nor harmed. Those 
same arrows—like thunderbolts—that had pierced the great sala trees and 
slain Valin, bull among monkeys, could not wound Kumbhakarna’s body. 
That foe of great Indra, however, absorbed those arrows with his body, as 
one might drink a trickle of water. For in whirling his war hammer with its 
fierce impact, he had blunted the impact of Rama’s arrows. Then, covered 
with blood, the rdksasa, a terror to the vast hosts of the gods, whirling his 
war hammer with its fierce impact, put the army of tawny monkeys to 
flight. 

[111-119] Then, taking up the excellent divine weapon-spell of Vayu, 
Rama loosed it at that night-roaming rdadksasa and, with it, took off his arm 


that held the war hammer. His arm severed, Kumbhakarna roared 
deafeningly. Severed by Raghava’s arrow, that arm of his, which was like a 
mountain peak and was still holding the war hammer, fell upon the army of 
the king of the tawny monkeys, wreaking carnage among the monkey 
troops. The monkeys who had survived that carnage were routed and fled in 
despair to the edge of the battlefield. From there, their bodies trembling, 
they watched the fearsome duel between the rdksasa lord and the lord of 
men. His arm severed by the divine weapon, Kumbhakarna tore up a tree 
with his hand and rushed in battle at the lord of men, like some huge and 
lordly mountain whose peak had been severed. But with an arrow 
variegated with jambtunada gold and charged with the divine weapon-spell 
of Indra, Rama cut off Kumbhakarna’s upraised arm, which resembled the 
coils of a great serpent and held the sala tree. Kumbhakarna’s severed arm, 
resembling a mountain, fell to the ground, where, thrashing about, it 
crushed trees, mountains, rocks, monkeys, and rdksasas. Seeing 
Kumbhakarna, his arms severed, rushing suddenly upon him and roaring, 
Rama took up two sharp half-moon-headed arrows and, with them, cut off 
the rdksasa’s feet in battle. His arms and feet severed, Kumbhakarna 
opened wide his mouth, which was like the mare’s head fire that lies 
beneath the sea. Bellowing, he hurled himself suddenly upon Rama, like 
Rahu, demon of the eclipse, upon the moon in the heavens. But Rama filled 
Kumbhakarna’s mouth with sharp arrows, their fletching bound with gold. 
His mouth full, Kumbhakarna was unable to speak. With great effort, he 
moaned and lost consciousness. 

[120-123] Then Rama took up the arrow of Indra, sharp, beautifully 
fletched and perfect. It shone like the rays of the sun. It had the speed of 
Maruta, and it resembled the staff of Brahma or Kala, the ender of all 
things. Its fletching was gorgeous with diamonds and jambiinada gold, and 
it shone like the blazing sun or fire. It had the striking power of great 
Indra’s vajra or a thunderbolt; and Rama loosed it at the night-roaming 
raksasa. Set in motion by Raghava’s arm, the arrow sped on its way, 
lighting up the ten directions with its inherent splendor. Its appearance was 
as brilliant as that of Agni Vaisvanara, undimmed by smoke, and its power 
was equal to that of mighty Sakra’s thunderbolt. With it, Rama severed the 
raksasa \ord’s head—huge as a mountain peak, its fangs bared, and its 


gorgeous earrings swinging wildly—just as, long ago, Indra, smasher of 
citadels, severed the head of Vrtra. 

[124-129] Struck off by R&ama’s arrow, the rdksasa’s head, which 
resembled a mountain, fell. It smashed the gates of the buildings on the 
main thoroughfares and knocked down the lofty rampart. Finally, the 
enormous raksasa, who looked like Himalaya, fell into the sea, abode of 
waters. There he crushed crocodiles, shoals of huge fish, and serpents 
before he entered the earth, When Kumbhakarna, that mighty foe of 
brahmans and gods, was slain in battle, the earth shook and all the 
mountains trembled, while the gods in delight raised a tumultuous cheer. 
The divine seers, great seers, great serpents, gods, the spirits of the 
departed, the great birds, and guhyakas, together with the hosts of yaksas 
and gandharvas, hovering in the sky, were delighted by Rama’s valor. 
Those countless monkeys, their faces like blooming lotuses, were 
overjoyed, and they paid honor to Raghava, who had achieved his objective 
in having slain an unassailable enemy of such fearsome power. Once 
Bharata’s older brother had slain in combat Kumbhakarna, crusher of the 
hosts of the gods, whose efforts had never before been thwarted in great 
battles, he rejoiced, as did Indra, the lord of the immortal gods, when he had 
slain the great asura Vrtra. 


Sarga 56 

[1-4] When the raksasas saw that Kumbhakarna had been slain by great 
Raghava, they reported it to Ravana, lord of the raksasas. Upon hearing that 
the immensely powerful Kumbhakarna had been slain in battle, Ravana was 
stricken with grief. He lost consciousness and collapsed. Hearing that their 
paternal uncle had been slain, Devantaka, Narantaka, Trisiras, and Atikaya 
were stricken with grief and wept. When Mahodara and Mahaparsva heard 
that their brother had been slain by Rama, tireless in action, they were 
overwhelmed with grief. 

[S—11] Then Ravana, bull among raksasas, regained consciousness with 
difficulty. Despondent at the slaying of Kumbhakarna, he began to lament: 
“Alas, Kumbhakarna, mighty and valorous crusher of your enemies’ pride! 
After single-handedly scorching the army of our foe, where have you gone, 
abandoning me? Now I am truly lost, since my right arm, relying on which 
I feared neither the gods nor the asuras, has now fallen. How could such a 


hero, a crusher of the pride of the gods and danavas, who was like the fire 
of universal destruction, have been slain today in battle by Raghava? How 
can it be that you, whom the blow of even Indra’s vajra could never harm, 
now sleep on the ground, mangled by Rama’s arrows? Seeing you struck 
down in battle, the hosts of gods, hovering in the sky together with the 
seers, are shouting in delight. Undoubtedly, the leaping monkeys, in their 
excitement, will seize the opportunity and scale the unbreachable gates of 
Lanka from every side. 

[12-19] “I have no further use for kingship, and what good is Sita to me 
now? Without Kumbhakarna, I can take no pleasure in life. If I should fail 
to kill in battle Raghava, my brother’s killer, then surely death would be 
better for me than this pointless existence. I shall go this very day to the 
place where my younger brother has gone. For I cannot bear to live a single 
moment without my brothers. The gods will surely laugh when they see me, 
who have done them great injury. But how, Kumbhakarna, shall I vanquish 
Indra now that you have been slain? This has befallen me, because, in my 
folly, I failed to heed the beneficial advice of great Vibhisana. Since 
Kumbhakarna and Prahasta suffered such cruel deaths, the words of 
Vibhisana have put me to shame. Now I have experienced the grievous fruit 
of my action in that I drove out majestic and righteous Vibhisana.” Thus, 
piteously lamenting for Kumbhakarna in many ways, ten-faced Ravana was 
shaken to his innermost core. Realizing that his younger brother, the foe of 
Indra, had been slain, he collapsed in profound distress. 


Sarga 57 
[1-7] After listening to the lamentations of evil-minded Ravana, who was 
lamenting in his burning grief, Trisiras spoke these words: “True enough, 
our dear and immensely valorous uncle, middlemost among you three 
brothers, has been slain. Nonetheless, your majesty, true men do not lament 
as you have done. Surely you are a match for all the three worlds, lord. 
Why then do you feel sorry for yourself in this fashion, like some ordinary 
person? Brahma has given you a javelin, armor, a bow and arrow, and a 
chariot rumbling like a thundercloud and yoked to a thousand donkeys. 
Time and again, even when unarmed, you have slain the gods and the 
danavas. Now, equipped with all your weapons, you must slay Raghava. Or 
rather remain here, great king. I myself shall go forth to battle. I shall 


exterminate your enemies, just as does Garuda the great serpents. Struck 
down by me this very day in battle, Rama shall be laid low, just as was 
Sambara by Indra, king of the gods, and Naraka by Visnu.” 

[8-13] When Ravana, lord of the raksasas, had heard those words of 
Trisiras, he felt—impelled as he was by his own impending doom—that he 
had obtained a new lease on life. And when Devantaka, Narantaka, and 
powerful Atikaya had heard the words of Trisiras, they were filled with 
eagerness for battle. Then those heroic sons of Ravana, bulls among 
raksasas, sons of chaos, equal in valor to mighty Sakra himself, cried out, 
“Tl go! Pll go!” All of them could fly through the air. All of them were 
skilled in the power of illusion. All of them had crushed the pride of the 
thirty gods. All of them were ferocious in battle. All were provided with 
troops and divine weapons. All had gained wide renown. None had ever 
been known to suffer defeat in battle. All those heroes were expert in the 
use of divine weapon-spells. All were adept in combat. All were endowed 
with higher knowledge. All had obtained boons. 

[14-17] Surrounded by his sons, whose brilliance equaled that of the 
sun, bringer of light, and who had crushed the strength of their enemies, the 
king resembled munificent Indra surrounded by the immortal gods, 
destroyers of the pride of the great danavas. He embraced his sons and 
adorned them with ornaments. Then, invoking the highest blessings, he sent 
them off to battle. Ravana also dispatched his two brothers Mahodara and 
Mahaparsva to guard the princes in battle. Taking respectful leave of great 
Ravana, who made his foes cry out, and reverently circling him, those 
gigantic warriors set forth. 

[18—23] Those six immensely powerful and prominent rdaksasas, sons of 
chaos, anointed themselves with all protective herbs and fragrances and 
then set forth, eager for battle. Mahodara mounted an elephant named 
Sudarsana, born in the lineage of Airavata and resembling a black storm 
cloud. Mounted upon that elephant, which was equipped with every weapon 
and adorned with quivers, he was as splendid as Surya, impeller of all 
creatures, perched on the summit of the western mountain. Trisiras, 
R&vana’s son, mounted a splendid chariot, which was yoked to magnificent 
horses and laden with every sort of weapon. Mounted in his chariot, bow in 
hand, Trisiras was as resplendent as a storm cloud charged with lightning 
and meteors, flashing fire, and traversed by a rainbow. Mounted on that 


splendid chariot, Trisiras, with his three diadems, was as splendid as 
Himalaya, lord of mountains, with his three golden peaks. 

[24—27] Next, Atikaya, foremost of all bowmen and a powerful son of 
the raksasa lord, mounted his splendid chariot. It had a magnificent axle 
and wheels and was splendidly yoked. It had a fine frame and yoke pole. It 
glittered with quivers and bows, and it was laden with darts, swords, and 
iron clubs. With his glittering diadem, variegated with gold, and his 
ornaments, Atikaya was as resplendent as Mount Meru illuminated by the 
rays of the shining sun. Standing in that chariot, surrounded by those tigers 
among the raksasas, sons of chaos, the mighty son of the king was as 
resplendent as Indra, vajra in hand, surrounded by the immortal gods. 

[28-31] Narantaka then mounted a huge white horse. Swift as thought 
and adorned with gold, it resembled Uccaihsravas himself. Taking up a dart 
that was like a meteor, Narantaka was as resplendent as powerful Guha 
when he has taken up his javelin amid his enemies in battle. Taking up an 
iron club studded with diamonds, Devantaka looked like the very image of 
Visnu when he had seized the mountain with both arms. Taking up his 
mace, powerful and heroic Mahaparsva resembled Kubera himself in battle, 
mace in hand. 

[32-39] As they set forth surrounded by incomparable troops, those 
great warriors were like the gods in Amaravati, surrounded by 
incomparable troops. They were followed by great rdksasas with splendid 
weapons, mounted on elephants and horses and riding on chariots that 
rumbled like storm clouds. Endowed with splendor, those great princes, 
diademed and radiant as the sun, looked like blazing planets in the sky. The 
white row of parasols held above them, resembling a bank of autumnal 
clouds, looked like a line of hamsas in the sky. Eager for battle, the heroes 
marched forth, grimly resolved, for they had determined either to conquer 
their enemies or die. As those great warriors, ferocious in battle, marched 
forth, they bellowed, roared, and loosed arrows in their frenzy. The earth 
itself seemed to shake from the sounds of their roaring and the slapping of 
their arms, while the lion roars of the radksasas seemed almost to shatter the 
sky. As they marched forth, in great delight, the mighty raksasa lords spied 
the monkey army with its upraised boulders and trees. 

[40-45] The great tawny monkeys too spied the army of the raksasas, 
sons of chaos. It was crowded with elephants, horses, and chariots, and it 


resounded with the jingling of hundreds of little bells. It looked like a black 
storm cloud, and it bristled with huge weapons. It was filled on every side 
with raksasas, sons of chaos, resplendent as blazing fires or the sun. 
Watching the approaching army, the leaping monkeys, perceiving their 
opportunity, raised huge mountains and roared again and again. Hearing the 
resounding cries of the leaders of the monkey troops, the mighty hosts of 
rdaksasas, unable to endure the fierce enthusiasm of their enemies, roared 
more frightfully still. As they plunged into the fearsome raksasa army, the 
troop leaders of the tawny monkeys, resembling mountains with lofty 
summits, stormed about with upraised boulders. Armed with trees and 
boulders, the leaping monkeys stormed through the raksasa troops in a 
rage, some leaping into the air, others remaining on the ground. 

[46-51] Then, though they were kept at bay by torrents of arrows, the 
tawny monkeys, fearsome in their valor, unleashed a stupendous hail of 
trees, rocks, and mountains. Both the rdksasas and the monkeys uttered 
leonine roars in the battle. And the leaping monkeys crushed the 
yatudhdanas with boulders. In a rage, some of the leaping monkeys slew in 
battle heroes, clad in armor and adornments and mounted on chariots, 
elephants, and horses, while others, leaping up violently, slaughtered the 
ydtudhanas. Those bulls among rdaksasas, their eyes knocked out by fists 
and falling mountain peaks, fled, fell, and shrieked. In a short while, the 
ground was covered with boulders and swords dropped by the tawny 
monkeys and raksasas, and it was drenched with blood. Crushers of their 
foes, the raksasas, who looked like shattered mountains, hurled their broken 
lances; but these were repulsed by the monkeys. 

[52-59] Night-roaming raksasas slaughtered monkeys with monkeys, 
while monkeys slaughtered rdksasas with raksasas. Snatching away the 
tawny monkeys’ boulders, the raksasas slaughtered them, while the 
monkeys, stripping away the rdaksasas’ weapons, slaughtered them. 
Smashing one another with boulders, lances, and missiles, the monkeys and 
rdaksasas roared like lions in battle as they slaughtered one another. Struck 
down by the monkeys, their mail and armor pierced, the rdksasas oozed 
blood, as trees do their vital sap. In that battle, some of the monkeys 
smashed chariot with chariot, elephant with elephant, and horse with horse. 
But the raksasas cut down the trees and boulders of the monkey lords with 
sharp arrows—horseshoe-headed, half-moon-headed, and crescent-headed. 


With the monkeys and raksasas slain in battle, and with all the shattered 
mountaintops and splintered trees, the ground became impassable. When 
the wrinkle-faced monkeys showed their excitement in that tumultuous 
battle and the raksasas were being struck down, the great seers and the 
hosts of gods cheered. 

[60-66] But then Narantaka, mounting a horse as swift as Maruta, and 
seizing a sharp javelin, plunged into the army of the monkey king, as might 
a fish into the vast ocean. That hero pierced seven hundred monkeys with 
his glittering dart. In an instant, that great foe of Indra single-handedly 
decimated the army of those bulls among tawny monkeys. The vidyadharas 
and great seers watched that great warrior as, mounted on horseback, he 
rampaged through the troops of tawny monkeys. One could mark his path, 
mired in flesh and blood and littered with the monkeys—huge as mountains 
—who had fallen. No sooner would the bulls among leaping monkeys 
resolve to attack him than Narantaka would attack and pierce them. Raising 
his blazing dart in the midst of the battle, Narantaka consumed the troops of 
tawny monkeys, as fire might the forests. No sooner would the forest- 
dwelling monkeys uproot trees and boulders than they would fall, struck 
down by that dart, like mountains riven by a thunderbolt. 

[67—71] In that battle, mighty Narantaka rampaged in all directions, like 
the wind in the rainy season, leveling everything in his path. Those heroes 
were unable to flee, or stand their ground, or even stir in any direction. For 
that mighty warrior pierced them all, whether they leapt, ran, or stood still. 
Pierced by that lone warrior, who, with his dart as brilliant as the sun, was 
like Yama, the ender of all things, the troops of tawny monkeys fell to the 
ground. Unable to withstand the blows of that dart, which had the crushing 
force of a thunderbolt, the monkeys wailed loudly. As they fell, the bodies 
of the heroes among the tawny monkeys resembled mountains falling as 
their tall summits were shattered by thunderbolts. 

[72-76] "Meanwhile, those great monkey leaders who had earlier been 
struck down by Kumbhakarna, now fully recovered, approached Sugriva. 
Gazing about him, Sugriva saw the army of tawny monkeys fleeing in all 
directions, terrified in their fear of Narantaka. As he watched the fleeing 
army, he spied Narantaka, mounted on horseback and heading toward him, 
holding his dart. Then immensely powerful Sugriva, overlord of the 
monkeys, addressed heroic Prince Angada, who was equal in valor to 


Sakra. “Hero, you must advance against that raksasa, the one mounted on 
horseback, who has been terrorizing the army of tawny monkeys. And you 
must swiftly kill him.” 

[77-82] Upon hearing these words of his lord, Angada burst forth from 
that host—so like a cloud—as does the many-rayed sun from a host of 
clouds. Adorned with his golden armlets and resembling a dense mass of 
stone, Angada, foremost of the tawny monkeys, was as resplendent as a 
mountain laced with shining ore. Armed only with his claws and fangs and 
lacking any other weapon, Valin’s immensely powerful son confronted 
Narantaka and spoke these words: “Stop! Why bother with such common 
tawny monkeys? Hurl your dart swiftly against this chest of mine, as hard 
to the touch as adamant.” Upon hearing Angada’s words, Narantaka, biting 
his lips with his teeth and hissing like a serpent, flew into a rage. Then he 
brandished his blazing dart and suddenly loosed it against Angada. But it 
shattered against the adamantine chest of Valin’s son and fell to the ground. 

[83-86] Then, glancing at that shattered dart, which now resembled the 
coils of a serpent torn to pieces by Suparna, V4alin’s son raised his palm and, 
with it, struck Narantaka’s horse on the head. At that blow of his palm, the 
horse, which looked like a mountain, collapsed to the ground, its head 
shattered, its feet driven into the earth, the pupils of its eyes burst, and its 
tongue lolling out. When immensely powerful Narantaka saw that his horse 
had fallen, slain, he was beside himself with rage. He raised his fist and, 
with it, struck Valin’s son on the head in battle. His head split open by that 
fist, Angada poured forth great gouts of scalding blood. For a moment he 
flared up in anger, then fainted. Regaining consciousness, he was 
astonished. 

[87-90] Then Valin’s great son, Angada, clenched his fist, which 
resembled a mountain peak and the impact of which was equal to that of a 
thunderbolt, and brought it down upon Narantaka’s chest. His chest 
shattered by the impact of that fist and his body drenched with blood, 
Narantaka, like a mountain shattered by the force of a thunderbolt, fell to 
the ground vomiting flames. When that most eminent of heroes, Narantaka, 
had thus been slain in battle by Valin’s son, the foremost among the thirty 
gods, hovering in the sky, along with the forest-dwelling monkeys, gave a 
mighty cheer. When Angada, that warrior of extraordinary might and valor, 
had performed this nearly impossible feat of valor—cheering the heart of 


Rama—he was somewhat astonished, but was filled once more with energy 
for battle. 


Sarga 58 

[1-4] When those bulls among the rdksasas, sons of chaos—Devantaka, 
Trimirdhan Paulastya, and Mahodara—saw that Narantaka had been slain, 
they began to wail. Then mighty Mahodara, mounted upon a magnificent 
bull elephant as huge as a cloud, charged at Angada, Valin’s immensely 
powerful son. And mighty Devantaka too anguished at the slaughter of his 
brother, took up a blazing iron club and rushed toward Angada. The heroic 
Trisiras, mounted on a chariot as radiant as the sun and yoked to splendid 
horses, also raced toward Valin’s son. 

[S—10] Attacked by those three lords of the rdksasas, sons of chaos, 
crushers of the pride of the gods, Angada tore up a tree with huge branches. 
Just as Sakra hurls his blazing thunderbolt, so did heroic Afigada violently 
hurl that huge tree with its huge branches at Devantaka. But Trisiras cut it 
to pieces with arrows like venomous serpents. Then Angada, seeing the tree 
splintered, leapt up into the sky. From there, that elephant among monkeys 
rained down trees and boulders. But Trisiras, in a towering rage, cut them to 
pieces with his sharp arrows. And Surantaka as well smashed those trees 
with the tip of his iron club, while Trisiras assaulted heroic Angada with 
arrows. Mahodara too, in a towering rage, charged at Valin’s son on his 
elephant and hit him on the chest with tron cudgels that struck with the 
force of thunderbolts. 

[11-16] Meanwhile, in a towering rage, swift Devantaka confronted 
Angada and, after striking him with an iron club, swiftly withdrew. But 
although the son of Valin was assaulted simultaneously by those three 
formidable rdksasas, sons of chaos, that immensely powerful and valorous 
watrior remained unshaken. Leaping up, he struck Mahodara’s great 
elephant violently with his open hand. Its eyes knocked out, the bull 
elephant trumpeted loudly. Then, ripping out one of its tusks, the 
immensely powerful son of Valin rushed upon Devantaka in battle and 
struck him with it. Swaying with every limb like a tree buffeted by the 
wind, Devantaka spewed blood the color of lac from his mouth. Then, 
recovering with difficulty, powerful and mighty Devantaka brandished his 
dreadful iron club and once more struck Angada. 


[17-24] Struck with that iron club, the son of the lord of the monkeys 
sank to his knees on the ground but then leapt up once more. But as the son 
of the lord of the tawny monkeys sprang up, Trisiras struck him in the 
forehead with three dreadful arrows that resembled venomous serpents. 
When Hanuman and Nila realized that Angada had been surrounded by 
three of the bulls among raksasas, sons of chaos, they ran to his aid. Then 
Nila hurled a mountaintop at Trisiras. But that wise son of Ravana shattered 
it with sharp arrows. Pierced by hundreds of arrows, its stony surface 
shredded, the mountaintop fell, shooting forth sparks and flames. Then, 
upon witnessing that explosion with delight, Devantaka, with his iron club, 
rushed toward Hanuman, son of Maruta, in battle. But Hanuman, son of 
Maruta, leapt upon the charging Devantaka and struck him on the head with 
his fist, which had the force of a thunderbolt. His head shattered by the 
crushing blow of that fist, Devantaka, son of the rdksasa king, all at once 
fell lifeless to the ground, his teeth and eyes knocked out, his tongue lolling. 

[25-28] When mighty Devantaka, foremost of raksasa warriors and foe 
of the gods, had been slain in battle, Trimtrdhan, enraged, loosed a fierce 
shower of sharp-tipped arrows at Nila’s chest. Deluged by those torrents of 
arrows and pierced in every limb, Nila, the guardian of the monkey troops, 
was slack limbed and immobilized by mighty Trisiras. But then, regaining 
consciousness, Nila ripped up a mountain along with its masses of trees, 
and, springing up with huge and terrible speed, he struck Mahodara on the 
head with it. Crushed together with his elephant by the mountain as it fell, 
Mahodara was mortally wounded and fell lifeless to the ground, like a 
mountain struck by a thunderbolt. 

[29-33] When Trisiras saw that his paternal uncle had been slain, he 
took up his bow and, in a towering rage, riddled Hanuman with sharp 
arrows. But in a rage, Hanuman sprang up and tore the horses of Trisiras to 
pieces with his claws, just as a lion, king of beasts, might a mighty 
elephant. Then, seizing his javelin, Trisiras, son of Ravana, hurled it at the 
son of Anila, just as Yama, ender of all things, unleashes Kalaratri, the dark 
night of universal destruction. But the tiger among tawny monkeys caught 
that javelin, which had been hurled, as it flew unimpeded, like a blazing 
meteor hurtling through the sky. He broke it and roared. When the hosts of 
monkeys saw that Hanuman had broken that fearsome-looking javelin, they 
were delighted, and they roared thunderously like storm clouds. 


[34-42] Then Trisiras, foremost among the rdaksasas, raised his sword 
and, in his rage, buried it in the chest of the monkey lord. Although he was 
injured by that sword stroke, mighty Hanuman, son of Maruta, struck 
Trimirdhan on the chest with his open hand. When Hanuman struck him 
with his open hand, immensely powerful Trisiras let his weapons slip from 
his hands, and he fell to the ground unconscious. And as Trisiras fell, the 
great monkey, who looked like a mountain, grabbed his sword and roared, 
terrifying all the rdksasas, sons of chaos. Then that night-roaming raksasa, 
unable to bear that sound, sprang up and struck Hanuman with his fist. The 
great monkey was angered by the blow of that fist, and, in a rage, he seized 
that bull among rdaksasas by the crown. Then, with Trisiras’s own sharp 
sword, the furious son of Anila cut off his heads—with their diadems and 
earrings—just as did Sakra the heads of Tvastr’s son. Like so many stars 
fallen from the path of the sun, those heads of Indra’s foe, huge as 
mountains, with their gaping orifices and their eyes blazing like Agni 
Vaisvanara, fell to the ground. When Hanuman, whose valor was equal to 
that of Sakra, had slain Trigiras, foe of the gods, the leaping monkeys 
cheered, the earth trembled, and the rdksasas fled in all directions. 

[43-47] Once the extremely irascible and mighty Mahaparsva saw that 
Trisiras had been slain as well as Mahodara and the unassailable warriors 
Devantaka and Narantaka, he flew into a rage and seized his splendid, 
blazing mace made of solid iron. It was encircled with bands of gold and 
smeared with flesh and blood. Reddened with the blood of his enemies, it 
shone with splendor. Adorned with red garlands, its tip blazing with energy, 
it could terrify even the mighty elephants Airavata, Mahapadma, and 
Sarvabhauma. Grasping that mace in a towering rage, mighty Mahaparsva 
hurled himself upon the tawny monkeys, like the blazing fire at the end of a 
cosmic era. 

[48-54] But the mighty monkey Rsabha sprang up and, confronting 
Mahaparsva, Ravana’s younger brother, took a stand before him. Seeing 
that monkey, huge as a mountain, standing before him, Mahaparsva, in a 
rage, struck him on the chest with that mace, which was like a thunderbolt. 
Struck by him with that mace, the bull among monkeys was rocked. His 
chest split open, he gushed forth gouts of blood. Regaining consciousness 
after a long time, Rsabha, bull among monkeys, his lips quivering in his 
rage, glared at Mahaparsva. Seizing that fearsome mace and whirling it 


round and round, he struck Mahaparsva Mattanika with it in the forefront of 
the battle. Mangled by his own mace, his teeth and eyes knocked loose, 
Mahaparsva collapsed, like a mountain struck by a thunderbolt. Once 
Ravana’s brother had been slain, the army of the rdksasas, sons of chaos, 
which resembled an ocean, dropped its weapons and ran for its life, like an 
ocean scattering in all directions. 


Sarga 59 

[1-6] Immensely powerful Atikaya, that mountainous crusher of the pride 
of gods and danavas, saw that his thunderous and hair-raising army had 
been devastated. And seeing that his brothers, whose valor was equal to that 
of Sakra, had been slain in battle together with his two paternal uncles, the 
brothers Mahodara and Mahaparsva, bulls among rdksasas, that warrior, 
who had been granted boons by Brahma, flew into a rage in the midst of 
battle. Mounting his chariot, which blazed with the brilliance of a thousand 
suns, that foe of Sakra hurtled toward the monkeys. Loudly twanging his 
great bow, Atikaya, adorned with a diadem and burnished earrings, 
proclaimed his name and roared loudly. With his leonine roar, the 
proclamation of his name, and the fearsome sound of his bowstring, he 
terrified the monkeys. 

[7-10] Gazing upon Atikaya’s gigantic form, which was like that of 
Visnu when he traversed the three worlds, all the monkeys were stricken 
with terror and fled in the ten directions. Confronted by Atikaya, their wits 
addled, the monkeys sought refuge in battle with Laksmana’s older brother, 
the refuge of all. Then Kakutstha gazed from afar at Atikaya, huge as a 
mountain, who stood mounted in his chariot, bow in hand, roaring like a 
black storm cloud. Observing that gigantic warrior, Raghava was 
astonished. After reassuring the monkeys, he said to Vibhisana: 

[11—16] “Who is that mountainous warrior—armed with a bow and with 
the gaze of a lion—mounted in that huge chariot yoked to a thousand 
horses? Surrounded with his sharp lances and his formidable and glittering 
darts and iron cudgels, he resembles Mahesvara surrounded by his 
malignant spirits. Surrounded with his glittering chariot-javelins, which 
resemble the tongues of Kala, he looks like a storm cloud surrounded by 
streaks of lightning. His well-strung bows with their golden facing 
illuminate his splendid chariot on every side, as does the rainbow, Sakra’s 


bow, the heavens. Who is this tiger among rdksasas, the foremost among 
chariot-warriors, who approaches on a chariot as radiant as the sun, 
illuminating the battlefield? Illuminating the ten directions with arrows that 
have the brilliance of the sun’s rays and, with the emblem of Rahu, demon 
of the eclipse, waving from his flagstaff, he looks resplendent. 

[17-24] “And his thrice-curved bow with golden facing, ornamented and 
reverberating like a thundercloud, is as resplendent as the rainbow, the bow 
of Indra of the hundred sacrifices. His great chariot is furnished with 
pennants and banners and has a fine frame. It is manned by four grooms and 
rumbles with the thunder of a storm cloud. There are thirty-eight quivers 
mounted on his chariot, along with fearsome bows, their bowstrings yellow 
with gold. And in his chariot there are two swords, one on each side. 
Clearly visible, their blades are fifteen feet in length and their hilts, six. 
They beautify both sides. With a red garland hung about his neck and his 
huge mouth like that of Kala, that dark warrior, steadfast and huge as a 
great mountain, looks like the sun, bringer of light, rising above a storm 
cloud. His arms girded with golden armlets, he is as resplendent as 
Himalaya, greatest of mountains, with its tall twin peaks. With its two 
earrings, that radiant face of his resembles the orb of the full moon passing 
between the twin stars of the constellation Punarvasu. Tell me, great-armed 
hero, about that outstanding raksasa at the sight of whom all the monkeys 
have fled in all directions, overcome with fear.” 

[25-30] When immensely powerful Vibhisana had been questioned in 
this fashion by Prince Rama Raghava of immeasurable power, he said to 
him: “The immensely powerful and enormously energetic king, ten-necked 
Ravana of fearsome deeds, is the younger brother of Kubera Vaisravana and 
is the overlord of the raksasas. He has a mighty son, the equal in battle of 
Ravana himself, respectful of his elders, deeply learned, and foremost of 
those who know all the divine weapon-spells. He is highly regarded for his 
skill on horseback, chariot, and elephant, with the sword, the bow, and the 
noose, in the arts of sowing dissension, conciliation, and bribery, as well as 
in statecraft and counsel. He is known as Atikaya, Dhanyamalini’s son. 
Relying on his arm, Lanka remains secure. His mind focused, he propitiated 
Brahma by means of his austerities. Thus, he acquired divine weapon-spells 
and conquered his enemies. 


[31-35] “And self-existent Brahma granted him that suit of armor and 
that chariot, radiant as the sun, as well as invulnerability to the gods and 
asuras. He has defeated hundreds of gods and danavas, protected the 
raksasas, and slaughtered the yaksas. For he is Atikaya, the wise and 
mighty son of Ravana. He is a bull among raksasas and the crusher of the 
pride of the gods and danavas. With his arrows he stopped wise Indra’s 
vajra in its course and repelled in battle the noose of Varuna, monarch of 
the waters. Therefore, bull among men, you must quickly exert yourself 
against him before he annihilates the monkey troops with his arrows.” 

[36-42] Then mighty Atikaya, plunging into the hosts of tawny 
monkeys, twanged his bow and roared again and again. Seeing that 
foremost of chariot-warriors, fearsome to behold, mounted on his chariot, 
the great and preeminent leaping monkeys hurled themselves upon him. 
Armed with trees and mountain peaks, Kumuda, Dvivida, Mainda, Nila, 
and Sarabha, acting as one, hurled themselves upon him. But immensely 
powerful Atikaya, foremost among those skilled in the use of divine 
weapon-spells, cut their trees and rocks to pieces with his gold-ornamented 
arrows. Then that mighty night-roaming raksasa with his fearsome body, 
facing those tawny monkeys, pierced them all in battle with arrows made of 
solid iron. Wounded by that hail of arrows, pierced in every limb, the 
leaping monkeys were unable to fight back against Atikaya in that great 
battle. The raksasa terrified the army of heroic tawny monkeys, just as a 
raging lion in the full flush of youth might a herd of deer. 

[43-48] But there in the midst of the army of tawny monkeys, that 
raksasa lord would not strike any that did not resist. Then, armed with bow 
and quiver, he approached Rama and arrogantly spoke these words: “Here I 
stand, mounted in my chariot, bow and arrow in hand; but I will not fight 
any ordinary foe. Let whomever has the ability coupled with resolve 
quickly give me battle here and now.” Now Saumitri, slayer of his foes, 
overheard those words of Atikaya as he was speaking. He could not abide 
them, and he flew into a rage. Leaping up, he seized his bow with a 
contemptuous smile. Leaping up in a rage, Saumitri drew an arrow from his 
quiver and bent his great bow right in front of Atikaya. The fearsome sound 
of Laksmana’s bowstring could be heard, filling the earth, the mountains, 
the sky, and the ocean and terrifying the night-roaming raksasas. Upon 


hearing the terrifying sound of Saumitri’s bow, the mighty and immensely 
powerful son of the rdksasa lord was astonished. 

[49-55] Seeing that Laksmana had leapt up, Atikaya, enraged, took up a 
sharp arrow and spoke these words: “You are a mere child, Saumitri, 
unskilled in deeds of valor. Get out of my way! Do you really want to 
provoke me to fight, I who am like Kala himself? Not even Himalaya, the 
sky, or the earth itself is able to withstand the force of the divine weapons 
released by my arm. Would you want to stir up the fire of universal 
destruction when it is sleeping peacefully? Put down your bow and go back. 
Don’t sacrifice your life by confronting me. Or if you are obstinate and do 
not wish to go back, then stay, and, losing your life, you shall go to the 
abode of Yama. Just look at these sharp arrows of mine, adorned with 
burnished gold. Resembling the weapon of Lord Siva, they crush the pride 
of my enemies. This arrow, resembling a serpent, will drink your blood, just 
as a raging lion, king of beasts, would the blood of a king among 
elephants.” 

[56-62] When Prince Laksmana had heard those angry and arrogant 
words of Atikaya in the midst of the battle, the exceedingly powerful and 
enormously majestic hero spoke these highly sensible words: “You cannot 
attain excellence by mere words; nor are true heroes produced by boasting. 
As long as I am standing here, armed with a bow, arrow in hand, you should 
demonstrate your prowess, evil-minded wretch! Show what you are made 
of through your deeds. You oughtn’t boast. Only he who is truly endowed 
with manly valor is accounted a hero. You are armed with a bow, mounted 
in a chariot, and equipped with every kind of weapon. So demonstrate your 
prowess with arrows or divine weapons. Then, with my sharp arrows, I 
shall cause your head to fall, just as the wind does a ripened ¢ala fruit from 
its stalk. This very day, my arrows, adorned with burnished gold, will drink 
the blood spurting from the gaping holes made in your body by my 
arrowheads. You should not underestimate me, thinking, ‘He is only a 
child.” Whether I be young or old, you must know me to be your death in 
battle.” 

[63-68] When Atikaya had heard those words of Laksmana, reasonable 
and supremely sensible though they were, he was enraged and took up a 
splendid arrow. Then vidyddharas, spirits of the departed, gods, daityas, 
great seers, and the great guhyakas watched that fight. In a rage, Atikaya 


fitted an arrow to his bow and shot it at Laksmana, shrinking, as it were, the 
space between them. But as that sharp arrow, like a venomous serpent, 
hurtled toward him, Laksmana, slayer of enemy heroes, cut it to pieces with 
a half-moon-headed arrow. When he saw his arrow cut to pieces, like a 
serpent whose coils have been slashed, Atikaya was beside himself with 
rage. He took up five more arrows. Then that night-roaming rdksasa shot 
those arrows at Laksmana. But before they could reach him, Bharata’s 
younger brother cut them to pieces with his own sharp arrows. 

[69-73] Once he had cut those arrows to pieces with his sharp arrows, 
Laksmana, slayer of enemy heroes, took up another sharp arrow that 
seemed to blaze with energy. Taking it up, Laksmana fitted it to his splendid 
bow. Then, drawing the bow, he released the arrow with tremendous force. 
And that mighty man struck that foremost of raksasas in the forehead with 
that straight arrow that had been drawn to the full. Buried in the forehead of 
that fearsome rdksasa, the arrow, smeared with blood, resembled a serpent 
lord in battle. Rocked by Laksmana’s arrow, the raksasa was shaken, just as 
was the fearsome gateway of Tripura when it was struck by Rudra’s arrow. 

[74-80] Regaining his composure and reflecting, the immensely 
powerful raksasa thought, “Well done! The impact of your arrow proves 
you to be a praiseworthy opponent for me.” Reflecting in this fashion, he 
lowered his face and both his arms. He advanced in his chariot, settling into 
its seat. That bull among rdksasas took up one, three, five, or seven arrows 
at a time, nocked them, and then drew and released them. Loosed from the 
bow of the rdksasa lord, those arrows, which were like Kala himself and, 
with their golden fletching, were as radiant as the sun, seemed to light up 
the heavens. But not the least bit perturbed, Raghava’s younger brother cut 
those torrents of arrows loosed by the rdksasa to pieces with many sharp 
arrows of his own. When RAavana’s son, the enemy of the thirty gods, saw 
his arrows cut to pieces in battle, he was enraged and seized yet another 
sharp arrow. The immensely powerful warrior nocked that arrow and 
released it with tremendous force. It then struck Saumitri in the center of his 
chest as he advanced. 

[81-88] Wounded in the chest by Atikaya in battle, Saumitri gushed 
forth great gouts of blood as does a rutting elephant rut fluid. But then that 
mighty man swiftly removed that arrow from his body. Then, taking up a 
sharp arrow and invoking a divine weapon-spell, he nocked it. He charged 


that arrow with the divine weapon-spell of Agni. The arrow of that great 
warrior then blazed brightly, as did his bow. The immensely powerful 
Atikaya, in turn, invoked the divine weapon-spell of Stirya, and, with it, he 
charged a gold-fletched arrow that resembled a serpent. Meanwhile, 
Laksmana loosed at Atikaya the fearsome and blazing arrow that he had 
fitted to his bow, just as Kala, the ender of all things, might his rod of 
doom. When he saw that arrow charged with the divine weapon-spell of 
Agni, the night-roaming rdksasa released his blazing arrow, charged with 
the divine weapon-spell of Strya. Like angry serpents, the two arrows 
struck each other as they flew through the sky, their tips blazing with 
energy. Consuming each other, they fell to the ground. Reduced to ashes, 
their flames extinguished, those two splendid arrows blazed no more. 

[89-95] Then Atikaya, in a towering rage, released the divine Aisika 
missile. But mighty Saumitri cut that divine missile to pieces with the 
divine missile of Indra. Seeing that the divine Aistka missile had been 
destroyed, the prince, son of Ravana, in a towering rage, charged an arrow 
with the divine weapon-spell of Yama. Then the night-roaming raksasa shot 
that divine missile at Laksmana. But Laksmana knocked it down with the 
divine missile of Vayu. Then, in a towering rage, Laksmana showered the 
son of Ravana with volleys of arrows, as might a storm cloud with torrents 
of rain. As those arrows struck Atikaya, their arrowheads shattered against 
his diamond-studded armor, and they fell with tremendous force to the 
ground. Perceiving that they had been ineffectual, glorious Laksmana, 
slayer of enemy heroes, showered him with a thousand arrows. Although he 
was pelted with torrents of arrows, the mighty raksasa Atikaya, with his 
impenetrable armor, was not the least bit discomfited in that battle. 

[96-99] Indeed, that foremost of men was unable to wound him in battle. 
But then Vayu approached him and said: “Granted a boon from Brahma, 
this rdksasa is encased in impenetrable armor. You must pierce him with the 
divine missile of Brahma; for there is no other way that he can be killed.” 
Then, upon hearing the words of Vayu, Saumitri, who equaled Indra in 
valor, took up an arrow of irresistible force and swiftly charged it with the 
divine weapon-spell of Brahma. As that splendid, sharp-tipped arrow was 
being charged by Saumitri with that supreme, divine weapon-spell, all the 
directions, as well as the moon, the sun, the great planets, and the heavens, 
shook with fear, and the earth groaned. 


[100-106] Once he had charged that beautifully fletched arrow, which 
resembled the messenger of Yama, with the divine weapon-spell of Brahma, 
Saumitri fitted it to his bow. Then, 1n that battle, he shot that arrow, which 
was like Indra’s vajra, at the son of Indra’s foe. Atikaya saw it hurtling 
toward him, loosed by Laksmana in battle. Its force was irresistible, and, 
with its fletching bright with gold and splendid diamonds, it shone like fire. 
Sighting it, Atikaya struck it violently with many sharp arrows. But that 
arrow, swift as Suparna, continued to hurtle toward him with tremendous 
speed. Watching that arrow, which was like fiercely blazing Kala, the ender 
of all things, Atikaya never slackened his efforts but continued to strike at it 
with javelins, broadswords, maces, hatchets, lances, and ploughshares. But 
that arrow, blazing with fire, was impervious to those wondrously formed 
weapons, and it violently struck off Atikaya’s head, crowned with its 
diadem. Battered by Laksmana’s arrow, his head, along with its headdress, 
fell violently to the ground, as might the summit of Himalaya. Now that 
their unassailable enemy of fearsome strength had been slain, the multitude 
of monkeys, filled with joy, their faces like blooming lotuses, honored 
Laksmana, who had accomplished their cherished goal. 


Sarga 60 
[1-2] Then the hosts of rdksasas who had survived the slaughter 
immediately reported to Ravana that those bulls among rdksasas, Trisiras, 
Atikaya, Devantaka, and the rest, had been slain. When the king heard in 
this sudden fashion that they had been slain, he was stunned and his eyes 
filled with tears. Reflecting upon the destruction of his sons and the horrific 
slaughter of his brothers, the king began to brood deeply. 

[3—7] Now, when that bull-like warrior Indrajit, son of the raksasa king, 
saw that the king was despondent and floundering in a sea of grief, he said 
these words: “Father, lord of the raksasas, you must not give way to 
despondency so long as Indrajit remains alive. For no one who is struck in 
battle by the arrows of Indra’s foe can escape with his life. This very day, 
you will surely see Rama along with Laksmana lying lifeless on the ground, 
his body pierced and dismembered by my arrows, his every limb bristling 
with sharp shafts. Now hear the vow of Sakra’s foe, which is well founded 
and infused with both human and divine power: ‘Today, with my unfailing 
arrows, I shall consume Rama along with Laksmana.’ This very day, Indra, 


Vaivasvata, Visnu, Mitra, the sddhyas, the Asvins, Agni Vaisvanara, 
Candra, and Surya shall witness my immeasurable valor, which is like the 
fearsome valor of Visnu in Bali’s sacrificial enclosure.” 

[8—11] When he had spoken in this fashion, Indrajit, the enemy of the 
lord of the thirty gods, took his leave of the king and, in high spirits, 
mounted a chariot as swift as the wind. It was yoked to splendid donkeys 
and equipped with the implements of war. Mounted in that chariot, the 
equal of the chariot of Indra himself, that immensely powerful tamer of his 
foes drove swiftly to where the battle raged. As great Indrajit set forth, 
many immensely powerful warriors followed him in great delight, their 
splendid bows in hand. Some were mounted on elephant-back, while others 
rode splendid chargers. They were armed with darts, war hammers, swords, 
battle-axes, and maces. 

[12-17] Praised by the night-roaming raksasas, the foe of the lord of the 
thirty gods went forth to the fearsome blaring of conches and the 
thunderous sound of bheri drums. With his parasol of the hue of conch shell 
or the hare-marked moon, that crusher of his enemies was as resplendent as 
the sky illuminated by the full moon. That hero, foremost of all bowmen, 
was fanned with the most splendid, golden yak-tail fly whisks, all adorned 
with gold. Then, illuminated by Indrajit, who was unmatched in valor and 
equal in blazing splendor to the sun, the city of Lanka was as resplendent as 
the heavens illuminated by the radiant sun. When Ravana, the majestic 
overlord of the raksasas, saw his son marching forth surrounded by a vast 
host, he said to him: “You are a peerless warrior, my son. You have 
conquered even Vasava in battle. How then would you not more easily slay 
Raghava, a vulnerable mortal.” 

[18—23] Addressed in this fashion by the rdksasa lord and having 
received his fulsome blessings, the hero proceeded swiftly to the shrine of 
Nikumbhila in his horse-drawn chariot. Upon reaching the battleground, 
that immensely powerful tamer of his foes stationed the rdksasas all around 
his chariot. Then, to the accompaniment of sacred mantras and in 
accordance with the ritual prescriptions, the foremost of radksasas, whose 
splendor was like that of Agni, eater of oblations, offered oblations to Agni, 
eater of oblations. The valorous rdksasa lord offered oblations to Agni, the 
purifier, along with ritual offerings of parched grain accompanied by 
flowers and sandalwood paste. Weapons served as the sarapatra grass; 


vibhitaka wood was the kindling. His garments were red, and his ladle was 
of black iron. Having strewn the fire altar there with weapons, including 
iron cudgels, in place of sarapatra grass, he seized the throat of a live, pure 
black goat. 

[24—29] Once kindled, the smokeless fire with its huge flames displayed 
signs that betokened victory. Glowing like burnished gold, his flames 
swirling in an auspicious clockwise direction, Agni, the purifier, himself 
rose up and received that oblation. Foremost among those familiar with 
divine weapon-spells, Indrajit invoked the divine weapon-spell of Brahma. 
And there with that spell, he infused his bow, his chariot, and all of his 
weaponry. And as that divine weapon-spell was being invoked and Agni, 
the purifier, was being gratified with oblations, the heavens shook along 
with the sun, the planets, the moon, and the constellations. Once Indrajit, 
whose blazing energy was like that of Agni, the purifier, and whose power 
was equal to that of great Indra, had made oblation to Agni, the purifier, he 
vanished into thin air along with his bow, arrows, sword, chariot, horses, 
and charioteer, his form no longer perceptible. Emerging from his own 
army, Indrajit swiftly plunged in among the monkey ranks, and there, in that 
great battle, invisible, he rained down a fearsome torrent of arrows, just as a 
black storm cloud does torrents of rain. 

[30-34] Baffled by Indrajit’s power of illusion, their bodies rent by the 
arrows of Sakra’s conqueror, the tawny monkeys, huge as mountains, fell in 
battle uttering discordant cries, like lordly mountains smashed down by 
Indra’s vajra. All they could see in the battle were the sharp-tipped arrows 
raining on the monkey troops. For they could not see the rdksasa, the foe of 
the lord of the gods, concealed as he was by his power of illusion. Then the 
great raksasa lord filled all the directions with volleys of arrows as radiant 
as the sun, further disheartening the monkey lords. Brandishing lances, 
swords, and battle-axes, which were like shining fires and emitted blazing 
flames along with sparks, he fiercely rained them down upon the army of 
the lord of the leaping monkeys. Then, struck by the sharp arrows—blazing 
like fire—of the conqueror of Sakra, the leaders of the monkey troops 
resembled red-blossoming kimsuka trees. 

[35-40] Pierced by the divine weapons of the rdksasa lord, those bulls 
among monkeys fell, crawling over one another and uttering discordant 
cries. Some of them, peering into the sky, were struck in the eyes with 


arrows so that they fell to the ground and clung to one another. Then, with 
darts, lances, and sharp arrows charged with mantras, Indrajit, foremost of 
rdaksasas, pierced all those tigers among the tawny monkeys: Hanuman, 
Sugriva, Angada, Gandhamadana, Jambavan, Susena, Vegadarsin, Mainda, 
Dvivida, Nila, Gavaksa, Gaja, Gomukha, Kesari, Hariloman, the monkey 
Vidyuddamstra, Siryanana, Jyotimukha, the tawny monkey Dadhimukha, 
Pavakaksa, Nala, and the monkey Kumuda. 

[41-49] Then, once he had torn apart the troop leaders of the tawny 
monkeys with maces and with arrows fletched with burnished gold, Indrajit 
pelted Rama and Laksmana with massive torrents of arrows that shone like 
the rays of the sun, bringer of light. Pelted by those showers of arrows, 
Rama regarded them no more seriously than showers of rain. Supremely 
wondrous in his majesty, he turned his gaze to Laksmana and said this: 
“Here is that raksasa lord again, Laksmana, the enemy of the lord of the 
gods. Relying upon the divine weapon-spell of Brahma, he has laid low the 
fierce army of tawny monkeys and is now constantly harassing us with 
arrows. The great warrior, having been granted a boon by self-existent 
Brahma, is hovering in the sky, his fearsome body hidden. How is it 
possible to kill Indrajit in battle today, when he is invisible and is wielding 
his divine weapon? I know that the self-existent lord Brahma, who is the 
creator of all things, is inconceivable. And this divine weapon-spell belongs 
to him. Therefore, wise Laksmana, with a calm mind you must endure with 
me the blows of these arrows here and now. The rdaksasa lord 1s filling all 
directions with massive torrents of arrows. And the whole army of the 
monkey king, its foremost heroes fallen, presents a sorry sight. Once he 
sees that we have fallen unconscious and have ceased to fight or show signs 
either of anger or excitement, he will surely return to Lanka, the abode of 
the foes of the immortal gods, having achieved the greatest glory in battle.” 
At that point, the two brothers were cut down on the spot by the mass of 
Indrajit’s divine weapons. Having laid them low there, the raksasa lord 
roared with delight in battle. Having thus laid low in battle the army of the 
monkey king, as well as Rama and Laksmana, he swiftly reentered the city 
of Lanka, which lay under the protection of the arms of ten-necked Ravana. 


Sarga 61 


[1-4] Then, when the two heroes, Rama and Laksmana, had been struck 
down in the forefront of battle, the army of the leaders of the troops of 
tawny monkeys was stunned. Even Sugriva, Nila, Angada, and Jambavan 
could do nothing. But then Vibhisana, foremost among the wise, seeing that 
the army was despondent, addressed the king of the tree-dwelling monkeys 
and his heroic warriors, comforting them with inimitable words: “Have no 
fear! Just because the two sons of the king are lying helpless, this is no time 
for despondency. For in being struck down by the mass of Indrajit’s divine 
weapons, they are merely observing the command of self-existent Brahma. 
Brahma’s supreme divine weapon-spell of unfailing force was given to 
Indrajit by the self-existent one himself. If, in order to show their reverence 
for it, the king’s two sons have fallen down, why is that an occasion for 
despondency?” 

[S—6] When wise Hanuman Maruti, who had already once shown his 
reverence to Brahma’s divine weapon-spell, heard those words of 
Vibhisana, he said this to him: “Let us comfort any of those in the 
decimated army of the swift monkeys who may still be alive.” 

[7-13] Then, torches in hand, those two heroes, Hanuman and that 
foremost of the rdksasas Vibhisana, together roamed the battlefront during 
that night. They saw the ground heaped up on every side with shining 
weapons that had been dropped and with fallen monkeys, huge as 
mountains, oozing blood from their limbs and dribbling urine, their tails, 
hands, thighs, feet, fingers, and necks severed. And there Vibhisana and 
Hanuman saw that Sugriva, Angada, Nila, Sarabha, Gandhamadana, 
Jambavan, Susena, Vegadarsin, Ahuka, Mainda, Nala, Jyotimukha, Dvivida, 
and Panasa had been struck down in battle. For within the fifth part of a 
day, Indrajit, self-existent Brahma’s favorite, had struck down six hundred 
and seventy million swift monkeys. Seeing that that fearsome host, which 
was like the vast flood of the ocean, had been decimated by arrows, 
Hanuman and Vibhisana sought out Jambavan. 

[14-18] Observing Jambavan, the wise and heroic son of Prajapati, who, 
riddled with hundreds of arrows and showing the signs of advanced age, 
resembled a dying flame, Vibhisana Paulastya approached him and spoke 
these words: “I trust, noble sir, that you have not been mortally wounded by 
these sharp arrows.” Upon hearing the words of Vibhisana, Jambavan, bull 
among apes, uttered this speech, articulating the words only with great 


difficulty: “Mighty hero, lord of the raksasas, sons of chaos, wounded as I 
am by these sharp arrows, I cannot see you, but I recognize you by your 
voice. O rdksasa, son of chaos, does the foremost of the monkeys 
Hanuman, in whom Afyana and Vayu Matarisvan have an excellent son, 
still live?” 

[19-23] When Vibhisana heard these words of Jambavan, he said this: 
“Why do you ignore the king’s sons Rama and Laksmana and ask only 
about Maruti? Noble sir, you have not shown the same extraordinary 
concern for King Sugriva, Angada, or even Raghava himself as you have 
for the son of Vayu.” Upon hearing the words of Vibhisana, Jambavan 
spoke these words: “Now hear, tiger among rdksasas, sons of chaos, why I 
inquired only about Maruti. So long as Hanuman is alive, then our army 
will survive, even if it should be massacred. But if that hero has lost his life, 
then, even though we survive, we are as good as dead. For, dear boy, if 
Maruti, the equal of Maruta and the rival in power of Agni Vaisvanara, still 
lives, only then do we have any hope of survival.” 

[24-34] Then Hanuman, son of Maruta, approached wise Jambavan. 
Devotedly clasping his feet, he respectfully greeted him. Although his every 
organ was in agony, when Jambavan, bull among apes, heard Hanuman’s 
words, he felt as if he had been born again. Then the immensely powerful 
Jambavan said to Hanuman: “Come, tiger among the tawny monkeys, you 
must save the monkeys. For no one else possesses valor equal to the task. 
You are the monkeys’ greatest friend. Now is the moment for you to show 
your prowess; for I can see no one else who can accomplish this. You must 
heal the arrow wounds of Rama and Laksmana, who have been struck 
down, and thus restore the spirits of the hosts of heroic apes and monkey. 
Taking the highest path, far above the ocean, you must go, Hanuman, to 
Himalaya, greatest of mountains. Then, slayer of your foes, you will see the 
great and forbidding Mount Rsabha, all made of gold, and the peak of 
Mount Kailasa. Between those two peaks, hero, you will see the mountain 
of healing herbs, which, covered with every sort of healing herb, glows with 
unequaled radiance. And growing on its peak, tiger among monkeys, you 
will find four healing herbs, glowing so as to illuminate the ten directions. 
They are mrtasamjivani, ‘the restorer of life to the dead,’ visalyakarani, 
‘the healer of arrow wounds,’ sauvarnakarani, ‘the restorer of a golden 
glow,’ and the great healing herb samdhani, ‘the joiner of limbs.’ You must 


gather them all, Hanuman, and swiftly return. For you must restore the 
tawny monkeys to life and rally them, son of Vayu, bearer of scents.” 

[35-43] When Hanuman, bull among tawny monkeys, had heard those 
words of Jambavan, he was filled with a great upsurge of strength, as is the 
ocean with its mighty currents. Perching on the top of the mountain slope 
and crushing that foremost of mountains, the hero Hanuman looked like a 
second mountain himself. Then, crumbling under the feet of that tawny 
monkey, the mountain caved in. For crushed so severely, it was unable to 
bear its own weight. The tremendous force of that tawny monkey caused 
the mountain’s trees to fall to the ground and burst into flame. And as it was 
being crushed by Hanuman, its peaks shattered. As that great mountain, its 
trees and rock faces smashed, was being crushed, it shook so that the 
monkeys could not keep their footing. With her great gateways shaking and 
the gates of her buildings crumbling, Lanka, overcome with panic in the 
night, seemed almost to be dancing. Crushing that mountain, the 
mountainous Hanuman, son of Maruta, made the earth together with the 
ocean tremble. As he crushed the mountain with his feet, he opened his 
mouth, which was as fearsome as the gaping mare’s head fire that lies 
beneath the sea, and he roared loudly, terrifying the raksasas. When they 
heard that extraordinary roar of fiercely roaring Hanuman, all the raksasas 
in Lanka were paralyzed with fear. 

[44-49] Then, after first offering obeisance to Rama, Maruti, that 
scorcher of his foes, so fearsome in his valor, turned his thoughts to that 
vital mission on behalf of Raghava. Extending his tail, which resembled a 
serpent, crouching down, laying back his ears, and opening his mouth, 
which was like the gaping mare’s head fire that lies beneath the sea, 
Hanuman leapt into the sky with terrifying force. With his great speed he 
carried along with him stands of trees, mountains, boulders, and lesser 
monkeys. Drawn upward and swept along by the force of his arms and 
thighs, they fell into the ocean as their speed slackened. Stretching out his 
arms, which resembled the coils of serpents, the son of Vayu, his power like 
that of Garuda, foe of serpents, headed toward Mount Meru, the prominent 
king of the mountains, drawing, so it seemed, the directions in his wake. 
Then, as he flew swiftly along, like the discus loosed by Visnu’s fingers, he 
looked down upon the ocean with its roiling garland of waves and all its 
creatures tossed violently about. Observing mountains, forests, lakes, rivers, 


ponds, splendid cities, and prosperous lands, Hanuman, whose swiftness 
equaled that of his father, flew swiftly onward. 

[50-55] Reaching the path of the sun, he flew on tirelessly. Then that 
foremost of tawny monkeys spied Himalaya, greatest of mountains. It had 
various kinds of waterfalls and many caves and rushing streams. It was 
endowed with beautiful peaks that resembled white clouds. As he 
approached that great lord of the mountains, with its huge, splendid, and 
formidable peaks, he spied vast and holy ashrams frequented by the hosts of 
the foremost gods and seers. He saw the abode of Brahma, the abode of 
Hiranyagarbha in his silver-naveled form, the abode of Sakra, the place 
where Rudra loosed his arrows, the abode of Hayanana the horse-faced god, 
and the luminous place where Brahma’s head fell. And he saw the servants 
of Vaivasvata. He saw the place where the vajra was presented as well as 
the abode of Kubera Vaisravana. He also saw the abode of the sun, 
resplendent as the sun itself, the throne of Brahma, the place of Safikara’s 
bow, and the very navel of the earth. Then he saw the prominent Mount 
Kailasa, the rock face of the Himalayas, and the prominent golden mountain 
Rsabha. And, at last, he spied the lordly mountain of all herbs, which was 
illuminated by all its glowing herbs of healing. 

[56-60] When Hanuman, son of Vasava’s messenger, the wind god, saw 
that lordly mountain of healing herbs, glowing as if with flames of fire, he 
was astonished. Alighting on it, he began to search there for the healing 
herbs. The great monkey, son of Maruta, roamed that mountain bearing 
divine herbs of healing for thousands of leagues. However, recognizing the 
purpose for which he had come, all the powerful healing herbs on that 
foremost of mountains made themselves invisible. Unable to find them, 
great Hanuman was furious and bellowed loudly in his rage. Losing 
patience, his eyes blazing like fire, he said these words to that lordly 
mountain: “What is this that you have thus resolved upon, in your lack of 
compassion toward Raghava? This very day, lord of mountains, 
overwhelmed by the strength of my arms, you shall see yourself smashed to 
pieces.” 

[61-64] Then, forcibly seizing hold of its peak, filled with thousands of 
minerals, together with its trees, elephants, and gold, he violently tore it off 
so that its summit crumbled and the tops of its slopes began to slide. 
Tearing it off, that hero, whose fearsome power was like that of Garuda, 


flew up into the sky, terrifying the worlds, together with the gods and the 
lords of the gods. Then, praised by innumerable creatures of the air, he 
proceeded swiftly on his way. Grasping that peak, which shone like the sun, 
bringer of light, he followed the path of the sun, bringer of light. Then, 
when he whose radiance was like that of the sun drew near the sun, he 
appeared to be a rival sun, bringer of light. Holding that mountain, the 
mountainous son of Vayu, bearer of scents, shone as brightly in the sky as 
Visnu holding aloft his fiery, thousand-bladed discus. 

[65-68] Then, when the monkeys caught sight of him, they roared, and 
he too, spotting them, roared back in delight. But when the raksasas in 
Lanka heard their resounding cries, they roared more fearsomely still. Then 
great Hanuman alighted on splendid Mount Triktta in the midst of the 
monkey army. After bowing his head in respectful salutation to the 
foremost among the tawny monkeys, he embraced Vibhisana there. No 
sooner had the two human princes smelled the fragrance of those powerful 
healing herbs than they were freed on the spot from their arrow wounds. 
The others too, the heroic tawny monkeys, stood up as well. Then that 
immensely powerful tawny monkey, the son of Vayu, bearer of scents, 
swiftly took the mountain of healing herbs back to the Himalayas and then 
rejoined Rama. 


Sarga 62 
[1-3] Then Sugriva, the immensely powerful overlord of the monkeys, 
spoke sensibly, instructing mighty Hanuman as to what should be done 
next: “Since Kumbhakarna has been slain and the rdksasa_ princes 
slaughtered, Ravana will now no longer be able to launch a sortie against 
us. Bulls among leaping monkeys! Those leaping monkeys who are 
powerful and agile are to take torches and leap into Lanka at once.” 

[4-7] Then, when the sun had set and the dread onset of night had come, 
the leaping monkeys marched toward Lanka, holding torches. Overrun on 
every side by swarms of tawny monkeys holding torches, the sentries at the 
gates, with their hideous eyes, abruptly fled. In a frenzy, the monkeys 
unleashed fire, the eater of oblations, on gateways, towers, highways, 
various streets, and mansions. And the fire, eater of oblations, consumed 
thousands of houses and the residences of all the raksasas, including those 
who performed the household rites. 


[8—11] Fire, the purifier of all things, consumed thousands of the houses 
of the residents of Lanka. Some of those residents wore armor, beautified 
with gold, while others wore garlands of flowers and costly garments. 
Some, their eyes rolling from drinking rum, staggered in their intoxication. 
The garments of some were clutched at by their lovers. Some held maces, 
lances, or swords in their hands, as they raged at the enemy, while others 
went on eating and drinking. Some were asleep with their beloveds in costly 
beds, while others, terrified, grabbed their sons and fled swiftly in all 
directions. As the fire, the purifier, burned their homes, it flared up again 
and again. 

[12—18] And the fire consumed mansions that looked like mountains. 
They were firmly built and costly, beautiful with their grand upper stories. 
They were shaped like full- and half-moons made of gold, soaring aloft 
with their penthouses. Their round windows were adorned with jewels. 
They were richly furnished throughout. Adorned with gems and coral, they 
seemed almost to touch the sun, bringer of light, and they echoed with the 
cries of krauncas and peacocks, the strains of lutes, and the tinkling of 
ornaments. Wreathed in flames, their gates looked like masses of clouds 
encircled with lightning at summer’s end. As they were being burned alive, 
the exquisite women, who had been sleeping in their lofty mansions, cast 
off all their ornaments and loudly shrieked, “Ah! Ah!” The dwellings there, 
engulfed in fire, collapsed, like the peaks of a huge mountain smashed by 
the vajra of Indra, the vajra wielder. As those mansions burned, they looked 
from afar like the peaks of the Himalayas with their thickets of glowing 
herbs. 

[19-23] With the rooftops of its mansions burning and _ brightly 
illuminated with flames, Lanka looked that night as if it were filled with 
red-blossoming Aimsuka trees. With its elephants and horses turned loose by 
their keepers, Lanka resembled the ocean with its huge creatures thrashing 
about at the end of a cosmic era. Whenever a terrified elephant would 
encounter a horse roaming free, it would run away, and when a terrified 
horse would encounter a terrified elephant it too would shy away. Set ablaze 
by the tawny monkeys, the city in an instant came to resemble the blazing 
earth, bearer of wealth, at the dreadful destruction of the world. The cries of 
the womenfolk, who shrieked loudly as they were enveloped in smoke and 
scorched by the flames, could be heard for a distance of ten leagues. 


[24-29] Meanwhile, the tawny monkeys, eager for battle, violently 
pounced upon any of the raksasas who rushed forth, their bodies ablaze. 
The shouts of the monkeys and the wailing of the raksasas made the ten 
directions, the ocean, and the earth itself resound. Then the great warriors, 
Rama and Laksmana, now healed of their arrow wounds, calmly took up 
their splendid bows. Twanging his splendid bow, Rama produced a 
thunderous sound that sowed terror among the rdksasas. As he twanged his 
great bow, Rama looked as splendid as Lord Bhava when, in his rage, he 
twangs his bow that consists of the vedas. Those three sounds—the clamor 
of the monkeys’ shouts, the wailing of the raksasas, and the twanging of 
Rama’s bowstring—filled the ten directions. 

[30-34] Shattered by the arrows loosed from Rama’s bow, the citadel’s 
gateway, which was like the peak of Mount Kailasa, crashed to the ground. 
Then, when the raksasa lords saw Rama’s arrows in their houses and 
mansions, they began frantic preparations for war. And as the rdksasa lords, 
roaring like lions, girded themselves for battle, the night took on the aspect 
of the dark night of universal destruction. Then great Sugriva commanded 
the monkey lords as follows: “Creeping near, you must assault the gate and 
give battle, bulls among leaping monkeys. And if any one of you, no matter 
where he may be posted, should disobey, he is to be pounced upon and slain 
as a violator of the king’s command.” 

[35-38] When the monkey leaders, their hands illuminated by their 
flaming torches, had approached the gate and taken up their positions there, 
rage seized hold of Ravana. The violent force of the expansion of his body 
threw the ten directions into confusion, for he looked like an incarnation of 
the wrath that fills the body of Rudra. In a rage, he sent forth Nikumbha and 
Kumbha, the two sons of Kumbhakarna, accompanied by many rdaksasas. 
Roaring like a lion, the lord of the raksasas commanded all of those 
raksasas, “Raksasas! Depart at once.” 

[39-44] Then, at his command, the heroic rdksasas, roaring again and 
again, marched forth from Lanka, their weapons glittering. With its 
terrifying horses, chariots, and elephants, and crowded with various types of 
foot soldiers, the fearsome radksasa army emerged into view, its lances, 
maces, swords, darts, iron cudgels, and bows glittering. Its valor and 
prowess were terrifying. Its darts were flashing, and it resounded with 
hundreds of little bells. The soldiers, their arms covered with golden 


ornaments, swung their battle-axes about and whirled their mighty 
weapons. They had fixed their arrows to their bows. They perfumed the 
strong breeze with their fragrances, floral wreaths, and the honey-wine of 
their stirrup-cups. Filled with mighty warriors and rumbling like a great 
storm cloud, the army was truly fearsome. Seeing that truly terrifying army 
of the raksasas approaching, the army of leaping monkeys leapt forward, 
roaring loudly. 

[45-52] Springing swiftly forward, the great raksasa army hurled itself 
at the enemy host, as a moth might hurl itself into a flame. With its iron 
clubs—like bolts of lightning—burnished from the rubbing of their arms, 
the raksasas’ magnificent army shone more brightly still. Then some of the 
fearsome-looking night-roaming raksasas began to cut down the monkey 
heroes on all sides with their sharp swords. The warriors on both sides 
cursed, bit, struck down, and killed one another. One cried, “Attack!” ““He’s 
attacking!” said another, while still a third cried, “Pll attack!” “Did you 
wound him?” “Stand!” Thus did they shout there to one another. With huge 
darts held on high amid a welter of fists, lances, and swords, the immensely 
fierce battle between the monkeys and the rdksasas raged on. The raksasas 
cut down the monkeys ten and seven at a time, while the monkeys 
slaughtered the rdksasas in battle ten and seven at a time. Then the 
monkeys cut off and surrounded the rdksasa troops, whose hair and 
drawstrings were flying loose, their armor and battle standards scattered. 


Sarga 63 

[1-4] In the thick of that fearsome slaughter of heroes, Angada, thirsting for 
battle, encountered the heroic raksasa Kampana. After challenging Angada, 
Kampana, in a rage, swiftly struck first, hitting him with his mace. Struck 
with such violence, Angada staggered. But coming to his senses, powerful 
Angada hurled the peak of a mountain. Kampana then fell to the ground, 
slain by that blow. Now that their champions were slain, the rdksasa troops, 
deeply shaken, ran headlong to Kumbha, Kumbhakarna’s son. When 
Kumbha saw them approaching so swiftly, he calmed them. 

[S—8] Then, in deep concentration, Kumbha, that foremost of bowmen, 
took up his bow and loosed arrows that looked like venomous snakes and 
could rend bodies. With the arrows fixed to it, his splendid bow shone more 
brightly still as if it were a second bow of Indra, illumined by the splendor 


of lightning and a great rainbow. Then, with a beautifully feathered, gold- 
fletched arrow that he had drawn back as far as his ear before releasing it, 
he struck Dvivida. Struck violently by that arrow, that best of leaping 
monkeys, who resembled a mountain peak, lost his footing and collapsed, 
dazed and twitching. 

[9-12] Seeing his brother wounded in that great battle, Mainda seized a 
huge boulder and came running at full speed. The immensely powerful 
Mainda flung that boulder at the raksasa. But Kumbha shattered it with five 
blazing arrows. Then, nocking another arrow, tipped with a splendid 
arrowhead and resembling a venomous serpent, the immensely powerful 
raksasa struck Dvivida’s elder brother in the chest with it. Struck by him in 
the vitals with such a blow, Mainda, leader of the monkey troops, fell to the 
ground, stunned. 

[13-17] When Angada saw that his two immensely powerful maternal 
uncles had fallen, he charged swiftly at Kumbha, who stood with bow 
drawn. As Angada rushed upon him, Kumbha pierced him—first with five 
iron shafts and then with three more sharp arrows—as one might an 
elephant with javelins. Mighty Kumbha pierced Angada with various 
arrows adorned with gold, their tips honed to razor sharpness, their cutting 
edges keen. Although his body was pierced all over, Valin’s son, Angada, 
was not shaken. He rained hails of trees and boulders upon Kumbha’s head. 
But Kumbhakarna’s majestic son cut down all those trees and smashed the 
boulders—everything that was thrown by Valin’s son. 

[18-22] Seeing the leader of the monkey troops rushing upon him, 
Kumbha struck him in the brow with two arrows, as one might an elephant 
with two flaming brands. Covering his eyes, which were bathed in blood, 
with one hand, Angada seized a nearby sd/a tree with the other. But even as 
he was about to swiftly hurl that tree, which looked like the flagstaff of 
Indra and was as huge as Mount Mandara, Kumbha cut him down with 
seven sharp arrows, rending his body, while all the raksasas looked on. In 
great agony, Angada collapsed and lost consciousness. Seeing the 
unassailable Angada in agony, drowning as it were in the ocean, the 
foremost among the tawny monkeys reported it to Raghava. 

[23-28] When Rama heard that Valin’s son had been gravely wounded 
in the great battle, he sent forth the foremost among tawny monkeys, led by 
Jambavan. As soon as they heard R&ama’s orders, those tigers among 


monkeys hurled themselves in a towering rage upon Kumbha, who stood 
with bow drawn. In their desire to rescue Angada, those bulls among 
monkeys raced onward with trees and boulders in their hands, their eyes red 
with rage. In a rage, Jambavan, Susena, and the monkey Vegadarsin rushed 
toward Kumbhakarna’s heroic son. But when Kumbha saw _ those 
immensely powerful monkey lords rushing toward him, he stopped them in 
their tracks with a torrent of arrows, as a barrage of trees might stop a 
rushing stream. For when they ran into that mass of arrows, the great 
monkey lords could no more get past it than can the ocean, the great 
reservoir of the waters, its shore. 

[29-35] But when Sugriva, lord of the leaping monkeys, saw that the 
troops of tawny monkeys had been overwhelmed by those hails of arrows, 
he stepped in front of Angada, his brother’s son, and rushed swiftly upon 
Kumbha in battle, just as a swift lion might upon an elephant roaming the 
mountain slopes. The immensely powerful Sugriva tore up huge mountains 
as well as many asvakarnas, dhavas, and various other trees, and let fly 
with them. But with his sharp arrows, Kumbhakarna’s majestic son cut 
down that hail of trees—so difficult to withstand—that covered the sky. 
Completely riddled with sharp arrows by that fierce and celebrated 
marksman Kumbha, those trees resembled fearsome hundred-slayers. But 
Sugriva, the majestic, fearless, and immensely powerful overlord of the 
monkeys, was not in the least disturbed when he saw his hail of trees cut to 
pieces by Kumbha. Although he was himself grievously wounded, Sugriva 
withstood those arrows. Then, snatching away Kumbha’s bow, as lustrous 
as the bow of Indra, he broke it. 

[36-44] Then, when Sugriva had accomplished this all-but-impossible 
feat, he swiftly bore down upon Kumbha, who now resembled an elephant 
with broken tusks, and, in a rage, said to him: “Elder brother of Nikumbha, 
your power and the force of your arrows are truly extraordinary. Your 
chivalry and your majesty are shared only by Ravana himself. Peer of 
Prahrada, Bali, Indra the slayer of Vrtra, Kubera, and Varuna, you alone 
take after your father, though you are mightier still. The thirty gods can no 
more get the better of you—a single-handed, great-armed tamer of foes, 
lance in hand—than can worldly cares, one who has vanquished his senses. 
Your paternal uncle Ravana conquered the gods and ddnavas through the 
gift of a boon, while Kumbhakarna did so through his own enormous 


strength. You are Indrajit’s equal in archery and Ravana’s in valor. In 
strength and prowess you are the foremost among raksasas in the world 
today. Let all beings witness this day the great and extraordinary clash in 
battle between you and me, like that between Sakra and Sambara. You have 
performed an unparalleled feat and demonstrated your mastery of missiles; 
for you have felled all these heroes among the tawny monkeys, fearsome in 
their valor. It is only out of fear of incurring censure that I have not killed 
you thus far, hero. For you must be exhausted after performing this feat. 
Once you are rested, you shall witness my strength.” 

[45-48] Kumbha had first been flattered, but now, at the contemptuous 
words of Sugriva, his blazing energy flared up, like that of a sacrificial fire 
into which an oblation of melted butter has been poured. Then, leaping up, 
Kumbha hurled himself upon Sugriva and, in a rage, struck him on the chest 
with a fist that had the force of a thunderbolt. His skin was torn open and 
his blood poured out; for that fist, with its tremendous force, had penetrated 
to the bone. Then, from that impact, there briefly sprang forth a blazing 
flame, like the flame that arises on Mount Meru when it is struck by 
lightning. 

[49-53] Although Sugriva, the immensely powerful bull among 
monkeys, had been struck there by him, he clenched his fist, as hard as 
adamant. Then the mighty monkey brought that fist, which, radiant with a 
thousand rays of light, was as brilliant as the sun’s orb, down upon 
Kumbha’s chest. Struck by that fist, the raksasa fell swiftly, like the red 
planet Mars, with its glowing rays, somehow fallen from the heavens. As 
Kumbha’s body fell, its chest caved in by that fist, it looked like the body of 
Surya, lord of cows, when he was vanquished by Rudra. When Kumbha had 
been slain in battle by that bull among leaping monkeys, so fearsome in his 
valor, the earth trembled together with its mountains and forests, while 
tremendous fear filled the raksasas. 


Sarga 64 
[1-10] When Nikumbha saw that his brother had been struck down by 
Sugriva, he glared at the lord of the monkeys, as if to burn him up with his 
rage. That hero then took up a splendid iron club. It was bound with 
garlands of flowers, stamped with the sign of five fingers, and it was as 
huge as the peak of a lordly mountain. It was bound with plates of gold and 


adored with diamonds and coral. That fearsome dispeller of the raksasas’ 
fear was like the rod of Yama. It was like the flagstaff of Sakra. Brandishing 
it in battle, immensely powerful Nikumbha, fearsome in his valor, opened 
wide his mouth and roared. With his iron club and his ornaments—the 
golden necklace hanging across his chest, the armlets on his arms, his 
burnished earrings, and his variegated garland—Nikumbha resembled a 
storm cloud replete with thunder, lightning, and rainbow. The tip of that 
huge warrior’s iron club could smash the lair of the winds in the sky. It 
blazed like a roaring, smokeless fire, purifier of all things. The whirling of 
Nikumbha’s iron club seemed to set the very sky spinning, along with the 
heavenly city of Vitapavatt with its splendid mansions of the gandharvas, 
the celestial city of Amaravati with all its mansions, and with its 
constellations, its hosts of stars, the moon, and the great planets. With his 
iron club and ornaments for his flames and his rage for kindling, the fire 
that was Nikumbha was as unapproachable as the fire at the end of a cosmic 
era when it blazes forth. 

[11-14] The rdksasas and the monkeys were frozen with fear. But 
mighty Hanuman, thrusting out his chest, took a stand before him. Then 
mighty Nikumbha, whose arms resembled iron clubs, brought that iron 
club, radiant as the sun, bringer of light, down upon the chest of mighty 
Hanuman. But that iron club shattered violently into a hundred pieces 
against his broad and adamantine chest, so that it resembled a hundred 
flaming meteors in the heavens. And shaken by that iron club, the great 
monkey staggered under the blow, as would a mountain during an 
earthquake. 

[15-20] Struck by that iron club in this fashion, the immensely powerful 
Hanuman, foremost among the leaping monkeys, tightly clenched his fist. 
Raising it, the forceful, immensely powerful, and mighty monkey, whose 
power was that of Vayu, drove it forcefully into Nikumbha’s chest. His skin 
was torn open and the blood gushed forth. That fist sparked flames that 
resembled lightning bursting forth. Nikumbha staggered under that blow, 
but, recovering, he seized the immensely powerful Hanuman. Seeing 
immensely powerful Hanuman swept up by Nikumbha, the inhabitants of 
Lanka roared frighteningly in the midst of battle. But even as he was being 
carried off in this fashion by Kumbhakarna’s son, the son of Anila struck 
him with a fist that had the force of a thunderbolt. 


[21-24] Then, freeing himself, Hanuman, son of Maruta, leapt to the 
ground and swiftly began to belabor Nikumbha. Exerting all his strength, he 
threw Nikumbha down and pummeled him. Then, leaping up, that powerful 
monkey landed on his chest with tremendous force. Locking Nikumbha’s 
neck in both his arms, Hanuman twisted it until he tore off the huge head of 
the raksasa, who was shrieking horribly. Once Nikumbha had been slain in 
battle by Pavana’s son, an intense and terrifying battle broke out between 
the enraged armies of DaSaratha’s son and the raksasa lord. 


Sarga 65 

[1-4] Upon hearing that Nikumbha had been slain and Kumbha struck 
down as well, Ravana, in a towering rage, flared up like fire. Beside himself 
with grief and rage, the rdksasa, son of chaos, exhorted large-eyed 
Makaraksa, Khara’s son: “Go, son, at my command, with an army. You 
must kill Rama and Laksmana along with the forest-dwelling monkeys.” 
Upon hearing these words of Ravana, the proud night-roaming rdksasa hero 
Makaraksa, Khara’s courageous son, replied, “Very well.” 

[S—8] Then, after respectfully saluting and _ reverentially 
circumambulating ten-necked Ravana, the mighty raksasa went forth from 
that splendid mansion at Ravana’s command. He then said this to the officer 
who was standing by: “Let my chariot be brought at once and have the 
army brought up quickly.” Upon hearing those words of his, that night- 
roaming raksasa officer had the chariot and army brought up. After 
reverentially circumambulating the chariot, the night-roaming rdaksasa 
mounted it and urged on his charioteer, crying, “Drive my chariot swiftly.” 

[9-12] Then Makaraksa said this to all those rdksasas: “Raksasas! You 
must all fight as my vanguard. I have been commanded by Ravana, the 
great king of the raksasas, to kill both Rama and Laksmana in battle. This 
very day, night-roaming rdksasas, with my splendid arrows I shall slay 
Rama, Laksmana, the tree-dwelling monkey Sugriva, and his monkeys. And 
this very day, hurling my lance, I shall consume the vast host of the 
monkeys that has assembled here, just as fire does dry kindling.” 

[13-16] Upon hearing that speech of Makaraksa, all of those mighty 
night-roaming radksasas, armed with various weapons, formed themselves 
into a column. Terrifying with their great fangs, yellow eyes, and bristling 
hair, those heroes, who could take on any form at will, roared like bull 


elephants trumpeting. Surrounding the huge son of Khara, those huge 
rdksasas then marched forth in great excitement, shaking the earth. A 
deafening roar arose on every side as they sounded thousands of battle 
conches and bheri drums, clapped their upper arms, and roared out their 
battle cries. 

[17-21] But suddenly the whip slipped from the hand of Makaraksas’s 
charioteer, and the raksasa’s battle standard fell. The horses yoked to his 
chariot were robbed of their strength. Moving along with halting steps, 
despondent, they proceeded with tearful faces. As fierce and evil-minded 
Makaraksa marched forth, a harsh and fearsome wind filled with dust began 
to blow. Although they saw those omens, all those immensely powerful 
raksasas paid them no heed and proceeded to where Rama and Laksmana 
stood. Their bodies as dark in hue as clouds, elephants, or buffaloes, the 
night-roaming raksasas, having been wounded many times with sword and 
mace in the forefront of battle, were seasoned in combat. They raced 
onward, roaring and crying out, “Here I am!” “Here I am!” 


Sarga 66 

[1-5] When the bulls among monkeys saw that Makaraksa had marched 
forth, they all immediately leapt up and arrayed themselves, eager for 
battle. Then there ensued a tremendous, hair-raising battle between the 
night-roaming rdksasas and the leaping monkeys, just like that between the 
gods and the ddnavas. The monkeys and the night-roaming rdaksasas 
belabored each other, the former with blows of trees and hails of boulders, 
the latter with volleys of lances and blows of iron clubs. From every side 
the night-roaming raksasas, who prowl in the darkness, slaughtered those 
lions among monkeys with javelins, lances, maces, swords, iron cudgels, 
spears, short javelins, volleys of arrows, nooses, war hammers, staves, 
nirghdtas, and other weapons as well. 

[6-8] Tormented by Khara’s son with his hails of arrows, the monkeys 
panicked. Stricken with terror, they all fled. When the raksasas saw that the 
forest-dwelling monkeys were fleeing, they roared like lions in their 
excitement. The raksasas then took on an air of victory. But even as the 
monkeys fled in all directions, Rama stopped the rdksasas in their tracks 
with a hail of arrows. 


[9-16] When the night-roaming rdaksasa Makaraksa saw that his 
raksasas had been stopped in their tracks, he was consumed with the fire of 
anger, and he said these words: “Stay where you are, Rama! I challenge you 
to single combat. With sharp arrows loosed from my bow, I shall rob you of 
your life. You are the one who killed my father back then in the Dandaka 
forest. Therefore, when I think that the author of that foul deed is standing 
right before me, my rage redoubles. My whole body is burning fiercely in 
that I did not catch sight of you, you evil-minded Raghava, back then in the 
great forest. But now, Rama, as luck would have it, I find you here right 
before my eyes. I have been as desperate to catch you as a famished lion is 
a deer. This very day, dispatched to the realm of Yama, king of the dead, by 
the impact of my arrows, you shall meet the heroes you have slain. But 
what is the use of endless talking? Hear my words, Rama. Let all the worlds 
behold the two of us on the battlefield. So now, in the midst of this great 
conflict, give battle, Rama, with any weapon in which you are skilled—a 
missile, a mace, or even your bare hands.” 

[17-21] When Rama, the son of DaSaratha, had heard this speech of the 
endlessly talkative Makaraksa, he laughed and spoke these words: “In the 
Dandaka forest, I slaughtered fourteen thousand rdksasas, including 
Trisiras, Diisana, and the one who was your father. Today, evil wretch, the 
vultures, jackals, and crows with their sharp beaks and fangs and their 
hooked claws will gorge themselves on your flesh.” When Rama had 
addressed him in this fashion, Khara’s son, the night-roaming rdaksasa, 
loosed a torrent of arrows at Raghava on the battlefield. But Rama cut those 
arrows into myriad pieces with a hail of his own arrows. Cut to pieces, the 
golden-fletched arrows fell to the ground by the thousands. 

[22-27] Then the battle between them commenced as the son of the 
rdksasa Khara and DaSaratha’s son rushed violently toward each other. The 
sound of their bowstrings striking their armguards was like that of two 
thunderclouds clashing in the sky. The deafening sound of their bows could 
then be heard throughout the battlefield. Eager to witness that awesome 
sight, all the gods, dadnavas, gandharvas, kinnaras, and great serpents 
assembled in the sky. As they pierced each other’s bodies, their strength 
only redoubled. They both engaged in thrusts and counterthrusts with each 
other on the battlefield. In that battle, the rdksasa cut down the swarms of 
arrows loosed by Rama, while Rama, for his part, with his arrows cut the 


arrows loosed by the rdksasa into myriad pieces. All the cardinal and 
intermediate directions were filled with torrents of arrows. The earth, 
covered as well on every side, was no longer visible. 

[28—33] In a rage, great-armed Raghava shattered the rdksasa’s bow. 
With eight iron arrows he slew the charioteer. Then, after smashing the 
chariot with his arrows, Rama cut down the chariot-horses. Robbed of his 
chariot, the night-roaming radksasa Makaraksa took his stand on the ground. 
In his hand, the rdksasa held his lance, which, equal in radiance to the fire 
that ends a cosmic era, struck terror into all beings. Brandishing that huge 
and blazing lance, the night-roaming raksasa hurled it furiously at Raghava 
in that great battle. But even as the blazing lance, released from the hand of 
Khara’s son, flew toward him, Raghava cut it to pieces in the sky with three 
arrows. Struck by Rama’s arrows, the lance, adorned with heavenly gold, 
was cut into myriad pieces so that it shattered on the ground, like some 
great meteor. When the great beings stationed in the sky saw that the lance 
had been destroyed by Rama of wondrous deeds, they cried out, “Excellent! 
Excellent!” 

[34-38] When the night-roaming raksasa Makaraksa saw that his lance 
had been destroyed, he raised his fist and cried out to Kakutstha, “Halt! 
Stay right where you are!” Seeing Makaraksa rushing toward him, Rama, 
the delight of the Raghus, laughed and fitted to his bow the divine weapon 
of Agni, the purifier. When he was struck by Kakutstha with that divine 
weapon in battle, the rdksasa, pierced to the heart, collapsed and died. 
Then, when the rdksasas had witnessed Makaraksa’s fall, they all fled back 
to Lanka, harried by Rama’s arrows. Seeing Khara’s son, the night-roaming 
raksasa, struck down by the force of the arrows of King DaSaratha’s son, 
like a mountain struck by a thunderbolt and shattered, the gods were 
delighted. 


Sarga 67 
[1-3] When Ravana, victorious in battle, heard that Makaraksa had been 
slain, he was furious, and he ordered his son Indrajit into battle: “Hero, you 
must slay those two heroic brothers, Rama and Laksmana. For whether 
visible or invisible, you are mightier still in every way. In battle you 
defeated Indra, whose feats are unmatched. How much more easily will you 
slay two men when you encounter them in battle?” 


[4-9] Addressed in this fashion by the raksasa lord, Indrajit accepted his 
father’s instructions. Then, in the sacrificial ground, he offered oblations 
into the purifying sacrificial fire according to the ritual prescriptions. As 
Ravani began his oblation into the sacrificial fire, raksasa women, bearing 
red turbans, came in haste to where he stood. Weapons served as the 
sarapatra grass, vibhitaka wood was the kindling. His garments were red, 
and his ladle of black iron. Having strewn the fire altar all around on every 
side with weapons in place of sarapatra grass, he seized the throat of a live, 
pure black goat. When kindled and fed the oblation of rice-gruel, the 
smokeless fire with its huge flames displayed signs betokening victory. 
Glowing like burnished gold, his flames swirling in an auspicious clockwise 
direction, Agni, the purifier, himself rose up and received that oblation. 

[10—17] Once he had made his oblations into the sacrificial fire and thus 
gratified the gods, danavas, and raksasas, Indrajit mounted his excellent 
and radiant chariot, which could be rendered invisible. 'Complete with its 
four horses, its sharp arrows, and a mighty bow fastened in place, that 
magnificent chariot looked splendid. Blazing with splendor and covered 
with burnished gold, the chariot was decorated with motifs of arrows, 
moons, and half-moons. With its device of a great conch of jambiinada 
gold, Indrajit’s battle standard, adorned with lapis, looked like a blazing 
fire, purifier of all things. And protected as he was by the divine weapon- 
spell of Brahma, as brilliant as the sun, the immensely powerful Ravani was 
unassailable. Once he had completed his oblation into the sacrificial fire to 
the accompaniment of mantras peculiar to the raksasas, Indrajit, victorious 
in battle and able to render himself invisible, marched forth from the city 
and said: “This very day, I shall slay in combat those two false forest 
ascetics and thus give my father a great victory in battle. Once I have 
cleared the earth of monkeys and slain Rama along with Laksmana, I will 
have given my father the greatest delight.”” When he had spoken in this 
fashion, he became invisible. 

[18-21] Acting on ten-necked Ravana’s orders, Indrajit, the fierce foe of 
Indra, in a rage drove swiftly into battle armed with his pitiless bow and 
iron arrows. He spied the two immensely powerful heroes in the midst of 
the monkeys. As they prepared to unleash volleys of arrows, they resembled 
three-headed cobras. With the thought, “There they are!” he strung his bow 
and inundated them with torrents of arrows, as, with a downpour, might a 


storm cloud charged with rain. In his chariot, he flew up into the sky, and, 
stationing himself there out of the range of sight, he riddled Rama and 
Laksmana with sharp arrows. 

[22-26] Beset on every side by the force of his arrows, Rama and 
Laksmana placed arrows on their bows and invoked a divine weapon-spell. 
Those very mighty warriors, who resembled gods, covered the sky with 
their volleys of arrows. But their divine weapons did not so much as graze 
Indrajit. For he had created dense darkness so as to obscure the heavens. 
Thus did that majestic warrior, shrouded in a murky fog, make it impossible 
to see in any direction. Not even the sound of his bowstring striking his 
armguard could be heard or the noise of his chariot wheels and horses’ 
hooves as he darted to and fro. Nor could one discern his form. With his 
torrent of iron arrows, the great-armed warrior, in that dense and blinding 
darkness, let loose a veritable and prodigious downpour of arrows. 

[27-31] In that battle, the angry Ravani, who had been granted a boon, 
completely riddled Rama in every limb with arrows as radiant as the sun. 
Although those two tigers among men were pelted with iron arrows like 
two mountains inundated by torrential rains, they continued to shoot their 
own sharp gold-fletched arrows. Soaring into the sky, those heron-fletched 
arrows wounded Ravani and then fell back to earth, smeared with blood. 
Although those two splendid men were sorely afflicted by that torrent of 
arrows, they cut down those shafts as they rained down, with many 
crescent-headed arrows. The two sons of Dasaratha would loose a splendid 
divine weapon in any direction from which they saw those sharp arrows 
raining down. 

[32-35] But the great chariot-warrior Ravani, whose divine weapons 
flew swiftly, darted in all directions in his chariot and continued to riddle 
the two sons of Dasaratha with his sharp arrows. Thoroughly riddled by him 
with those finely made, gold-fletched arrows, the two heroic sons of 
Dasaratha looked like twin kimsuka trees covered with crimson blossoms. 
No one could follow Indrajit’s movements, nor could anyone discern his 
form, his bow, or his arrows. Nothing whatever of his could be discerned, as 
if he were the sun hidden behind a dense mass of clouds. Pierced through 
by him, the tawny monkeys were struck down by the hundreds and lay 
fallen on the ground, robbed of their life breaths. 


[36-42] Then, in a towering rage, Laksmana said these words to his 
brother: “I shall use the divine weapon-spell of Brahma in order to 
exterminate all the raksasas.” But Rama said this in reply to Laksmana of 
auspicious marks: “You must not slaughter all the raksasas of the earth on 
account of a single one. A foe who does not resist, is in hiding, cups his 
hands in supplication, approaches seeking refuge, is fleeing, or is caught off 
guard—you must not slay any of these. Therefore, mighty warrior, let us 
strive to slay him alone. Let us summon our divine weapon-spells, which 
strike with tremendous force and resemble venomous serpents. For if the 
leaders of the monkey troops could but see that vile master of illusion with 
his invisible chariot, they could then overpower and slay that rdaksasa. 
Whether he enters the earth, the heavens, the underworld Rasatala, or the 
sky—no matter where he may hide—he shall fall to earth consumed by my 
divine weapons and robbed of his life breaths.” Thus did the great hero of 
the Raghus speak, surrounded by those bulls among leaping monkeys. Then 
the great man urgently began to contemplate how to kill that fierce raksasa 
of cruel deeds. 


Sarga 68 

[1-6] Now, when Indrajit realized what great Raghava had in mind, he 
withdrew from the battle and reentered the city. But as that immensely 
lustrous hero recalled the slaughter of those courageous rdksasas, his eyes 
grew red with rage and he sallied forth once more. Surrounded by raksasas, 
the immensely powerful Indrajit Paulastya, that thorn in the side of the 
gods, marched forth through the western gate. But then, perceiving that the 
two heroic brothers, Rama and Laksmana, were prepared for battle, Indrajit 
displayed his power of illusion. Placing an illusory Sita on his chariot in the 
midst of his vast host, he made as if to kill her. Determined to deceive all of 
them, that very evil-minded raksasa marched out right in front of the 
monkeys, displaying every intention of killing Sita. 

[7-11] When the forest-dwelling monkeys saw him marching forth from 
the city, they leapt up in a towering rage, with boulders in their hands, eager 
for battle. Before them strode Hanuman, elephant among monkeys, holding 
an immense mountain peak that was impossible to withstand. There, in 
Indrajit’s chariot, he saw Sita. She was sorrowful, wearing a single braid, 
dejected, her face gaunt with fasting. That splendid woman, Raghava’s 


beloved, wore only a single garment, now much worn. She was unwashed 
so that all her limbs were covered with dust and dirt. After observing her 
closely for a moment and concluding that she was indeed Maithil1, 
Hanuman became deeply agitated, his face awash in tears. 

[12-15] Seeing poor Sita there in the chariot, sorrowful and afflicted 
with grief, in the clutches of the raksasa lord’s son, the great monkey 
thought, “What does he mean to do?” Then, after voicing this concern, he 
rushed upon R&avani together with those excellent monkeys. But when 
Ravani spied the monkey host, he was beside himself with rage. 
Unsheathing his sword, he seized Sita by the head. Then, right before their 
eyes, Ravani struck that woman, whom he had conjured up in his chariot 
through his power of illusion, as she cried out, “Rama! Rama!” 

[16—21] When Hanuman saw Sita seized by her hair, that son of Maruta 
shed tears born of grief from his eyes. In anger, he spoke harsh words to the 
son of the rdksasa lord: “Evil wretch! You have seized her braid to your 
own destruction. Though born in a lineage of brahman-seers you dwelt in a 
raksasa woman’s womb. Damn you, you creature of foul deeds, whose 
mind has sunk to this! Savage! Ignoble! Evildoer! Lowest of the low! 
Criminal! Such is the act of an ignoble creature! You are without pity, 
pitiless raksasa! Taken from her home, her country, and the arms of Rama, 
what offense has Maithilt done you that you should want to kill her? If you 
kill Sita, you will certainly die soon. For through this deed, for which you 
would deserve to die, you would fall into my clutches. And then, once you 
have lost your life and passed on to the next world, you will surely obtain 
those worlds reserved for those who kill women, worlds that are despised 
even by others who deserve death at the hands of all men.” 

[22-27] Even as he was speaking in this fashion, Hanuman, surrounded 
by tawny monkeys wielding weapons, rushed in a rage at the son of the 
raksasa \ord. But Indrajit, with his army of fearsomely swift rdaksasas, 
drove back the immensely powerful army of forest-dwelling monkeys as it 
rushed onward. Once he had routed the army of tawny monkeys with a 
thousand arrows, Indrajit replied to Hanuman, foremost among the tawny 
monkeys: “This very day, right before your very eyes, I shall kill Vaideht, 
on whose account Sugriva, you, and Rama have come here. And after I kill 
her, monkey, I shall then kill Rama, Laksmana, you, Sugriva, and that 
ignoble Vibhisana. Now as to what you said, leaping monkey, ‘Women are 


not to be killed,’ I would respond that one must do whatever causes pain to 
one’s enemies.” 

[28—33] When he had addressed him in this fashion, Indrajit himself 
slew the wailing, illusory Sita with his sharp-edged sword. Hacked in two 
from her shoulder to her hip, the poor woman, so beautiful and broad- 
hipped, fell to the ground. After he had killed that woman, Indrajit said to 
Hanuman: “Now behold Rama’s woman, whom I have slaughtered in my 
wrath.” Then, having slain her himself with his huge sword, Indrajit 
mounted his chariot in great delight and unleashed a deafening roar. As he 
withdrew to the safety of his own forces, roaring loudly, his mouth opened 
wide, the monkeys standing nearby could hear the din. When evil-minded 
Ravani had slain Sita in this fashion, he was delighted at heart. But when 
the monkeys saw how thoroughly delighted he was, they fled every which 
way in profound dejection. 


Sarga 69 

[1-4] When those bulls among monkeys heard that terrifying sound, they 
fled in all directions, glancing back toward Indrajit, whose roar was like the 
sound of Sakra’s thunderbolt. But as they all scattered, terrified and 
dejected, their faces downcast, Hanuman, son of Maruta, called out to them: 
“Leaping monkeys! Why are you fleeing with downcast faces, abandoning 
your enthusiasm for battle? Where now are all your heroics? Follow close 
behind me as I advance before you into battle. It ill befits heroes endowed 
with noble birth to run away.” 

[5—9]| Addressed in this fashion by the wise son of Vayu, the monkeys 
were highly indignant. Their minds filled with excitement, they seized 
mountain peaks and trees. Those bulls among monkeys rushed, roaring, 
toward the raksasas. Surrounding Hanuman, they followed him into the 
great battle. Like fire, eater of oblations, wreathed in flames, Hanuman, 
surrounded on every side by the principal monkeys, consumed the army of 
his foes. Surrounded by the monkey host, the great monkey—like Yama, 
who brings time itself to an end—wrought destruction among the raksasas. 
Consumed with grief and rage, the great monkey Hanuman hurled an 
enormous boulder at Ravani’s chariot. 

[10-14] But when the charioteer saw it hurtling toward him, he drove the 
chariot, drawn by obedient horses, well out of range. Failing in its purpose, 


the boulder fell short of Indrajit, who remained in his chariot with his 
charioteer. It split open the earth and buried itself. But in falling, 1t wrought 
havoc among the raksasa host. Then, roaring, the forest-dwelling monkeys 
hurled themselves by the hundreds upon Indrajit. Arming themselves, those 
huge monkeys, fearsome in their valor, hurled trees and mountain peaks 
into the midst of their enemies. Struck down powerfully with trees by the 
immensely powerful monkeys, the grotesque night-roaming rdksasas 
writhed on the battleground. 

[15-22] But when Indrajit saw his army being harried by the monkeys, 
he seized his weapons in a towering rage and rushed at his foes. Surrounded 
by his own troops, he displayed his valor, releasing torrents of arrows. And 
he slaughtered many of those tigers among monkeys with lances, darts, 
swords, spears, mallets, and war hammers. The monkeys, in turn, slew his 
followers in battle. With sda/a trees, complete with trunks and branches, and 
with boulders, immensely powerful Hanuman slaughtered the raksasas of 
fearsome deeds. Once he had driven back the enemy army, Hanuman said to 
the forest-dwelling monkeys: “Withdraw! There is no point in defeating this 
army, for Janaka’s daughter, on whose account we have been fighting, 
struggling, and sacrificing our lives to please Rama, has been slain. Let us 
first report this matter to Rama and Sugriva. Then we shall do whatever 
they may ordain.” When he had spoken in this fashion, that foremost of 
monkeys turned back all the monkeys and, calmly and deliberately, 
withdrew. 

[23—26] Now, when Indrajit saw that Hanuman was heading back to 
where Raghava waited, he retired to the Nikumbhila shrine, eager to make 
oblation to the sacred fire, purifier of all things. The sacred fire, purifier of 
all things, blazed up fiercely, as, in accordance with the sacrificial 
injunctions, the raksasa poured oblations of blood into it there on the 
sacrificial ground. Glutted with the oblations of blood and swathed in 
flames, that fierce fire blazed up like the sun at twilight. Then Indrajit, in 
accordance with the sacrificial injunctions, made oblations according to 
those injunctions for the success of the raksasas. And the raksasas, who 
knew what was and was not proper conduct, stood around in their vast 
troops, watching. 


Sarga 70 


[1-4] Now, when Raghava heard the deafening noise of the battle between 
the raksasas and the forest-dwelling monkeys, he said to Jambavan: “My 
friend, surely Hanuman must have accomplished an all-but-impossible feat, 
since we hear such a mighty and terrifying clash of arms. Therefore, you 
should go quickly, lord of the apes, surrounded by your own forces, and 
render assistance to that foremost of monkeys, who is engaged in battle.” 
With the words, “So be it,” the king of the apes, surrounded by his own 
army, proceeded toward the western gate, where the monkey Hanuman was. 

[S—9] But then, on the road, the lord of apes encountered Hanuman 
returning, surrounded by his monkeys, who were fresh from battle and 
breathing hard. Encountering on the road that fearsome army of apes all 
ready for battle and resembling a black storm cloud, Hanuman halted it and 
turned it back. With his army of tawny monkeys, the illustrious Hanuman 
quickly approached Rama and, in great sorrow, said these words to him: 
“While we were engaged in battle, Indrajit, the son of Ravana, slew the 
wailing Sita right before our eyes. When I saw her like that, I was 
devastated and despondent, tamer of your foes. Then I came straightaway to 
report this news to you, sir.” 

[10-12] Upon hearing those words of his, Raghava, fainting from grief, 
fell to the ground, like a tree cut off at the roots. Seeing the godlike 
Raghava fallen to the ground, those excellent monkeys leapt up and rushed 
to him from every side. They doused him with water fragrant with red and 
blue lotuses, as if he were an unbearable blazing fire that had sprung up. 

[13-18] Then Laksmana, deeply grieving himself, took the stricken 
Rama in his arms and addressed him in words that were both rational and 
meaningful: “Since the practice of righteousness has been unable to protect 
you, noble brother—you, who have always trodden the path of virtue and 
controlled your senses—from calamities, it is truly pointless. For since we 
cannot directly perceive the force of righteousness in the same way that we 
perceive moving and fixed objects, it is my opinion that it does not exist. 
This thing called ‘righteousness’ is not demonstrable in the same way that 
moving and fixed objects are. Otherwise, a person like you would not 
experience such suffering. By the same token, if the force of 
unrighteousness were real, Ravana would go to hell, while you, sir, who are 
devoted to righteousness, would not thus suffer calamity. Since he has 
suffered no calamity, while you are immersed in one, can it be true that one 


obtains felicity through the practice of righteousness and that suffering 
arises from the practice of unrighteousness? 

[19-24] “Now, if those people who were averse to unrighteousness 
would thereby experience the felicity arising from the practice of 
righteousness, that is, if those who conducted themselves righteously would 
experience happiness, then they would receive their just deserts. Therefore, 
since the fortunes of those among whom unrighteousness is practiced 
increase, while those who always practice righteousness suffer torments, 
these two concepts are meaningless. And if, Raghava, it were true that 
evildoers perish through the force of unrighteousness, then the force of 
righteousness would also be destroyed by the very act of destruction. Then, 
once it is destroyed, whom could it harm? Or if we are to understand that it 
is because of fate that a person is either killed by or kills another, then it is 
fate alone that would be tainted by that evil act and not the person himself. 
Since the results of righteousness are imperceptible and it itself is 
unmanifest and, in fact, unreal, how, tormentor of your foes, would it be 
possible to attain the highest good by means of it? If there were really such 
a thing as the power of virtue, then you, foremost among the virtuous, 
would never have suffered any evil. But since such a calamity has befallen 
you, it must follow that the power of virtue does not exist. 

[25—29] “On the other hand, it may be that the force of righteousness is 
weak and impotent and is merely auxiliary to manly effort. And since it is 
weak and blurs all distinctions, it should, in my opinion, be ignored. And if 
the force of righteousness is merely auxiliary to manly effort when it comes 
to effective action, then you should abandon it and devote yourself to manly 
effort, just as you now do to righteousness. Or should it be argued that 
righteousness consists, as they say, in speaking the truth, scorcher of your 
foes, then why is it that you would not imprison our father, who acted both 
untruthfully and cruelly toward you? Moreover, scorcher of your foes, if 
either righteousness or human effort were to be practiced exclusively, then 
the wielder of the vajra, Indra of the hundred sacrifices, would not first 
have slain a sage and then performed a sacrifice. When either human effort 
or righteousness is practiced exclusively, it destroys a person, Raghava. 
Therefore, Kakutstha, a man should act as he pleases in all such matters. 

[30-38] “Such is righteousness according to my way of thinking, 
Raghava, my poor brother. Besides, when you relinquished the kingship, 


you cut off righteousness at its root. For all righteous actions flow from 
wealth that is drawn and amassed from different sources, just as rivers flow 
from the mountains. But when a man is stripped of his wealth and so 
becomes powerless, all his righteous actions cease to flow like rivulets in 
the hot season. And such a man who has been raised to enjoy pleasures will 
come to crave them. If he should lose his wealth, he will resort to evil 
deeds. In this way, dire consequences will ensue. A rich man has friends. A 
rich man has kinsmen. A rich man is an important person in this world. A 
rich man is considered learned. A rich man is powerful. A rich man is wise. 
A rich man is highly fortunate. A rich man is endowed with the finest 
qualities. I have thus laid out for you the disadvantages inherent in 
relinquishing wealth. I cannot imagine, heroic brother, what led you to such 
a decision when you abandoned your kingship. A rich man gains 
righteousness, pleasure, and profit—everything is propitious for him. But a 
poor man, though he may desire wealth and seek it, can never acquire it. 
Joy, desire, pride, righteousness, anger, tranquility, and self-restraint: all of 
these proceed from wealth, lord of men. 

[39-42] “Those who wander about practicing righteousness lose 
everything of value in this world. Those things of value are no more to be 
seen in you than are the heavenly bodies on stormy days. For, hero, it was 
when you were living in exile, adhering to your father’s word, that the 
raksasa stole away your wife, dearer to you than life itself. But this very 
day, with feats of valor, hero, I shall dispel the great suffering wrought by 
Indrajit. Therefore, arise, Raghava! For I have arisen to aid you, sinless 
brother. In my rage at learning of the murder of Janaka’s daughter, I shall, 
with my arrows, completely level Lanka, along with its horses, elephants, 
and chariots, as well as the lord of the rdksasas himself.” 


Sarga 71 
[1-7] Now, while Laksmana, so fond of his brother, was consoling Rama, 
Vibhisana returned after having stationed the troops at their proper posts. 
Surrounded by his four valiant ministers, all armed with various weapons 
and resembling masses of collyrium, he resembled the leader of a herd 
surrounded by bull elephants. As he drew near, he saw that the great 
Raghava was immersed in grief and that the monkeys’ eyes were awash 
with tears. Then he saw the great Rama Raghava, delight of the House of 


Iksvaku, who lay dazed in Laksmana’s lap. Upon seeing Rama tormented 
by grief and deeply chagrined, Vibhisana, his heart sinking with an inner 
sorrow, said, “What’s wrong?” Looking first at Vibhisana’s face, then at 
Sugriva and the monkeys, Laksmana, overwhelmed with tears, said these 
words: “Upon hearing Hanuman report that Indrayit had slain Sita, Raghava 
fainted on the spot, dear friend.” 

[8—12] But Vibhisana cut Saumitri off even as he was speaking and said 
these deeply meaningful words to the barely conscious Rama: “Lord of 
men, I think that what Hanuman told you in his despair is as preposterous as 
would be the drying up of the ocean. For I know full well the plans that the 
evil-minded Ravana has for Sita, great-armed warrior. He would never 
countenance her murder. Desiring what was best for him, I begged him over 
and over again, “You must give up Vaidehi!’ But he would not heed that 
advice. But no one can so much as get a glimpse of her, whether through 
conciliation, sowing dissension, bribery, or any other means, much less 
through violence. 

[13-15] “After deluding the monkeys, the raksasa Indrajit has returned 
to the shrine known as Nikumbhila, where he will perform a sacrifice. And 
should that son of Ravana return after having completed his oblation, he 
will be unassailable in battle, even by the gods, Vasava included. He must 
surely have employed this illusion, dear boy, in his desire to undermine the 
monkeys’ valor. We must go there with our troops before he completes his 
sacrifice. 

[16-22] “So cease this baseless grieving that has overcome you, tiger 
among men, for when they see you racked with grief, the whole army 
becomes despondent. You must remain here to compose yourself and 
recoup your strength. Send Laksmana, along with us and the leaders of the 
troops. For that tiger among men with his sharp arrows will force Ravani to 
abandon his sacrifice. Then that raksasa can be killed. Then his sharp and 
pitiless feathered shafts, made swift by the feathers of birds, will, like birds 
of prey themselves, drink Indrajit’s blood. Thus, great-armed warrior, you 
must send forth Laksmana of auspicious marks for the destruction of this 
rdksasa, just as might Indra, the wielder of the vajra, send forth that 
weapon. Nor, best of men, must there be any delay in regard to killing our 
enemy. So issue your orders for the destruction of our foe, as does great 
Indra for the smashing of the citadels of the asuras. For if the raksasa lord 


should complete his sacrifice, he would become invisible in battle to the 
gods and asuras alike. Then, having completed his sacrifice, should he wish 
to fight, even the gods themselves would be in grave peril.” 


Sarga 72 
[1-3] Although Raghava had heard those words of Vibhisana, he could not, 
racked with grief as he was, clearly understand what the raksasa had said. 
But then, in the presence of the monkeys, Rama, the conqueror of enemy 
citadels, regaining his composure, spoke to Vibhisana, who sat beside him: 
“Vibhisana! Lord of the rdksasas, sons of chaos, I would like to hear once 
more what you just said. Please repeat what you intended to say.” 

[4-9] When he had heard those words of Raghava, Vibhisana, skilled in 
speech, repeated what he had said: “No sooner had you ordered me to 
station the troops at their proper posts than I executed your command, 
great-armed hero, just as you said. All the forces have been disposed 
separately on every side, while the troop leaders have been duly posted with 
their respective divisions. But please, illustrious hero, listen to my request 
once more. When you were grieving baselessly, our hearts were filled with 
grief. So abandon this sorrow, your majesty, this baseless grief that has 
overcome you. You must give up your brooding, which serves only to 
delight your enemies. If you are to recover Sita and slay the night-roaming 
raksasas, you must bestir yourself, hero, and lift your spirits. 

[10-14] “Listen, delight of the Raghus, to the beneficial advice that I 
will now give you. Let Saumitri set out directly, accompanied by a large 
army, in order to confront Ravani in the Nikumbhila shrine and kill him in 
battle. There with arrows—like the venom of venomous serpents—loosed 
from his full-drawn bow, that mighty bowman, victorious in battle, shall 
slay Ravani. Through the boon of self-existent Brahma, acquired by virtue 
of his asceticism, that hero will obtain the divine Brahmasiras weapon-spell 
and chariot-horses that can take him wherever he desires. But this is the 
way in which the death of that cunning warrior was foreordained, your 
majesty: ‘Should an enemy ever strike you, enemy of Indra, before you can 
reach the Nikumbhila grove and there complete your oblation into the fire, 
he shall compass your death even as you draw your bow to slay him.’ 
Therefore, Rama, you must depute mighty Laksmana to kill Indrajit. For 


once he is slain, you can consider Ravana and all his companions to be as 
good as dead.” 

[15-17] When Rama had heard these words of Vibhisana, he replied: 
“Well do I know, truly valorous hero, the illusory power of that fierce 
warrior. For he is cunning and has mastered the divine weapon-spell of 
Brahma. He is mighty and mighty is the power of his illusion. Indeed, he 
can render even the gods themselves, including Varuna, unconscious in 
battle. And when, illustrious hero, mounted in his chariot, he travels 
through the sky, his movements can no more be discerned than those of the 
sun behind a dense mass of clouds.” 

[18—21] Then Raghava, who knew well the illusory power of his evil- 
minded foe, said these words to illustrious Laksmana: “Laksmana! 
Accompanied by the entire army of the monkey lords and the troop leaders 
led by Hanuman as well as Jambavan, lord of the apes, and his army, you 
must slay the son of that rdksasa, skilled though he may be in the power of 
illusion. And Vibhisana, the great night-roaming raksasa, who knows this 
country intimately, will bring up the rear together with his ministers.” 

[22—25] When Laksmana, of fearsome valor, who was accompanied by 
Vibhisana, heard these words of Raghava, he took up a superb and 
extraordinary bow. Girded for battle with his armor, sword, arrows, and 
golden bow, Saumitri touched Rama’s feet and spoke in great excitement: 
“This very day, arrows loosed from my bow will pierce Ravani and then 
plunge into Lanka, as do hamsas into a lotus pond. Indeed, this very day, 
my arrows, flying from the bowstring of my mighty bow, will strike that 
fierce warrior and tear his body to pieces.” 

[26-30] When he had spoken in this fashion in the presence of his 
brother, glorious Laksmana departed in haste, eager to slay Ravani. Then, 
having made his obeisance to his elder brother’s feet and having circled him 
reverentially, he set out for Nikumbhila, the shrine guarded by Ravani. His 
mission blessed by his brother, the valorous prince hastened on his way, 
accompanied by Vibhisana. Then Hanuman, surrounded by many thousands 
of monkeys, and Vibhisana, together with his ministers, followed 
Laksmana. Accompanied by a vast army of tawny monkeys, Laksmana 
quickly encountered the army of Jambavan, king of the apes, which was 
stationed along the way. 


[31-33] After he had traveled a long way, Saumitri, delight of his 
friends, spied in the distance the army of the raksasa lord, which was drawn 
up in battle array. When the delight of the Raghus, tamer of his foes, had 
thus encountered that master of illusion Indrajit, he took his stand, bow in 
hand, in order to triumph according to the decree of Brahma. Then he 
plunged into the army of his enemies as into a vast darkness. It was diverse 
and gleamed with shining weapons. It was thick with battle standards and 
abounded in great chariot-warriors. In the immeasurable force of its onset, it 
was utterly terrifying. 


Sarga 73 

[1-5] Now, at this critical juncture, Ravana’s younger brother Vibhisana 
addressed Laksmana in words that were inimical to their enemies and 
instrumental to the achievement of their own ends: “Laksmana, you must 
make every effort to annihilate this vast army. For once it has been 
annihilated, the son of the rdksasa lord will become visible. Showering 
your enemies with arrows like Indra’s thunderbolts, you must attack at once 
while his sacrifice is not yet completed. Hero, you must slay evil-minded 
R&vani, so unrighteous and adept in the power of illusion, for he is cruel in 
his actions and a terror to all the worlds.” Upon hearing these words of 
Vibhisana, Laksmana of auspicious marks unleashed a hail of arrows in the 
direction of the raksasa lord’s son. 

[6-12] Meanwhile, the apes and tree-dwelling monkeys, armed with 
huge trees and mountains, together hurled themselves upon the army that 
stood before them. The rdksasas, for their part, eager to annihilate the 
monkey host, fought back with sharp arrows, swords, and with upraised 
javelins and iron cudgels. And thus a tumultuous clash of arms took place 
between the monkeys and the rdksasas, which, with its colossal din, caused 
Lanka to reverberate on every side. The very sky itself was hidden from 
view by weapons of many different kinds: sharp arrows, trees, and 
fearsome, upraised mountain peaks. Hurling their weapons at the monkeys, 
the rdaksasas, with their deformed faces and arms, sowed immense panic 
among them. By the same token, the monkeys struck and slaughtered the 
bulls among rdksasas in battle with whole trees and mountain peaks. 
Immense panic broke out among the rdksasas as they were being 


slaughtered by the huge and immensely powerful leaders of the apes and 
monkeys. 

[13-16] When unassailable Indrajit learned that his army was 
demoralized and afflicted by the enemy, he rose up, his sacrifice still 
incomplete. Emerging from the shadow of the trees, the raksasa Ravani, in 
a rage, mounted his chariot, which stood fully equipped and already yoked. 
Resembling a mass of black collyrium, his eyes and face an angry red, that 
cruel raksasa with his fearsome bow and arrows looked like Mrtyu himself, 
the ender of all things. As soon as the army of the raksasas—fearsome in 
their onslaught and eager to fight with Laksmana—saw Indrajit mounted in 
his chariot, they surrounded him. 

[17-20] But at that moment, Hanuman, that tamer of his foes, who 
resembled a mountain, took up a huge and unstoppable tree and, with it, 
tore through the rdksasa ranks like the fire of universal destruction. And in 
that battle, the monkey knocked them unconscious with many trees. When 
they saw that Hanuman, son of Pavana, was wreaking swift destruction 
upon them, thousands of rdksasas unleashed a hail of weapons toward him 
—bearers of sharp lances assailed him with their lances, swordsmen with 
their swords, javelin-wielders with their javelins, and spearmen with their 
spears. 

[21-24] Besetting the mountainous monkey on every side, the rdksasas 
belabored him with iron clubs, maces, splendid-looking barbed darts, 
hundreds of hundred-slayers, iron war hammers, fearsome battle-axes, short 
javelins, fists with the force of the vajra, and palms like thunderbolts. 
Meanwhile, Hanuman, in a towering rage, wrought great slaughter among 
them. Indrajit saw that Pavana’s mountainous son, the foremost of 
monkeys, Hanuman, destroyer of his enemies, was slaughtering his 
enemies. 

[25-27] Indrajit then said to his charioteer, “Drive to where that monkey 
is, for if we do not deal with him, he will surely destroy us raksasas.” When 
he had been addressed by him in this fashion, the charioteer drove to where 
Maruti was, conveying the utterly invincible Indrajit, mounted in the 
chariot. Closing in, the invincible raksasa unleashed upon the monkey’s 
head a hail of arrows, swords, spears, scimitars, and battle-axes. 

[28—34] But Maruti, parrying those fearsome weapons, was seized with a 
towering rage and spoke these words: “Come and fight if you are such a 


hero, evil-minded son of Ravana! Having now encountered Vayu’s son, you 
will not escape with your life. If you want to engage me in single combat in 
this battle, then fight me with your bare hands. If you can sustain my 
crushing force, evil-minded wretch, then you will prove to be the best of the 
raksasas.” But just then Vibhisana informed Laksmana that Indrajit, the son 
of Ravana, intent on killing Hanuman, had taken up his bow: “Ravana’s 
son, the conqueror of Vasava, intent on killing Hanuman, has now mounted 
his chariot. Saumitri, you must slay Ravani with your fearsome, foe- 
piercing arrows, incomparable in their workmanship and utterly lethal.” 
Addressed in this fashion by that terror to his foes, Vibhisana, great 
Laksmana spied the unassailable Indrajit of fearsome power, resembling a 
mountain and mounted in his chariot. 


Sarga 74 

[1-6] After addressing Saumitri in this fashion, Vibhisana, in great 
excitement, took him, still armed with his bow, and swiftly advanced. 
Proceeding for a short distance, Vibhisana entered a vast grove and there 
pointed out to Laksmana the sacrificial ground. There Ravana’s powerful 
brother pointed out to Laksmana a fearsome-looking banyan tree that 
resembled a black storm cloud: “It is only after offering oblations to 
malignant spirits at this spot that the mighty son of Ravana goes forth to 
battle. Then the rdksasa becomes invisible to all creatures and is able to 
bind and slay his enemies in battle with his splendid arrows. Therefore, 
with your keen arrows, you must destroy the mighty son of Ravana, 
together with his chariot, horses, and charioteer, before he returns to that 
banyan tree.” 

[7-9] With the words, “So be it,” immensely powerful Saumitri, delight 
of his friends, took up his stand there, twanging his splendid bow. At that, 
Indrajit, Ravana’s mighty son, appeared in his flame-colored chariot with 
his armor, sword, and battle standard. Then immensely powerful Laksmana 
addressed the invincible Paulastya: “I challenge you to a duel. Give me a 
fair fight.” 

[10-16] Although the resolute and immensely powerful son of Ravana 
had been challenged in this fashion, he turned his gaze to Vibhisana and 
spoke these bitter words: “Born and bred in our House, you are the very 
brother of my father. How then, raksasa, can you, my own uncle, betray 


me, your son? You evil-minded defiler of righteousness! You have no sense 
of kinship, affection, loyalty to your kind, sound judgment, fraternal 
feeling, or righteousness. You are truly pathetic, you evil-minded wretch, 
and an object of contempt to the virtuous since, abandoning your own kind, 
you have chosen to serve our enemies. With your feeble wits you do not 
perceive this glaring difference. How can one even compare life with one’s 
own kinfolk to despicable servitude to one’s enemy? Even if one’s enemy is 
virtuous and one’s kinfolk devoid of every virtue, still one’s kinfolk, devoid 
of virtue though they be, are to be preferred. An enemy is always an enemy. 
No kinsman other than you, night-roaming raksasa, could demonstrate such 
pitilessness and callousness as you have, younger brother of Ravana.” 

[17—23] When Vibhisana had been addressed in this fashion by his 
brother’s son, he replied: “Why do you disparage me, rdksasa, as if you 
knew nothing of my character? Vicious son of the raksasa lord, cease your 
impudent speech out of respect for me. Although I was born in the race of 
savage rdksasas, my nature is not that of the raksasas. Instead, I share the 
better nature of virtuous men. I take delight in neither cruelty nor 
unrighteousness. Otherwise, how could a brother, even one of radically 
different character, reject his brother? There are three faults that lead one to 
ruin: theft of another’s property, raping another man’s wife, and excessive 
distrust of one’s friends. My brother’s horrific murder of the great seers, his 
warring with all the gods, his arrogance, his wrathfulness, his unremitting 
hostility, and his perversity—these crimes and defects of his, so threatening 
to his life and his rule, obscure his virtues, as do storm clouds a mountain. It 
is because of these crimes and defects that I have forsaken my brother, your 
father. Neither you nor your father nor the city of Lanka shall long endure. 

[24-27] “You are an arrogant and ill-disciplined whelp, raksasa! Say 
what you will about me; you are bound by the noose of Kala. Your death is 
at hand this very day. What can you say to me now? Lowest of the 
raksasas, you will never make it back to that banyan tree. If you confront 
the two Kakutsthas in battle, you will not escape with your life. And now 
you must do battle with Prince Laksmana. Once you are slain, you will 
accomplish the purpose of the gods in the abode of Yama. So demonstrate 
all the power you can muster. Discharge all your weapons and arrows. But 
once you come within the range of Laksmana’s shafts, you and your army 
will not escape with your lives.” 


Sarga 75 

[1-8] When RAavani had heard these words of Vibhisana, he was beside 
himself with rage. He replied in harsh words and swiftly rushed forward. 
Standing in his huge and ornate chariot yoked to black steeds, with his 
sword and other weapons raised, he resembled Kala, the ender of all things. 
Taking up his broad and thick bow, so firm, fearsome, and powerful, and 
fingering his foe-destroying arrows, he spoke in his fury to Saumitri, 
Vibhisana, and the tigers among monkeys, saying: “Behold my valor! Now 
try to ward off in battle the irresistible hail of arrows loosed from my bow, 
like a torrential downpour from the sky. This very day, my arrows, loosed 
from my immense bow, will scatter your limbs, as the wind might a heap of 
straw. I shall send you all this very day to the abode of Yama, your bodies 
mangled by sharp arrows, lances, javelins, broadswords, and iron cudgels. 
For who can stand before me in battle when, like a thundering storm cloud, 
I release a hail of arrows with my deft hands?” 

[9-13] When Laksmana heard the boasting of the raksasa lord, his face 
displayed not the slightest sign of fear. But he was enraged, and he said 
these words to Ravani: “The fulfillment of the goals of which you boast is 
not so easy to accomplish, rdksasa. He alone is truly wise who fulfills his 
goals through action. You are utterly incapable of accomplishing this feat. 
In fact, no one can accomplish it. Yet after merely boasting about it, fool, 
you think, ‘I have accomplished my purpose!’ As for what you 
accomplished in battle on that other occasion by making yourself invisible, 
that is the way of thieves. It is not to be followed by heroes. So now that I 
am standing here, raksasa, within range of your arrows, go ahead and show 
us your martial prowess. Why boast with mere words?” 

[14-17] Addressed in this fashion, immensely powerful Indrajit, 
victorious in battle, drew his fearsome bow and let fly sharp arrows. Once 
launched, those arrows, venomous as serpents, reached Laksmana and 
cascaded upon him with their tremendous striking force, like hissing 
serpents. With those arrows, exceedingly powerful in their striking force, 
Ravana’s son Indrajit, whose own striking force was great, pierced Saumitri 
of auspicious marks in battle. Drenched in blood, his body riddled with 
arrows, majestic Laksmana resembled a smokeless fire. 

[18—22] When Indrajit saw what he had done, he drew near and, letting 
out a tremendous roar, uttered these words: “Now, Saumitri, lethal arrows— 


sharp edged and well fletched—loosed from my bow will rob you of your 
life. Soon, Laksmana, packs of jackals, vultures, and swarms of kites will 
descend upon you as you lie lifeless, slain by me. This very day, the 
supremely evil-minded and ever ignoble Rama, a warrior in name only, will 
see you, his brother and devotee, slain by me. Yes, he will soon see you 
sprawled on the ground, Saumitri, slain by me, your armor cut to pieces, 
your bow smashed, and your head severed.” 

[23—26] But as Ravana’s son was speaking these harsh words in such a 
frenzy, Laksmana responded to him with words that were perfectly 
reasonable: “Why do you boast, raksasa, when you have accomplished no 
feat? You must perform some feat through which I may come to believe 
your boasting. Observe, man-eater! Without uttering any harsh speech, any 
word of censure, and without boasting, I am going to kill you.” When he 
had spoken in this fashion, Laksmana sank five arrows of tremendous 
striking force—iron arrows drawn fully back to his ear—into the rdksasa’s 
chest. 

[27-33] Enraged at being struck by Laksmana with those arrows, 
Ravana’s son pierced him in return with three well-aimed arrows. And thus 
ensued an immensely fearsome and tumultuous clash in battle between 
those two lions—man and raksasa—each eager to kill the other. For both 
were endowed with might, both were valorous, both were extremely heroic, 
and both were skilled in every weapon and divine weapon-spell. Both were 
supremely invincible and unequaled in their power and blazing energy. The 
two great heroes clashed like two planets in the heavens. For then the two 
great warriors, as unassailable as Bala and Vrtra, fought like a pair of lions. 
Discharging many torrents of arrows, the two lions—man and raksasa— 
continued fighting in great excitement. Like two great storm clouds, the two 
champions—man and raksasa—bows and arrows in hand and both eager 
for victory, inundated each other in high excitement with torrents and hails 
of arrows. 


Sarga 76 
[1-4] Then, hissing like an angry serpent, Dasarathi, tormentor of his foes, 
fitted an arrow to his bow and released it toward the rdksasa lord. When the 
son of Ravana heard the slapping of the bowstring against Laksmana’s 
armguard, his face went pale, and he stared at him. Meanwhile, Vibhisana, 


observing the downcast face of the rdksasa, son of Ravana, addressed 
Saumitri, who was absorbed in battle: “I perceive unpropitious signs on the 
person of this son of Ravana. Therefore, you must make haste, great-armed 
warrior, for he is doubtless broken.” 

[S—7] Then Saumitri nocked sharp arrows, like flames of fire or serpents 
engorged with venom, and let them fly. Struck by Laksmana with those 
arrows, whose impact was like that of Sakra’s thunderbolt, Indrajit was 
momentarily stunned, all his senses wildly disordered. But he regained 
consciousness after a moment. And his senses fully restored, that hero 
stared at DaSaratha’s heroic son who stood before him. 

[8—14] His eyes red with rage, Indrajit advanced upon Saumitri, and, as 
he drew near, he once again addressed him in harsh words: “Have you 
completely forgotten my prowess in our first encounter, when, in battle, you 
and your brother writhed in bondage? That first time, during the great 
battle, the two of you and your followers were struck to the ground 
unconscious by my arrows, which are like the thunderbolts of Sakra. So 
since you dare to attack me, I think that you either must have forgotten that 
or else, clearly, you desire to depart for the abode of Yama. If you failed to 
observe my prowess in that first encounter, I will demonstrate it for you 
today. Now stand your ground!” And so saying, Indrajit pierced Laksmana 
with seven arrows and Hanuman with ten splendid, sharp-edged shafts. 
Then, his frenzy redoubled in his fury, that powerful warrior pierced 
Vibhisana with one hundred well-aimed arrows. 

[15—20] But when Rama’s younger brother had witnessed this feat 
performed by Indrajit, he dismissed it with a laugh, saying, “That’s 
nothing!” Then Laksmana, bull among men, his face betraying not the 
slightest sign of fear, took up fearsome arrows and, in battle, loosed them 
angrily at Indrajit Ravani, saying: “This is not the way heroes engaged in 
battle strike their blows, night-roaming rdksasa. These arrows of yours are 
inconsequential and have little force. Indeed, they feel quite pleasant. No, 
this is not the way heroes fight if they desire victory in battle.” And 
speaking in this fashion, he showered him with hails of arrows. Smashed by 
his arrows, Indrajit’s armor, all adorned with gold, shattered across the 
chariot floor, like a constellation falling from the sky. His armor torn away, 
heroic Indrajit was wounded with iron arrows, so that he resembled a 
mountain bristling with trees. 


[21-25] Breathing hard, they fought incessantly and savagely in that 
battle, pierced with arrows in every limb and completely drenched with 
blood. Deploying their divine weapon-spells again and again, those two, 
foremost among those expert in divine weapon-spells, filled the sky with 
arrows of every size and shape. Both man and rdaksasa, shooting flawlessly, 
swiftly, marvelously, and accurately, continued their fearsome and 
tumultuous conflict. Each terrifying crash of their bowstrings against their 
armguards was like that of two fearsome storm clouds thundering in the 
heavens. The golden-fletched arrows struck their bodies only to emerge 
smeared with blood and plunge into the ground. 

[26-34] Meanwhile, some of their arrows were intercepted in the air by 
other well-honed weapons. They smashed and splintered one another by the 
thousands. During the struggle, a ghastly carpet of arrows formed around 
them, so that it looked like a carpet of kusa grass around two blazing fires at 
a sacrificial session. Covered with wounds, the bodies of those two great 
watriors were as resplendent as a sd/mali and a kimsuka tree in full bloom 
in the forest before their leaves appear. Tumultuously and gruesomely the 
two of them—Indrajit and Laksmana—clashed again and again, each eager 
to vanquish the other. Although they continued to strike at each other— 
Laksmana, Ravani, and Ravani, Laksmana—neither of them grew weary in 
that battle. With the masses of arrows deeply rooted yet protruding from 
their bodies, the two powerful and mighty heroes looked like twin 
mountains bristling with trees. Drenched with blood and completely 
covered with arrows, all their limbs resembled blazing fires. A long time 
elapsed while they were thus engaged in combat, but neither of them turned 
his face from combat or felt any weariness. At that moment, immensely 
powerful Vibhisana joined the fray and took his stand in order to aid and 
comfort Laksmana, unconquered in the forefront of battle, and to give him 
respite from the fatigue of combat. 


Sarga 77 
[1-5] Ravana’s brother, the heroic Vibhisana, then took up his position in 
the front line of battle, watching the two of them—man and raksasa—who 
were locked in combat. He twanged his great bow as he took up his stance 
and then shot huge, keen-tipped arrows at the raksasas. Those arrows, 
glowing like fire, fell thick and fast. They tore the raksasas to pieces, as 


thunderbolts might great mountains. Vibhisana’s followers as well, those 
outstanding rdksasas, cut down the heroic rdksasas in combat with lances, 
swords, and spears. Surrounded by those rdksasas, Vibhisana then 
resembled a great bull elephant in the midst of its excited calves. 

[6-14] Then, at the appropriate time, that foremost of raksasas, who well 
understood timing, said these words, urging on the tawny monkeys, who 
took pleasure in battling the rdksasas: “Indrajit alone is, as it were, the last 
hope of the rdksasa lord, and this is the mere remnant of his forces. What 
are you waiting for, lords of the tawny monkeys? Once this evil rdksasa is 
slain in the forefront of battle, then, with the exception of Ravana himself, 
the enemy forces will have been destroyed. In slaying so many mighty 
raksasa chiefs—the loyal hero Prahasta, immensely powerful Nikumbha, 
Kumbhakarna, Kumbha, the night-roaming raksasa Dhtmraksa, 
Akampana, Suparsva, the rdaksasa Cakramalin, Kampana, Devantaka, 
Narantaka, and other mighty foes—you have crossed the ocean with your 
bare hands. You need now only hop across a small puddle. He is the only 
one left here for you to conquer, monkeys. All the other raksasas who 
joined battle here, arrogant in their strength, have been slain. True, it is not 
right for someone like me, who is like a father to him, to kill one who is like 
my own son. Still, for R&ama’s sake, I must put all pity aside and compass 
the death of my brother’s son. But although I would like to kill him, tears 
cloud my vision. Therefore, it is great-armed Laksmana who will have to 
finish him off. Now let the monkeys form up their ranks and slaughter his 
retainers, who have clustered around him.” 

[15-21] Urged on in this fashion by the very illustrious raksasa, the 
monkey lords were roused to a frenzy and beat their tails against the 
ground. Then, roaring again and again, those tigers among monkeys 
unleashed various screeches, as peacocks do when they see storm clouds. 
Then Jambavan, surrounded by all his troops, assailed the radksasas with 
boulders, claws, and teeth. But those immensely powerful rdksasas, casting 
aside their fear and wielding all kinds of weapons, surrounded the lord of 
the apes even as he attacked them. They belabored Jambavan in battle with 
arrows, keen battle-axes, spears, and iron cudgels even as he was 
slaughtering the raksasa army. A tumultuous clash then ensued between the 
monkeys and the raksasas. It was as fearsome and deafening as the clash 
between the gods and asuras in their fury. And Hanuman too, in a rage, 


ripped up a sdla tree from the mountain and, advancing to the attack, 
slaughtered the raksasas by the thousands. 

[22-28] Then, after having engaged in a tumultuous struggle with his 
paternal uncle Vibhisana in that battle, Indrajit charged once again at 
Laksmana, slayer of enemy heroes. Then those two heroes, Laksmana and 
the raksasa, violently engaged in battle, struck at each other, raining 
torrents of arrows. The two swift and immensely powerful archers were 
concealed from view, again and again, by swarms of arrows, just as are the 
sun and moon by storm clouds at summer’s end. Such was the dexterity of 
their hands as they fought that one could not perceive them taking up their 
arrows, nocking them, grasping their bows, releasing their arrows, drawing 
back the bowstrings, taking up their stances, tightly gripping their weapons, 
or striking their marks. Since the sky was completely covered in every 
direction with swarms of arrows sent flying by the force of their bows, 
nothing could be seen. A great and utterly terrifying darkness engulfed 
everything. The wind ceased to blow, and fire, the purifier, ceased to burn. 
The great seers muttered, “Heaven help us!” while the gandharvas and the 
celestial bards came and gathered at that place. 

[29-32] With four arrows Saumitri pierced the four black, gold- 
ornamented horses of that lion among raksasas. Then, with yet another 
shaft, a crescent-headed arrow, the majestic Raghava deftly severed the 
head from the body of the charioteer as he drove back and forth. Now, when 
the son of Ravana saw that his charioteer had been slain in combat, he lost 
his enthusiasm for battle and became dejected. And when the troop leaders 
of the tawny monkeys saw the rdksasa with his dejected face, they were 
supremely delighted, and they honored Laksmana. 

[33-38] Then four lords of the tawny monkeys—Pramathin, Sarabha, 
Rabhasa, and Gandhamadana—unable to hold themselves back, launched a 
violent assault. Leaping swiftly upward, the four immensely powerful 
monkeys, terrifying in their valor, landed on Indrajit’s splendid horses. 
Blood gushed visibly from the mouths of the horses as those monkeys, huge 
as mountains, came crashing down upon them. Having slain his horses, they 
smashed his great chariot. Then, swiftly leaping back, they stood once more 
at Laksmana’s side. But Ravani, leaping down from his chariot—its horses 
slain, its charioteer slaughtered—assailed Saumitri with a hail of arrows. 
wThen, with masses of arrows—and sharp and splendid arrows they were— 


Laksmana, the equal of great Indra, forcefully warded him off, who was 
now on foot and was releasing sharp and splendid arrows in battle. 


Sarga 78 

[1-5] His horses slain, the enormously powerful night-roaming rdksasa 
Indrajit now stood on the ground. In his towering rage, he blazed with 
energy. Wholly intent on killing each other with their arrows for the sake of 
victory, the two bowmen charged at each other like two bull elephants in the 
forest. Meanwhile, the raksasas and the forest-dwelling monkeys raced 
back and forth in battle, slaughtering one another. Yet they never abandoned 
their respective masters. Then, taking aim at Laksmana and relying on his 
unsurpassed dexterity, Indrajit unleashed torrents of arrows, as does Indra, 
smasher of citadels, torrents of rain. But Laksmana calmly parried that all- 
but-unstoppable torrent of arrows unleashed by Indrajit. 

[6-12] Realizing that Laksmana’s armor was impenetrable, Indrajit, son 
of Ravana, in a towering rage, shot him in the forehead with three well- 
fletched arrows, thus demonstrating his extraordinary swiftness in releasing 
divine weapons. With those arrows planted in his forehead, there in the 
forefront of battle, the delight of the Raghus, who delighted in battle, 
looked as splendid as a mountain with three summits. Although the raksasa 
had thus pierced him with arrows in the great battle, Laksmana nonetheless 
swiftly pierced him in turn with five arrows. And thus did the two heroes, 
Laksmana and Indrajit, armed with their immensely powerful bows and 
fearsome in their valor, strike each other with sharp arrows. Charging 
toward each other, the two bowmen, their hearts set on victory, pierced each 
other in every limb with fearsome arrows. But Vibhisana, still further 
enraged at Indrajit, whose horses had been slain, shot him through the chest 
with five arrows that struck with the force of thunderbolts. Flying straight to 
their mark, those gold-fletched arrows pierced his body. Smeared with his 
blood, they resembled huge red serpents. 

[13-18] Then immensely powerful Indrajit, enraged at his uncle there in 
the midst of the raksasas, took up a splendid arrow that had been given to 
him by Yama. But when immensely powerful Laksmana, fearsome in his 
valor, saw him nock that great arrow, he took up another arrow. It had been 
granted to him in a dream by immeasurable Kubera himself. It was 
invincible and impossible to withstand even for the gods and asuras, Indra 


included. Fixed to their splendid bows and drawn back by those heroes, the 
two magnificent arrows blazed brightly in their splendor. Released from 
their bows, the two arrows lit up the heavens. They struck each other head 
on, colliding with tremendous force. Colliding with each other in battle like 
two great planets, the arrows fell to the ground, shattered into a hundred 
pieces. 

[19-23] Seeing their arrows thwarted there in the forefront of battle, both 
Laksmana and Indrajit were filled with shame and rage. Then, in a towering 
rage, Saumitri took up the divine weapon of Varuna, while the conqueror of 
great Indra, standing firm in battle, loosed the divine weapon of Rudra. 
Then a tumultuous and wondrous battle took place between the two of 
them. Hovering in the sky, the supernatural beings surrounded Laksmana. 
As that fearsome battle, with its terrifying roar, raged on between the 
monkeys and the rdksasas, the sky was completely filled with numerous 
supernatural beings, all wonderstruck. The seers, the ancestors, the gods, 
and the gandharvas along with the great birds and the great serpents, 
placing Indra of the hundred sacrifices at their head, watched over 
Laksmana in battle. 

[24—27] And now, Raghava’s heroic younger brother nocked yet another 
arrow, the greatest of all. It struck with the burning force of fire, eater of 
oblations, and was capable of piercing Ravana’s son. It was beautifully 
fletched and its shaft was tapered with smooth joints. Finely crafted and 
adorned with gold, it was a lethal arrow, impossible either to ward off or to 
withstand. The terror of the rdksasas, it was like the venom of venomous 
serpents, and it was worshiped by the hosts of gods. This was the very 
arrow with which, long ago, the immensely powerful and heroic Lord Sakra 
of the bay steeds had defeated the danavas during the war of the gods and 
asuras. 

[28-31] Then Saumitri, foremost of men, placed upon his foremost of 
bows that foremost of arrows, the divine weapon of Indra, which had never 
known defeat in battle. Nocking that foe-destroying, divine weapon, the 
unassailable Laksmana drew his well-strung bow, stretching it to its limit, 
like Kala himself at the destruction of the world. Once he had placed the 
arrow on his splendid bow, fortunate Laksmana, drawing it back, uttered 
these words in order to accomplish his purpose: “If Rama, the son of 


Dasaratha, be righteous, true to his word, and unrivaled in manly valor, then 
may you slay Ravani.” 

[32—37] When he had spoken in this fashion, fortunate Laksmana, heroic 
slayer of enemy heroes, drew that straight-flying arrow back to his ear. 
Then, charging it with the weapon-spell of Indra, he shot it at Indrajit in 
battle. It severed Indrajit’s majestic head—with its helmet and blazing 
earrings—from his body, before falling to the ground. Lying on the ground, 
drenched with blood, severed from his shoulders, the huge head of the 
raksasa’s son looked like burnished gold. Slain in this fashion, the son of 
Ravana collapsed instantly, sprawling on the ground, along with his armor, 
helmet, and bow. Now, once Indrajit was slain, all the monkeys along with 
Vibhisana raised a shout, rejoicing, as did the gods at the death of Vrtra. 
Then in the heavens there arose a mighty shout on the part of the great seers 
and all beings, including the gandharvas and apsarases. 

[38-42] Realizing that their champion had fallen, the vast raksasa host 
fled in all directions, being slaughtered by the tawny monkeys, who now 
had a victorious air. Being slaughtered by the monkeys, all the raksasas 
dropped their weapons and ran, dazed, toward Lanka. In their panic, all the 
rdksasas fled by the hundreds in many directions, abandoning their 
weapons—spears, swords, and battle-axes. Some, harried by the monkeys 
and terrified, entered Lanka. Some threw themselves into the sea, while 
others took refuge on the mountain. Of the thousands of raksasas who had 
seen Indrajit slain and lying on the battlefield, not a single one was to be 
found. 

[43-48] Once Indrajit had fallen, the raksasas vanished in all directions, 
just as do the solar rays when the sun has set behind the western mountain. 
Like the sun when its rays grow faint, or fire, the purifier, when it dies out, 
that warrior of immense blazing energy lay there, stripped of life, his limbs 
sprawling. Then, once the son of the raksasa lord had fallen, the world—its 
enemy destroyed, its oppression nearly at an end—was filled with joy. And 
Lord Sakra himself, along with all the bulls among the gods, was delighted 
when that rdksasa of evil deeds was slain. The waters and the heavens 
became limpid and the daityas and danavas assembled and rejoiced when 
that terror to all the worlds had fallen. And all the gods, gandharvas, and 
danavas together cried, “May the brahmans now move about free from 
anxiety, their impurities removed.” 


[49-54] Then, seeing that warrior of unrivaled strength, a bull among 
raksasas, sons of chaos, slain in battle, the delighted leaders of the troops of 
tawny monkeys rejoiced. And Vibhisana, Hanuman, and Jambavan, the 
troop leader of the apes, praising Laksmana, rejoiced as well in his victory. 
Their goal obtained, the leaping monkeys pressed close around that scion of 
the Raghus and stood there, roaring, howling, and bellowing. Beating their 
tails on the ground and clapping their upper arms, the monkeys raised a 
shout, “Laksmana has triumphed!” Their hearts delighted, the monkeys, 
great and small, embraced one another as they chattered about Raghava’s 
exploits. When his dear friends had witnessed Laksmana’s all-but- 
impossible feat in battle, they were delighted. And the gods, seeing that 
Indra’s foe had been slain, felt in their hearts the greatest delight. 


Sarga 79 

[1-5] When Laksmana of auspicious marks, his body drenched with blood, 
had slain in battle the conqueror of Sakra, he was delighted. Then mighty 
and immensely powerful Laksmana, taking Jambavan, Hanuman, and all 
the forest-dwelling monkeys with him, went straightaway, leaning on 
Vibhisana and Hanuman, to where Sugriva and Raghava_ waited. 
Approaching Rama, Saumitri greeted him respectfully and stood there at his 
brother’s side, as might Visnu, Indra’s younger brother, at the side of his 
brother, Sakra. That hero then reported to him the horrific slaughter of 
Indrajit. Then Vibhisana, in delight, told Rama that great Laksmana had cut 
off Ravani’s head. 

[6-9] The bull among men, Rama, took Laksmana on his lap and 
embraced him tightly. He kissed him on the head and, swiftly stroking him 
again and again, he spoke these words, comforting him: “You, who can 
accomplish all-but-impossible deeds, have performed a _ supremely 
auspicious feat. Today, I have been freed from my enemy. Surely Ravana 
himself will now come forth with a vast array of troops, once he learns that 
his son has been struck down. And then, surrounded by my own vast army, 
I shall kill the lord of the raksasas, so difficult to defeat, as he marches 
forth, burning with grief at the slaying of his son. Laksmana, now that you, 
my guardian, have slain the conqueror of Sakra, both Sita and the earth 
itself have been placed within my grasp.” 


[10-12] Having thus embraced and comforted his brother, Rama 
Raghava, delighted, spoke these words, addressing Susena: “Wise Saumitri, 
so loving of his friends, is still riddled with darts. You must act in such a 
way that he is restored to health. You must immediately rid Saumitri and 
Vibhisana of these arrows. And you must assiduously heal the others among 
the heroic ape and monkey troops—who fight with trees—who were 
wounded and pierced with darts as they fought.” 

[13-18] Addressed in this fashion by Rama, Susena, the great troop 
leader of the tawny monkeys, held a powerful medicinal herb to 
Laksmana’s nose. The moment he smelled its fragrance, the arrows fell 
away from him, his pain subsided, and his wounds healed over. At 
Raghava’s command, Susena treated his comrades, starting with Vibhisana, 
as well as all the monkey leaders. Saumitri was instantly restored to his 
normal state. The darts were removed, his fever had subsided, and he was 
free of pain and in good spirits. Then, when they saw Saumitri rise up 
restored to health and in good spirits, Rama, along with Sugriva, the lord of 
the leaping monkeys, Vibhisana, and Jambavan, lord of the apes, rejoiced 
together with their troops for a long time. Great Dasarathi praised 
Laksmana’s all-but-impossible feat, while the foremost of the troop leaders 
were delighted upon hearing that the conqueror of Sakra had fallen in battle. 


Sarga 80 

[1-3] Upon hearing that Indrajit had been slain, the ministers of ten-necked 
Paulastya confirmed the news for themselves and then, in great distress, 
reported it to him: “Great and glorious king! With Vibhisana’s help, 
Laksmana has slain your son in battle right before our eyes. Encountering 
another heroic warrior, that heroic warrior who was unvanquished in battle, 
your heroic son, the conqueror of the lord of the all-wise gods, has been 
slain by Laksmana.” 

[4-9] When he heard about the grievous, terrible, and horrifying death of 
his son Indrajit in battle, he fell into a profound stupor. Regaining his wits 
after a long time, the king, that bull among raksasas, was overwhelmed 
with grief for his son. Despondent, his senses reeling, he gave way to 
lamentation: “Alas, my dear child! Leader of the raksasa host! Great 
chariot-warrior! How could you, who had conquered Indra, have 
succumbed this day to the power of Laksmana? When roused to anger in 


battle, you could surely, with your arrows, have cut to pieces even K@la or 
Yama, the ender of all things, or even the peaks of Mount Mandara. What 
then to speak of Laksmana? Today King Vaivasvata has risen greatly in my 
estimation. For he has now brought you, great-armed warrior, under the 
power of time. This is the way of brave warriors, even among all the hosts 
of the immortal gods. A man who gives up his life for his lord attains 
heaven. 

[10-15] “This night all the hosts of the gods along with the guardians of 
the world and the seers, having seen Indrajit slain, will sleep soundly, freed 
from fear. Today, through the loss of Indrajit alone, all the three worlds and 
the forest-covered earth seem as if empty to me. Today, in the inner 
apartments, I shall hear the cries of the daughters of the raksasas, sons of 
chaos, like the shrill trumpeting of a herd of elephant cows in a mountain 
cavern. Where have you gone, scorcher of your foes, giving up your 
succession to the throne and abandoning Lanka and all of us—the rdaksasas, 
your mother, your wife, and me? Surely it was for you, hero, to have 
performed the funerary rites when I had gone to the realm of Yama. But 
now you have reversed this. Since Sugriva, Raghava, and Laksmana yet 
live, where have you gone, abandoning us without first removing this 
source of all my torment?” 

[16-21] But even as Ravana, lord of the rdksasas, was afflicted with 
lamentations such as these, an immense anger, born of the loss of his son, 
took hold of him. His appearance, which was dreadful by nature, was now 
transfigured with the fire of his wrath, so that it was as unbearable as that of 
Rudra when he is filled with wrath. And from the furious rdksasa’s eyes fell 
teardrops, like flaming drops of oil from two blazing lamps. And as he 
gnashed his teeth, a grinding sound was heard, as if from some vast engine 
being turned by the danavas. In whichever direction he cast his glance, the 
raksasas, petrified with terror, hid themselves. For in his rage, he was like 
the fire at the end of a cosmic era. The rdksasas did not dare come near him 
as he glared in all directions in his rage, like Yama, the ender of all things, 
intent upon devouring everything in the world. 

[22—28] Then, in a towering rage, Ravana, lord of the raksasas, spoke in 
their midst, anxious to steady them in battle: “Over the course of thousands 
of years, I practiced all-but-impossible austerities whereby, time after time, 
self-existent Brahma was fully gratified. As a result of these austerities, 


through the grace of self-existent Brahma, I have nothing to fear from either 
the asuras or the gods. And the armor, as resplendent as the sun, that 
Brahma gave me was never pierced by vajra or javelin in any of my battles 
with the gods and asuras. Who then, even Indra, smasher of citadels 
himself, can approach me, when, this very day, equipped with that armor 
and mounted in my chariot, I take my stand in combat on the battlefield. 
Now, for the slaughter of Rama and Laksmana in the ultimate battle, bring 
forth to the blare of hundreds of trumpets the great and terrible bow and 
arrows that were given to me during my battles with the gods and asuras by 
self-existent Brahma, who was pleased with me.” 

[29-34] Tormented by the killing of his son and in the grip of his rage, 
heroic Ravana, reflecting in his mind, resolved to kill Sita. The fearsome 
raksasa, his eyes red, gazed in his dejection at all the fearsome-looking 
night-roaming rdksasas, who were murmuring dejectedly, and said: “A 
short time ago, in order to deceive the forest-dwelling monkeys, my 
beloved son, employing his power of illusion, showed them an apparition of 
a murdered woman, saying, ‘Here is your Sita!’ Now I will make that a 
reality, just to please myself. I shall murder Vaideht, so devoted to that false 
kshatriya!” When he had addressed his ministers in this fashion, he quickly 
took up his sword. In his rage, Ravana hurriedly seized his magnificent 
sword, which shone like a cloudless sky, and drew it. Then, surrounded by 
his ministers, his mind reeling with grief for his son, he swiftly rushed forth 
from the assembly hall to where Maithili was. 

[35-38] Seeing that raksasa rushing forth, the raksasas roared like lions. 
Perceiving that he was enraged, they huddled together and said: “When the 
two brothers see Ravana today they will tremble. For in his wrath he 
conquered the four guardians of the world and laid low many another foe in 
battle.” As they were conversing together, Ravana, beside himself with 
rage, went storming toward Vaideht, who was in the asoka grove. Although 
his friends, concerned for his welfare, tried to restrain him, he rushed on in 
his towering rage, like the angry planet Mars racing toward Rohini in the 
heavens. 

[39-49] Blameless Maithilt, who was guarded by the raksasa women, 
spied the furious raksasa brandishing his magnificent sword. Seeing him 
armed with a sword and not turning back, though his friends tried many 
times to restrain him, Janaka’s daughter was terrified: “From the way he is 


racing toward me, suffused with rage, it is clear that this evil-minded wretch 
is going to kill me, as if I had no one to protect me, although, in fact, I do. 
For no matter how many times he pressed me, saying, ‘Be my wife, enjoy 
yourself!’ I rejected him, devoted as I am to my husband. It is clear that 
because I rejected him as a suitor, he has given up all hope of winning me. 
Overwhelmed with anger and mad passion, he is now on the point of 
murdering me. Or perhaps just now, on my account, the ignoble creature 
has slain in battle the brothers Rama and Laksmana, tigers among men. Ah! 
What an evil fate that I should be the cause of the princes’ death. For, 
foolish wretch that I am, I did not heed the advice of Hanuman. If only I 
had returned, mounted on his back, then, seated blamelessly in my 
husband’s lap, I should not now be grieving in this fashion. I think that 
when Kausalya, who has but one son, hears that her son has been slain in 
battle, her heart will surely break. For weeping, she will surely call fondly 
to mind that great man’s birth, childhood, youth, righteous deeds, and 
beauty. Losing all hope upon the slaughter of her son, she will perform his 
funerary rites. Then, in her distraction, she will surely mount the funeral 
pyre or hurl herself into the water. Damn that hunchbacked slut Manthara 
and her wicked scheming! It is on her account that Kausalya must endure 
such suffering.” 

[50-57] Now, when the wise rdksasa Suparsva saw poor Maithili 
lamenting in this fashion, like the constellation Rohini occluded by a hostile 
planet and so cut off from the moon, her lord, he spoke these words to 
Ravana, lord of the raksasas, whose ministers were attempting to restrain 
him: “How can you, ten-necked Ravana, the younger brother of Kubera 
Vaisravana himself, even think of killing Vaidehi, abandoning righteousness 
in your anger? You have completed your discipleship in vedic knowledge, 
and you are ever devoted to the proper duties of your rank. How then, 
heroic lord of the raksasas, can you possibly think of killing a woman? You 
should spare Maithilt, your majesty, endowed as she is with such beauty, 
and instead, together with us, unleash your wrath upon Raghava himself. So 
you must make your preparations this very day, the fourteenth of the dark 
fortnight. Then, surrounded by your troops, you shall march forth to victory 
tomorrow on the new-moon day. A wise and heroic warrior, armed with a 
sword and equipped with a chariot, you, sir, mounted in your splendid 
chariot, will slay Rama Dasarathi and win Maithilt.” Mighty and evil- 


minded Ravana paid heed to that advice that was offered by his friend, in 
keeping as it was with righteousness. Then, returning to his residence, he 
went once more to his assembly hall surrounded by his friends. 


Sarga 81 

[1-5] Upon entering his assembly hall, the king sat down on his splendid 
throne, despondent and deeply pained, snarling like an angry lion. 
Tormented by the loss of his son, immensely powerful Ravana then 
addressed the leaders of his army, who stood with their hands cupped in 
reverence: “All of you gentlemen are to march forth surrounded by the 
entire cavalry and elephant corps and accompanied by the chariot divisions 
and infantry. Exerting yourselves, you must isolate Rama, surround him, 
and then slay him in battle with a hail of arrows, like storm clouds in the 
rainy seasons. Otherwise tomorrow, in a great battle, as the whole world 
watches, I shall kill Rama, whose limbs you gentlemen will have pierced 
with your sharp arrows.” 

[6-9] When the raksasas had received these instructions from the lord of 
the rdksasas, they set forth swiftly, surrounded by chariots and columns of 
elephants. And so at sunrise a fearsome and tumultuous battle broke out 
between the raksasas and the monkeys. Then the monkeys and the rdksasas 
assaulted one another with various types of clubs, darts, swords, and battle- 
axes. Rivers of blood began to flow, carrying logjams of corpses. They had 
elephants and chariots for their banks, warhorses for their fish, and battle 
standards for their trees. 

[10-14] Springing up again and again in battle, those splendid monkeys 
smashed battle standards, armor, chariots, horses, and all kinds of weapons. 
With their sharp fangs and their claws, the leaping monkeys rent the hair, 
ears, foreheads, and noses of the raksasas. A hundred of those bulls among 
monkeys swarmed about each raksasa in battle, as birds might a tree laden 
with fruit. Similarly, the raksasas, huge as mountains, belabored the 
fearsome monkeys with darts, swords, battle-axes, and heavy maces. Then 
the vast host of monkeys, being slaughtered by the rdksasas, sought refuge 
with DaSaratha’s son Rama, the refuge of all. 

[15-19] Then mighty Rama of enormous blazing energy took up his bow 
and, plunging into the raksasa host, unleashed a hail of arrows. Once Rama 
had plunged in, fearsome and blazing with the fire of his arrows, the 


raksasas could no more approach him than can clouds approach the sun in 
the heavens. The night-roaming raksasas could witness the very fearsome 
and all-but-impossible feats of Rama in battle only after he had 
accomplished them. Although he was shaking their vast host and crushing 
their great chariot-warriors, they could no more see Rama than can one a 
gale tearing through a forest. Although they saw that through the skill of 
Rama their forces had been cut to pieces, shattered, scorched with arrows, 
broken, and afflicted by weapons, they could not catch sight of him, so 
swiftly did he move. 

[20-27] Although Raghava was striking their very bodies, they could no 
more see him than can creatures see the inner spirit that resides among the 
objects of sense. “He is slaughtering the elephant corps!” “He is 
slaughtering the great chariot-warriors!” “With his sharp arrows he is 
slaughtering the infantry along with the cavalry!” So thinking, because of 
their seeming similarity to Rama, all the raksasas began in their fury to 
slaughter one another in battle, slaying those raksasas who resembled 
Raghava. And since great Rama had befuddled them with the mighty, 
divine weapon-spell of the gandharvas, they could not see him, even 
though he was burning up the army of his foes. Sometimes the raksasas 
saw a thousand Ramas in battle, while at other times they saw but a single 
Kakutstha in that great conflict. Sometimes they would see only the golden 
tip of the great warrior’s bow, whirling about like a circle of blazing fire, 
but not Raghava himself. As he massacred the rdksasas in battle, Rama 
appeared to them like a spinning wheel, as does the wheel of time to all 
creatures. It had his body for its hub, his power for its flames, his arrows for 
its spokes, his bow for its rim, the sound of his bowstring striking his 
armguard for its rumbling, his qualities of blazing energy and mental 
brilliance for its radiance, and the power of his divine weapon-spell for its 
sharp edge. 

[28-33] Thus, in the eighth part of a day, did Rama with his arrows like 
flames of fire single-handedly annihilate the forces of the raksasas, who 
could take on any form at will: a host of ten thousand chariots as swift as 
the wind, eighteen thousand mighty war-elephants, fourteen thousand 
battle-steeds along with their riders, and a full two hundred thousand 
raksasa foot soldiers. Their horses slaughtered, their chariots smashed, and 
their battle standards shattered, the remnants of the night-roaming raksasas 


fled back to the citadel of Lanka, exhausted. With its slaughtered elephants, 
foot soldiers, and horses, the battlefield resembled the playground of 
wrathful Rudra, wielder of the Pinaka. The gods, along with the 
gandharvas, perfected beings, and supreme seers, praised that feat of Rama, 
crying, “Excellent! Excellent!” 

[34-35] Then Rama addressed Sugriva, who stood nearby, saying, “The 
power of this divine weapon-spell belongs only to me and three-eyed Siva.” 
When he had slaughtered the raksasa host, great Rama, who had conquered 
all fatigue and who was the equal of Sakra in the use of weapons and divine 
weapon-spells, was praised by the delighted hosts of the gods. 


Sarga 82 

[1-4] Thousands of war-elephants and battle-steeds with their riders, 
thousands of chariots, blazing like fire and flying their battle flags, 
thousands of valiant raksasas, who could take on any form at will, were 
armed with maces and iron clubs, and were resplendent with their golden 
battle standards—all of these sent forth by Ravana, Rama, tireless in action, 
had now slaughtered with his sharp arrows adorned with burnished gold. 
When the remnants of the night-roaming rdksasa troops had seen what had 
happened and the raksasa women had heard about it, they huddled together 
in panic, despondent and overwhelmed with gloomy thought. 

[S5—11] The raksasa women—widows, those who had lost their sons, and 
those who had lost their kinsmen—were grief-stricken. Wailing, they 
huddled together and lamented thus: “How could that potbellied, 
snaggletoothed hag Strpanakha have possibly made advances in the forest 
to Rama, who is as handsome as Kandarpa, the god of love? Rama is 
delicate, yet immensely powerful. He is devoted to the welfare of all beings. 
He is mighty, fair of face, and replete with every virtue. This raksasa 
woman, on the other hand, with her ugly face, is hideous and lacking in 
every virtue. Really, someone ought to kill her. How, after seeing him, 
could that lustful creature have possibly hoped to win him? It is just the bad 
luck of our race that this white-haired crone, so ill-suited to Raghava, 
should have made advances to him. For this was an impermissible and 
ludicrous act, condemned by everyone, and it has led to the destruction of 
Disana, Khara, and the raksasas in general. It was on her account that 


Ravana incurred this tremendous enmity. And so the ten-necked raksasa 
abducted Sita to his own destruction. 

[12-17] “Yet although he has not won over Sita, Janaka’s daughter, 
Ravana has forged an undying enmity with mighty Raghava. When he 
heard that the raksasa Viradha, who was assaulting Vaidehi, had been killed 
by Rama single-handedly, that should have been a sufficient warning. Then, 
too, in Janasthana, Rama slaughtered fourteen thousand rdksasas of 
fearsome deeds with his arrows, which were like flames of fire. And he 
slew Khara, Disana, and Trisiras in battle with arrows that blazed like the 
sun. That too should have been a sufficient warning. Next he slew the 
blood-guzzling Kabandha, whose arms were a league in length and who 
bellowed in a transport of rage. That too should have been a sufficient 
warning. Rama also slew thousand-eyed Indra’s mighty son Valin, who 
resembled a storm cloud. That too should have been a sufficient warning. 

[18-21] “Sugriva, his dreams shattered, had been dwelling despondently 
on Mount Rsyamitika. Rama established him in royal sovereignty. That too 
should have been a sufficient warning. In his delusion, Ravana paid no heed 
to the fitting words spoken by Vibhisana, though they were fully in accord 
with righteousness and polity and were beneficial for all the rdksasas. If 
only Ravana, the younger brother of Kubera, bestower of wealth, had acted 
upon Vibhisana’s advice, this city of Lanka would not have become a 
cremation ground, overwhelmed by sorrow. Even when he heard that 
immensely powerful Kumbhakarna had been slain by Raghava and that his 
own beloved son Indrajit had been slain as well, Ravana still did not 
understand. 

[22—27] “ ‘My son has been slain in battle! My brother has been slain! 
My husband has been slain!’ Such are the cries that are heard in household 
after household of the raksasas. For in battle valiant Rama has destroyed 
chariots, horses, elephants, and rdksasa foot soldiers by the hundreds of 
thousands. It must be Rudra, Visnu, great Indra of the hundred sacrifices, or 
even Yama himself, the ender of all things, who, in the guise of Rama, is 
slaughtering us. With our heroes slain by Rama, we have lost all hope of 
life. Foreseeing no end to this terror and bereft of our protectors, we lament. 
Having been granted his boon, the valiant ten-necked Ravana does not 
realize the terrible danger he faces at Rama’s hands in battle. For not even 


the gods, the gandharvas, the pisdacas, or the raksasas can save one who is 
assailed by Rama in battle. 

[28-31] “Moreover, portents regularly appear to Ravana in battle after 
battle, foretelling his death at Rama’s hands. For Grandfather Brahma, 
being gratified, granted Ravana invulnerability to the gods, danavas, and 
raksasas. But Ravana never requested invulnerability to men. I believe that 
this is undoubtedly that very same dangerous vulnerability to men that has 
now presented itself. It is sure to prove fatal to both Ravana and the 
raksasas. Oppressed by the mighty raksasa through the gift of his boon, the 
wise gods worshiped Grandfather Brahma with fierce austerities. 

[32-39] “Gratified, the Grandfather, great Brahma, spoke these grave 
words to all the divinities for their benefit: ‘From this day hence, all the 
danavas and raksasas will eternally wander the three worlds constantly 
beset by danger.’ Then all the gods, led by Indra, came together and 
propitiated the great god, bull-bannered Siva, destroyer of Tripura. 
Gratified, the great god Siva spoke these words to the gods: ‘For your sake, 
a woman shall be born who will bring about the destruction of the 
raksasas.’ Employed by the gods, this destroyer of the rdksasas, Sita, will 
devour us along with Ravana, just as, long ago, famine was used to devour 
the danavas. This dreadful lamentation suffused with sorrow is the direct 
result of the misconduct of this evil-minded criminal Ravana. Afflicted as 
we are by Raghava, we can see no one in the world who can afford us 
refuge, any more than one could afford refuge to creatures afflicted by Kala 
himself at the end of a cosmic era.” Thus did all the women of the night- 
roaming raksasas loudly and grievously lament. Afflicted and tormented by 
a terrible fear, they grew despondent, holding one another in their arms. 


Sarga 83 
[1—8] Ravana heard that piteous sound, the lamentation of the grief-stricken 
rdksasa women, in household after household throughout Lanka. Heaving a 
deep sigh, he remained for a moment lost in thought. Then, seized with a 
towering rage, Ravana became fearsome to look upon. Gnawing at his lip, 
his eyes red with rage, flaring up like the fire of universal destruction, he 
was unbearable to look upon, even for the raksasas. The lord of the 
raksasas then addressed the raksasas who stood near him, their speech 
slurred with fear, as if to scorch them with his gaze: “Quickly! On my 


authority, tell Mahodara, Mahaparsva, and the rdksasa Viripaksa, ‘Send 
forth the troops!’ ” Hearing the king’s words and acting on his orders, the 
raksasas, although stricken with fear, exhorted the raksasa warriors, who 
retained their composure. Then all those rdksasas of fearsome aspect said, 
“So be it!” After performing benedictory rites, they all presented 
themselves before Ravana. Honoring Ravana in the prescribed fashion, all 
of those great chariot-warriors stood with their hands cupped in reverence, 
eager for the victory of their lord. 

[9-15] Then, laughing but beside himself with rage, Ravana addressed 
Mahodara, Mahaparsva, and the rdksasa Virtipaksa: “This very day, with 
arrows loosed from my bow and blazing like the sun at the end of a cosmic 
era, I shall lead Raghava and Laksmana to the abode of Yama. This very 
day, through the slaughter of my enemies, I shall avenge Khara, 
Kumbhakarna, Prahasta, and Indrajit. Obscured by the clouds of my arrows, 
the atmosphere, directions, rivers, and even the ocean itself shall disappear 
from view. This very day, with waves in the form of arrows springing from 
the ocean that is my bow, I shall annihilate the masses of monkey troops, 
one division after another. This very day, like a bull elephant, I shall wreak 
havoc upon the lotus ponds that are the monkey troops, their faces like full- 
blown lotuses, their color that of lotus filaments. This very day, in battle the 
leaders of the monkey troops, their faces riddled with arrows, shall adorn 
the earth, like lotuses with their protruding stalks. 

[16—20] “With each of the arrows I let fly this day in battle, I shall pierce 
hundreds and hundreds of the tawny monkeys, so ferocious in combat and 
armed with trees. Through the slaughter of the enemy, I shall, this very day, 
wipe away the tears of these women whose husbands, brothers, and sons 
have been slain. This very day, with the monkeys strewn about pierced by 
my arrows and robbed of life, I shall make it so that one will have to strain 
to see the surface of the earth. I shall, this very day, let all the jackals, 
vultures, and other carnivorous beasts gorge on the flesh of my enemies rent 
by my arrows. Quickly! Get my chariot ready. Bring my bow at once! Let 
those night-roaming raksasas who remain follow me into battle.” 

[21—25] When Mahaparsva heard those words of his, he addressed these 
words to the commanders of the army, who stood nearby, “Assemble the 
troops at once!” And the commanders of the army then, in great agitation, 
raced about Lanka with rapid strides, rousting the raksasas from house after 


house. In a short time, fearsome-faced rdksasas of fearsome valor issued 
forth, roaring. They had mighty arms and bore all manner of weapons: 
swords, spears, lances, maces, cudgels, ploughshares, sharp-edged javelins, 
huge mallets and war hammers, clubs, shining discuses, sharp battle-axes, 
short javelins, hundred-slayers, and other splendid weapons. 

[26-30] Then, acting on Ravana’s orders, four commanders of the army 
swiftly brought up a chariot yoked with eight horses and driven by a 
charioteer. Ravana then mounted that celestial chariot, which blazed with its 
own splendor. In the excess of his power, it seemed as if he would tear up 
the earth itself. With Ravana’s consent, Mahaparsva, Mahodara, and the 
unassailable Virtpaksa then mounted their chariots. Bellowing in their 
excitement, as if to rend the earth itself, they marched forth, eager for 
victory, releasing fearsome roars. And thus, endowed with blazing energy 
and surrounded by the hosts of rdksasa troops, Ravana marched forth. 
Holding his bow aloft, he resembled Yama, who brings time itself to an end. 

[31-37] Then, in his chariot drawn by swift horses, that great chariot- 
warrior issued forth through the gate to where Rama and Laksmana stood. 
Suddenly the sun grew dim and the directions were shrouded in darkness. 
Fierce birds screeched and the earth shook. It rained blood and the horses 
stumbled. A vulture alighted on the tip of his battle standard and jackals 
howled inauspiciously. His left eye throbbed and his left arm trembled. His 
face grew pale; his voice grew faint. And so, as the rdksasa ten-necked 
Ravana raced forth to war, these manifestations appeared, presaging his 
death in battle. A blazing meteor fell from the sky with a sound like that of 
a thunderclap. Vultures screeched inauspiciously, their cries echoed by the 
crows. But heedless of these terrible portents that appeared before him, 
Ravana, in his delusion, marched forth, impelled by his own impending 
doom, to seek his own destruction. 

[38-42] Hearing the rumbling of the great rdksasas’ chariots, the 
monkey army hurled itself into battle. A hugely tumultuous battle then 
broke out between the monkeys and the rdksasas as they challenged one 
another in their fury, eager for victory. Then, with arrows adorned with 
gold, ten-necked Ravana, in his rage, wrought a tremendous slaughter 
among the monkey hosts. Some of the wrinkle-faced monkeys were 
beheaded by Ravana, while others were struck dead, their breathing stopped 
forever. Still others had their flanks ripped open. Some had their heads 


shattered, while others had their eyes torn out. Wherever ten-faced Ravana 
moved through the battle in his chariot, his eyes wide with fury, the troop 
leaders of the tawny monkeys could not withstand the crushing force of his 
arrows. 


Sarga 84 

[1-4] Thus did Ravana litter the ground, covering it with tawny monkeys, 
their limbs severed by his arrows. The leaping monkeys could no more 
withstand Ravana’s single-handed and irresistible barrage of arrows than 
can moths a blazing fire. Tormented by those sharp arrows, they ran 
shrieking in all directions, as might elephants burned by the flames of a 
forest fire that surrounds them. Ravana careened through the battle, 
scattering with his arrows the hosts of leaping monkeys, as would a mighty 
wind great banks of clouds. 

[S—12] Having swiftly wrought his slaughter of the forest-dwelling 
monkeys, the raksasa lord then immediately approached Raghava in battle. 
When Sugriva saw his monkeys broken in battle and fleeing in all 
directions, he placed Susena in charge of the encampment and resolved to 
enter the fight at once. Having placed that heroic monkey, his equal, in 
charge, Sugriva turned his face toward the enemy and set forth armed with a 
tree. All the troop leaders, whether at his side or in his train, voluntarily 
followed him, wielding huge boulders and various gigantic trees. Roaring 
with a mighty voice in battle, great Sugriva began to slaughter the principal 
raksasas, felling various others as well. The gigantic lord of the monkeys 
knocked down the raksasas, as the mighty gale at the end of a cosmic era 
does full-grown trees. He showered hails of stones upon the raksasa hosts, 
just as a storm cloud might a shower of hailstones on flocks of birds in the 
forest. Their heads shattered by the hails of boulders released by the king of 
the monkeys, the rdksasas crumpled like mountains cut to pieces. 

[13-16] As the rdaksasas, routed, falling, and crying out, were being 
annihilated on every side by Sugriva, the unassailable raksasa Virupaksa, 
calling out his own name, took up his bow and, leaping from his chariot, 
mounted the back of a war-elephant. Once the great chariot-warrior 
Virupaksa had mounted the elephant, he charged at the monkeys, 
unleashing a terrifying roar. He loosed fearsome arrows at Sugriva in the 


vanguard of the army and, rallying the frightened raksasas, he made them 
hold their lines. 

[17-24] Completely riddled with sharp arrows by that rdksasa, the 
irascible lord of the monkeys flew into a rage and resolved to kill him. 
Then, uprooting a tree, the heroic tawny monkey leapt forward and, in 
battle, struck Virtiipaksa’s great war-elephant in the face. Stricken with that 
blow by Sugriva, the great elephant staggered back a bow length and 
collapsed, bellowing. Jumping clear of the wounded elephant, the mighty 
rdaksasa turned to face the monkey, who stood his ground. Seizing his sword 
and oxhide shield, he advanced upon Sugriva with swift strides, reviling 
him. In his rage at Virtipaksa, Sugriva seized a boulder as huge as a storm 
cloud and hurled it at him. Seeing that boulder hurtling toward him, the 
immensely valiant bull among rdksasas dodged it and then struck Sugriva 
with his sword. In a towering rage, he cut away Sugriva’s armor with his 
sword there in the forefront of battle. Struck with that sword, the monkey 
fell. 

[25—33] But the fallen monkey sprang up and unleashed a blow with the 
palm of his hand, which, with its terrifying sound, was like a thunderbolt. 
The raksasa, however, skillfully dodged the blow that Sugriva had dealt 
and in return struck him on the chest with his fist. Now, when Sugriva, lord 
of the monkeys, saw that the raksasa had dodged his blow, he grew even 
more enraged. Then, spying an opening, the monkey, in his rage, brought 
his huge palm down upon Viriipaksa’s temple. Struck by that palm, which 
was like the thunderbolt of great Indra, he fell to the ground, drenched in 
gore and vomiting blood. Drenched with foaming blood, his eyes rolling 
with rage, Virtipaksa appeared to the monkeys to have his eyes still more 
disfigured than before. The monkeys watched their enemy as, drenched in 
blood, he rolled in convulsions from side to side, moaning piteously. Then 
those vast and powerful armies—that of the monkeys and that of the 
raksasas—who were engaged in battle, roared fearsomely, like two great 
oceans that have crashed beyond their shorelines. When the combined host 
of the monkeys and the rdksasas saw the immensely powerful raksasa 
Virupaksa, his eyes disfigured, slain by the king of the tawny monkeys, it 
became as agitated as the Ganges in raging flood. 


Sarga 85 


[1-7] As the two armies were being rapidly slaughtered by each other in 
that tremendous battle, they both were vastly diminished, like two lakes in 
the scorching heat of summer. At the slaughter of his troops and the slaying 
of Virtpaksa, Ravana, lord of the raksasas, grew doubly furious. Seeing his 
army decimated by the wrinkle-faced monkeys and thus diminished, he 
realized that the fortunes of war had turned against him and he grew 
agitated. He said to Mahodara, tamer of his foes, who stood beside him: “At 
this point, great-armed warrior, you are my only hope of victory: Annihilate 
the army of our enemies, hero! Demonstrate this day your valor! Now is the 
time to repay your obligation to your master. Fight bravely!” Addressed in 
this fashion, Mahodara replied, “So be it,” to the rdksasa lord and then 
plunged into the enemy army, like a moth into a fire. Then, urged on by his 
master’s words and his own valor, that immensely powerful rdksasa, filled 
with blazing energy, sowed destruction among the monkeys. 

[8—12] Then Sugriva, seeing the vast monkey army routed, ran toward 
Mahodara, who happened to be nearby. Seizing a huge and fearsome 
boulder as big as a mountain, the immensely powerful lord of the tawny 
monkeys hurled it in order to kill Mahodara. When Mahodara saw that 
unstoppable boulder hurtling violently toward him, he was not in the least 
agitated, and he cut it to pieces with his arrows. Shattered into a thousand 
fragments by the raksasa with his torrents of arrows, the boulder fell to 
earth, like a frenzied flock of vultures descending. When Sugriva saw that 
his boulder had been shattered, he was beside himself with rage. Uprooting 
a sala tree, he hurled it at the rdksasa in the forefront of battle. But that 
heroic conqueror of enemy citadels cut it to pieces with his arrows. 

[13-16] In his rage, Sugriva then spied an iron club that had fallen to the 
ground. He brandished that blazing iron club and made a display of it 
before his foe. Then, with its tip, he violently struck down Mahodara’s 
splendid horses. Jumping down from his huge chariot, now that its horses 
had been slain, the heroic rdksasa Mahodara, in his rage, seized a mace. 
Like two bellowing bulls, the two heroes closed with each other in combat. 
With one holding a mace and the other an iron club, they resembled two 
storm clouds streaked with lightning. The lord of the tawny monkeys struck 
the rdksasa’s mace with his iron club; but, shattered by that mace, his iron 
club fell to the ground. 


[17-21] Then Sugriva, filled with blazing energy, snatched up from the 
ground a fearsome iron cudgel, fully ornamented with gold. Raising it aloft, 
he threw it, just as Mahodara hurled a second mace. The two collided and 
fell, shattered, to the earth. Their weapons shattered, the two warriors 
closed in combat with their fists. Filled with strength and blazing energy, 
they resembled two blazing fires, eaters of oblations. They struck at each 
other and roared again and again. Slapping each other with their open 
hands, they both fell to the ground. Jumping swiftly to their feet, they struck 
each other once again. The two heroes flailed at each other with their arms, 
yet neither could get the better of the other. 

[22—29] Then the immensely swift raksasa Mahodara seized a sword and 
a shield that were lying nearby. But swifter still, Sugriva, foremost of 
monkeys, also seized a huge sword and shield that had fallen. Their very 
bodies suffused with rage, the two warriors, skilled in the use of weapons, 
hurled themselves at each other on the battlefield, swords raised, roaring in 
the fury of battle. Raging at each other and intent on victory, the two 
quickly circled each other to the right and to the left. Then the immensely 
swift hero, evil-minded Mahodara, praiseworthy for his valor, brought his 
sword down upon Sugriva’s great shield. The sword lodged in the shield; 
and, as Mahodara struggled to free it, that elephant among monkeys, with 
his sword, cut off the rdksasa’s head, along with its helmet and earrings. 
When they saw that, the army of the raksasa lord—who had fallen to the 
ground with his head cut off—fled. Having slain Mahodara, the tawny 
monkey was overjoyed, and he and his monkeys roared in unison. Ten- 
necked Ravana was enraged, while Raghava appeared delighted. 


Sarga 86 

[1-4] Once Mahodara had been struck down, the immensely powerful 
Mahaparsva wrought havoc with his arrows upon Angada’s fearsome army. 
On every side, he struck off the heads from the bodies of the principal 
monkeys, just as the wind might fruit from its stalk. In a towering rage, the 
raksasa, with his arrows, cut off the arms and shoulders of some of the 
monkeys and tore open the sides of others. Afflicted by Mahaparsva with 
his hail of arrows, the monkeys, their faces cast down in despair, were 
stunned. 


[S—11] Now, when great-armed Angada saw that his army was cowed 
and afflicted by the raksasa, he surged powerfully forward, like the ocean 
on the new- or full-moon day. Seizing an iron club, whose radiance was like 
that of the sun’s rays, the foremost of monkeys brought it down in combat 
upon Mahaparsva. Stunned by that blow, Mahaparsva fell senseless from 
his chariot to the ground along with his charioteer. At this point, the 
extraordinarily powerful Gavaksa, filled with blazing energy and 
resembling a mass of black collyrium, accompanied by Jambavan, the king 
of the apes, burst forth from his own troop, which resembled a great storm 
cloud. In his rage, he seized a huge boulder that resembled a mountain 
peak, swiftly killed Mahaparsva’s horses, and smashed his chariot. But 
regaining consciousness after a short while, immensely powerful 
Mahaparsva once again riddled Angada with numerous arrows. He struck 
Jambavan, king of the apes, in the center of his chest with three arrows and 
hit Gavaksa with many more. 

[12-19] Now, when Angada saw Gavaksa and Jambavan tormented by 
arrows, he was beside himself with rage, and he seized a fearsome iron 
club. Enraged at that raksasa, who stood at a distance, Valin’s powerful 
son, Angada, grasped with both hands that iron club, whose radiance was 
like that of the sun’s rays, and, whirling it about, he hurled it at Mahaparsva 
in an effort to kill him. Hurled by the powerful monkey, the iron club struck 
the bow and arrows from the rdksasa’s hand and knocked off his helmet. 
Rushing violently upon him in his rage, the valorous son of Valin struck 
him with his palm just below the ear, where his earring hung. But the 
immensely powerful Mahaparsva of blazing splendor was enraged in turn 
and seized an immense battle-axe with one hand. In a towering rage, the 
raksasa brought down that weapon—honed with oil, spotless, solid, and 
made of the essence of the mountains—upon Va4lin’s son. He swung the 
battle-axe powerfully at Angada’s left shoulder blade, but, in his fury, 
Angada dodged tt. 

[20-23] In a towering rage, heroic Angada, equal in valor to his own 
father, clenched his adamantine fist. Knowing all the body’s vital points, he 
brought that fist, whose impact was equal to that of Indra’s thunderbolt, 
down upon the raksasa’s chest, just over his heart. By virtue of that blow 
delivered in that great battle, the raksasa’s heart burst, and he fell at once to 


the ground, dead. When he had fallen to the ground, his army was deeply 
shaken there in that battle, but Ravana flew into a tremendous rage. 


Sarga 87 

[1-4] When Ravana saw that the raksasas Mahodara and Mahaparsva had 
been slain and that the immensely powerful hero Viripaksa had been slain 
before them, a tremendous rage seized hold of him there in that great battle. 
He urged on his charioteer, saying these words: “In killing those two, Rama 
and Laksmana, I shall allay my grief for my slaughtered ministers and my 
besieged city. I shall destroy in battle the tree that is Rama, which dispenses 
fruit and has Sita for its blossom, and whose branches are Sugriva, 
Jambavan, Kumuda, and Nala.” 

[5—10] Causing the ten directions to resound with the rumbling of his 
chariot, that great and splendid chariot-warrior raced swiftly onward and 
charged directly at Raghava. Filled with that sound, the entire earth, along 
with its rivers, mountains, and forests, its boar, deer, and elephants, shook. 
Ravana then produced the extremely horrifying and fearsome divine 
weapon-spell, the Tamasa, bringer of darkness, and, with it, he scorched all 
the monkeys. They fled on every side. When Raghava saw that those 
numerous hosts had been routed in their hundreds by Ravana’s splendid 
arrows, he took up his battle stance. Ravana then spied the unconquerable 
Rama, who stood there with his brother Laksmana like Vasava with Visnu. 
Holding aloft his great bow, the long-armed, lotus-eyed tamer of his foes 
seemed as if to scrape the very sky. 

[11-14] Meanwhile, Raghava, for his part, seeing the monkeys routed in 
battle and Ravana rushing toward him, was delighted. He grasped his bow 
in the middle. Then he began to twang that magnificent bow powerfully and 
loudly, as if to shatter the earth itself. As Ravana came within the range of 
the princes’ arrows, he looked like Rahu, the demon of the eclipse, as he 
bears down upon the sun and the hare-marked moon. The streams of 
Ravana’s arrows and the sound of Rama twanging his bow knocked the 
raksasas down by the hundreds. 

[15-17] Eager to be the first to fight Ravana with his own sharp arrows, 
Laksmana drew his bow and released arrows that were like flames of fire. 
But no sooner had those arrows been released by the bowman Laksmana 
than the immensely powerful Ravana intercepted them in the air with his 


own arrows. He cut down one of Laksmana’s arrows with one of his own, 
three with three, and ten with ten, thus displaying his deftness of hand. 

[18—21] Then, leaving Saumitri aside, Ravana, victorious in battle, 
advanced upon Rama, who stood there as immovable as a mountain. And as 
he advanced upon Rama Raghava in battle, Ravana, his eyes red with rage, 
unleashed hails of arrows upon him. But Rama, seeing those torrents of 
arrows hurtling swiftly toward him as they were loosed from Ravana’s bow, 
quickly took up his crescent-headed arrows. Then, with his sharp, crescent- 
headed arrows, Raghava cut down those torrents of immensely powerful 
arrows, which blazed like angry, venomous serpents. 

[22-27] In this way, they swiftly showered each other—RAaghava, 
Ravana; and Ravana, Raghava—with all manner of sharp arrows. Never yet 
defeated in battle, the two of them circled each other for a long time to the 
left and to the right in an astonishing way, each of them keeping his eyes on 
the trajectory of the other’s arrows. All creatures were terrified as those two 
fierce warriors, resembling Yama and Antaka, ender of all things, fought 
each other, unleashing their arrows. At that time, the sky was completely 
covered with their various arrows, just as it is at the end of the hot season 
by storm clouds laced with streaks of lightning. The streams of their arrows 
—arrows that were immensely powerful, keenly honed, fletched with 
vulture feathers, and extremely swift—made the sky appear to be densely 
covered with latticework. With their arrows, the two heroes then created a 
massive and fearsome darkness, as might two vast storm clouds arising at 
sunset. 

[28—32] A tumultuous battle—like that between Vrtra and Vasava— 
unequaled and unimaginable, then raged between the two warriors, each 
intent on killing the other. Both were armed with splendid bows, both were 
skilled in the use of weapons, both were preeminent among those familiar 
with divine weapon-spells, and they hurled themselves at each other in 
battle. As they maneuvered, waves of arrows preceded them, as might the 
waves of two oceans driven by the wind. Then Ravana, who makes the 
worlds cry out, his hands working swiftly, unleashed a chain of iron arrows 
upon Rama’s forehead. Although he bore that chain of iron arrows—shot 
from that fearsome bow and shining like the petals of a blue lotus—on his 
head, Rama took no harm. 


[33-37] Rama, suffused with rage, muttered sacred mantras and invoked 
the divine weapon-spell of Rudra. Then, taking up his arrows once again, 
that mighty warrior of immense blazing energy bent his bow and let them 
fly. Allowing no interruption in the stream of his arrows, he loosed them 
toward the lord of the raksasas. But those arrows fell harmlessly on the 
rdksasa lord’s impenetrable armor, which resembled a huge storm cloud. 
But then, with a splendid, divine weapon, Rama, skilled in all divine 
weapon-spells, pierced the rdksasa lord through the forehead, as the latter 
stood in his chariot. But those arrows, after shattering the splendid arrows 
of Ravana, were deflected by him and so entered the earth, hissing like five- 
headed serpents. 

[38-42] Having thus thwarted Raghava’s divine weapons, Ravana, 
beside himself with rage, invoked yet another divine weapon-spell, the truly 
dreadful one belonging to the asuras. He then released sharp arrows. The 
heads of some were like those of lions and tigers, while others had the 
heads of adjutant storks and crows. Some had the heads of vultures and 
kites while others had the heads of jackals. Some had the heads of wolves, 
their jaws gaping and terrifying. Still others were like five-headed serpents 
with flickering tongues. Hissing like an angry serpent, the immensely 
powerful raksasa, employing his powers of illusion, then loosed still more 
sharp arrows at Rama. Some of these arrows had the heads of donkeys, 
while others were shaped like the heads of boars. Some had the heads of 
dogs and cocks, while others had the heads of sea monsters and venomous 
serpents. 

[43-47] Assaulted by that divine weapon-spell of the asuras, the 
immensely energetic delight of the Raghus invoked the divine weapon-spell 
of Agni, the purifier, a weapon-spell that was like the purifying fire itself. 
Rama then released sharp arrows. Some of these arrows had heads blazing 
with fire, while some had heads like the sun. Some had heads like the moon 
or half-moon, while others had heads like comets. Some resembled planets 
and constellations, while others had heads shaped like huge meteors. Still 
others were like streaks of lightning. Intercepted in the air by Raghava’s 
divine weapons, Ravana’s fearsome arrows disappeared, shattering into 
thousands of fragments. When the monkeys, who could take on any form at 
will, saw that Rama, tireless in action, had struck down Ravana’s divine 
weapons, they roared in delight. 


Sarga 88 

[1-5] Now, when that divine weapon-spell of his had been thwarted, 
Ravana, lord of the raksasas, redoubled his fury and, in his rage, invoked 
yet another divine weapon-spell. Immensely lustrous Ravana then prepared 
to invoke against Raghava that other fierce and fearsome divine weapon- 
spell devised by Maya, the craftsman of the asuras. Then, from his bow, 
lances, maces, and cudgels flew forth—all of them blazing and as hard as 
adamant. Like the mighty gales at the end of a cosmic era, there flew forth 
various mallets, war hammers, nooses, and blazing darts, as well as various 
other sharp weapons. But immensely lustrous Raghava, foremost of those 
familiar with the great divine weapon-spells, thwarted that divine weapon- 
spell with the supreme divine weapon-spell of the gandharvas. 

[6-12] But when that divine weapon-spell of his had been thwarted by 
great Raghava, Ravana, his eyes red with rage, invoked the divine weapon- 
spell of Sirya. Then huge and blazing discuses flew forth from the bow of 
wise ten-necked Ravana of fearsome power. As they descended on every 
side, they lit up the sky, as the blazing moon, sun, and planets might light 
up the directions if they were to fall. But with torrents of arrows, Raghava 
cut down the discuses and various other weapons of Ravana there in the 
vanguard of the army. When Ravana, lord of the rdksasas, saw that that 
divine weapon-spell had been thwarted, he riddled Rama in all his vital 
points with ten arrows. Nonetheless, although Ravana had riddled him with 
ten arrows loosed from his mighty bow, immensely powerful Raghava was 
not shaken in the least. And then Raghava, victorious in battle, in a 
towering rage, riddled Ravana in every limb with numerous arrows. 

[13-16] At this juncture, Raghava’s younger brother, mighty Laksmana, 
slayer of enemy heroes, took up seven arrows in a rage. And with those 
seven immensely powerful arrows, that immensely lustrous hero shredded 
Ravana’s battle standard with its image of a human head. With a single 
arrow, majestic and immensely powerful Laksmana took off the head of the 
charioteer of the raksasa, son of chaos, along with its glittering earrings. 
And with five sharp arrows Laksmana cut to pieces the rdksasa lord’s bow, 
so like an elephant’s trunk, along with his arrows. 

[17—21] Meanwhile, Vibhisana leapt forward and, with his mace, slew 
Ravana’s splendid horses, as huge as mountains and resembling black storm 
clouds. Jumping swiftly down from his great chariot, now that its horses 


had been slain, powerful Ravana conceived a burning rage toward his 
brother. Then the valorous and immensely powerful rdksasa lord hurled at 
Vibhisana a blazing javelin that was like a blazing bolt of lightning. But 
Laksmana cut it to pieces with three arrows before it reached Vibhisana. At 
that, a mighty roar went up in the battle from the monkeys. Encircled with 
gold, the javelin fell to earth cut into four pieces, like a huge glowing 
meteor falling from the sky in a shower of blazing sparks. 

[22—26]| Then Ravana took up a huge javelin, which he prized greatly. It 
glowed with its own blazing energy, and even Kala himself could not 
withstand it. Brandished violently by the mighty but evil-minded Ravana, 
that supremely terrifying weapon blazed with a splendor equal to that of 
Sakra’s thunderbolt. At that very moment, heroic Laksmana ran quickly to 
Vibhisana, who was now in mortal danger. In order to save him, heroic 
Laksmana drew back his bow and, with a hail of arrows, showered Ravana, 
who stood there, javelin in hand. Pelted by that torrent of arrows let loose 
by great Laksmana, Ravana, his martial ardor now diverted, decided not to 
strike his brother. 

[27-31] Seeing that Laksmana had saved his brother, Ravana positioned 
himself so that he faced Laksmana and said these words: “Since you, so 
proud of your strength, have saved Vibhisana in this fashion, this javelin, 
sparing the raksasa, will now fall upon you. After piercing your heart, this 
blood-stained javelin, flung by the iron club that is my arm, will fly on its 
way, taking with it your life breaths.” When he had spoken in this fashion, 
Ravana, taking aim at Laksmana, roared and, in a towering rage, hurled that 
javelin. With its eight bells it made a terrific sound. Maya, the craftsman of 
the asuras, had forged it with his supernatural power so that it was infallible 
in slaying one’s enemies. It glowed with blazing energy. 

[32-35] Hurled with terrifying force and emitting a roar like that of 
Sakra’s thunderbolt, the javelin struck Laksmana with tremendous impact 
there in the forefront of battle. But even as that javelin was hurtling toward 
Laksmana, Rama Raghava addressed it, saying: “May Laksmana be spared! 
And may you, your energy thwarted, be foiled!” Nonetheless, that 
immensely brilliant weapon, flashing like the flickering tongue of a serpent 
king, fell with tremendous force on Laksmana’s broad chest. Then 
Laksmana, his heart pierced by that javelin, so deeply embedded through 
Ravana’s strength, fell to the ground. 


[36-41] When Raghava of enormous blazing energy, who was nearby, 
saw Laksmana in that condition, his heart sank out of love for his brother. 
He remained lost for a moment in thought, his eyes filled with tears. Then 
he flared up in anger, like Agni, the purifier, at the end of a cosmic era. 
Reflecting, “This is no time for despondency,” Raghava began a tumultuous 
battle, intent upon slaying Ravana. Rama then gazed at Laksmana, who, 
pierced by that javelin in the great battle and drenched in blood, resembled 
a mountain with a mighty serpent. Try as they might, the foremost among 
the tawny monkeys, harried as they were by the swift-handed raksasa with 
his torrents of arrows, were unable to extract the javelin that had been flung 
by mighty Ravana. But Rama, in the rage of battle, seized with both hands 
that terrifying javelin, which, having transfixed Saumitri, was embedded in 
the earth. Wrenching it out violently, he broke it in two. 

[42-53] But even as Rama was wrenching out the javelin, mighty 
Ravana pelted his every limb with arrows that pierced his vitals. Heedless 
of those arrows, Raghava embraced Laksmana and then said this to 
Hanuman and Sugriva: “Foremost of monkeys, you must stay here and care 
for Laksmana. The moment to display my valor is now at hand, a moment I 
have long awaited, as does a thirsty cdtaka the sight of rain clouds at the 
end of the hot season. Now the evil-minded ten-necked Ravana of evil 
intent must die. I give you my solemn word here and now, monkeys, that 
very soon you shall see a world that is either without Ravana or without 
Rama. For once I have slain Ravana in battle today, I will put behind me all 
the terrible suffering and hellish torment that I endured: the loss of my 
kingdom, the sojourn in the wilderness, the wandering in the Dandaka, the 
assault on Vaidehi, and the clashes with the raksasas. For that evil wretch— 
on whose account I bridged and crossed the ocean and brought the monkey 
army here after slaying Valin in combat and placing Sugriva on the throne 
—has now come within my sight here in battle. Indeed, once he comes 
within the range of my sight, Ravana can no more survive than can a person 
seen by a serpent whose mere glance is deadly venom. So, unassailable 
bulls among monkeys, you should seat yourselves comfortably on the 
mountaintops and watch the battle between Ravana and me. This very day, 
let the three worlds, along with the gandharvas, the gods, the seers, and the 
celestial bards, witness in battle what makes Rama Rama. Today, I shall 
perform such a feat that all the worlds, with their moving and fixed contents 


and including the gods themselves, will talk about as long as the earth shall 
endure.” 

[54-59] When he had spoken in this fashion, Rama, with great 
concentration, struck ten-necked Ravana in battle with sharp arrows 
adorned with burnished gold. And Ravana, in turn, then showered Rama 
with blazing iron arrows and cudgels, as might a storm cloud with its 
torrential rains. And a tumultuous sound arose as the various arrows loosed 
by Rama and RAavana crashed into one another. Broken and scattered, the 
arrows of Rama and Ravana fell from the sky to the ground, their 
arrowheads blazing. The deafening sound of the bowstrings of Rama and 
Ravana striking against their armguards was almost miraculous, and it 
terrified all beings. Ravana was covered with dense hails of arrows and thus 
tormented by the great wielder of the blazing bow. Having first joined 
battle, he now fled in terror, like a great storm cloud driven before the wind. 


Sarga 89 

[1-5] When Rama had thus given tumultuous battle to evil-minded Ravana, 
he spoke these words to Susena, even as he continued to discharge his 
torrents of arrows: “Here is heroic Laksmana, fallen to the ground through 
the power of Ravana. He is writhing like a snake, filling me with sorrow. 
When I see that hero, dearer to me than life itself, drenched with blood, my 
mind is in such turmoil that I wonder what power I have left to fight. For if 
my brother, so praiseworthy in battle and marked with auspicious signs, has 
truly returned to the elements, then of what use to me is pleasure or indeed 
life itself? For my valor itself seems to hang its head in shame, while my 
bow seems to slip from my grasp. My arrows drop away, and my sight is 
dimmed with tears. Dreadful thoughts grow in my mind, and I wish now 
only for death.” 

[6-8] Thus did Rama, his senses overwhelmed, lament in the greatest 
despair when he saw his brother struck down by evil-minded Ravana, 
saying: “Seeing my brother Laksmana struck down in the dust of the 
battlefield, I have no further use for battle, for my life, or even for Sita 
herself. Now that Laksmana lies slain in the forefront of battle, what use 
have I for kingship or for life itself? There is now no longer any purpose to 
this war.” 


[9-16] Then, consoling Rama, heroic Susena spoke these words: “Great- 
armed Laksmana, increaser of prosperity, is not dead. For his face has not 
altered, nor has it darkened or lost its radiance. Indeed, his countenance 
looks quite radiant and clear. The palms of his hands are as red as the lotus, 
and his eyes are clear. This is not the way people look, lord of the peoples, 
when their life breaths have left them. So do not despair, heroic tamer of 
your foes. He is still alive. As he lies here unconscious, his limbs sprawling 
on the ground, the rhythmic movement of his chest proclaims that he still 
lives, hero.” Once Susena, skilled in speech, had uttered these words to 
Raghava, he immediately said this to Hanuman, who stood nearby: “Go 
swiftly hence, gentle friend, to the splendid mountain known as the 
mountain of healing herbs, which Jambavan told you about earlier. Then 
bring back the splendid healing herb known as visalyakarani, ‘the healer of 
arrow wounds,’ which grows on its southernmost peak. Go swiftly and, in 
order to revive the great hero Laksmana, you must also bring the 
sauvarnakaranti, ‘the restorer of a golden glow,’ the samjivani, ‘the restorer 
of life,’ and the samdhdnakarani, ‘the joiner of limbs.’ ” 

[17-21] Addressed in this fashion, Hanuman proceeded to the mountain 
of healing herbs. But unable to identify those potent herbs, the majestic 
monkey fell to brooding. But then Maruti of immeasurable blazing energy 
had this idea: “I will take this mountain peak and go back! For if I were to 
return without bringing the visalyakarani, the loss of time would lead to 
dire consequences and there might be a serious calamity.” Reflecting thus, 
immensely powerful Hanuman immediately descended on the peak of that 
mountain and, seizing it, flew off. Returning, he said: “I could not identify 
those healing herbs, bull among tawny monkeys; so I brought the entire 
mountain peak.” 

[22—25] Susena, foremost of monkeys, praised the son of Pavana, who 
was speaking in this fashion. Then he plucked and gathered the healing 
herbs. Then that foremost of monkeys, Susena of immense luster, crushed 
one of the herbs and held it to Laksmana’s nose. No sooner had that slayer 
of enemy heroes, Laksmana, who had been pierced by that javelin, inhaled 
that aroma than he leapt up from the ground, free from the javelin and the 
pain it had caused. When the tawny monkeys saw that Laksmana had leapt 
up from the ground, they were delighted and, crying, “Excellent! 
Excellent!” they honored Susena. 


[26-28] Then Rama, slayer of enemy heroes, addressed Laksmana, 
saying: “Come to me, come to me.” His eyes clouded with tears, he 
embraced him tightly in his affection. Embracing Saumitri, Raghava then 
said to him: “Thank heavens, I see you, hero, risen from the dead. Sita, 
victory, and life itself have no meaning for me. For if you had returned to 
the elements, what purpose, indeed, would I have had in living?” 

[29-34] As great Rama was speaking in this fashion, Laksmana, 
distressed at this fainthearted speech, said these words: “Having first made 
that vow, truly valorous warrior, you must not now speak in this fashion, 
like some weak and insignificant person. For, blameless hero, the virtuous 
do not falsify their vows. Indeed, the keeping of one’s vows is the sign of 
greatness. So enough of your giving way to despair on my account, 
blameless hero. You must keep your vow by slaying Ravana this very day. 
For once he comes within range of your arrows, your enemy will no more 
escape with his life than would a great bull elephant that comes within the 
clutches of a roaring, sharp-fanged lion. I long for the swift death of that 
evil-minded wretch before the sun, maker of day, sets behind the western 
mountain, his day’s work done.” 


Sarga 90 

[1-4] When Raghava had heard those words uttered by Laksmana, he 
loosed fearsome arrows at Ravana there in the vanguard of the army. But 
ten-necked Ravana, mounted in his chariot, in turn pelted Rama with 
enormously fearsome arrows that resembled thunderbolts, as might a storm 
cloud with torrents of rain. Nonetheless, Rama, with great concentration, 
pierced ten-necked Ravana in battle with arrows, which, adorned with gold, 
resembled blazing fires. Then the gods, gandharvas, and danavas declared, 
“This combat between Rama, who is standing on the ground, and the 
raksasa, mounted in his chariot, is not fair.” 

[S—12] Just then, shining like the rising sun, the majestic and splendid 
chariot of the king of the gods, ornamented with hundreds of bells, its body 
studded with gold, its yoke pole made of lapis, and its flagstaff made of 
gold, descended from Trivistapa, Indra’s heaven. It was yoked with 
splendid bay steeds, which, with their golden plumes, white tufts, and 
ornaments of gold fretwork, were as radiant as the sun. It drew near to 
Kakutstha. Standing in the chariot and holding the whip, Matali, the 


charioteer of thousand-eyed Indra, cupped his hands in reverence and spoke 
these words to Rama: “Thousand-eyed Indra has given you this majestic, 
foe-destroying chariot so that you may obtain victory, mighty Kakutstha. 
And here too are Indra’s great bow, armor shining like fire, arrows as 
brilliant as the sun, and a sharp, glittering javelin. So mount this chariot, 
heroic Rama, and, with me as your charioteer, slay the radksasa Ravana, just 
as did great Indra the danavas.” Addressed in this fashion, Rama 
respectfully circumambulated the chariot and, after reverentially saluting 
Matali, mounted it, illuminating the worlds with his splendor as he did so. 

[13-18] Then there ensued an astonishing and hair-raising chariot duel 
between great-armed Rama and the rdksasa Ravana. Raghava, who had 
mastered the most powerful divine weapon-spells, thwarted each divine 
weapon-spell of the rdksasa king with one of his own—a divine weapon- 
spell of the gandharvas with a divine weapon-spell of the gandharvas, a 
divine weapon-spell of the gods with a divine weapon-spell of the gods. 
Then, in a towering rage, the lord of the night-roaming rdksasas invoked 
the supremely fearsome divine weapon-spell of the raksasas. Loosed from 
Ravana’s bow, the arrows, adorned with gold, turned into venomous 
serpents and sped toward Kakutstha. With gaping jaws and mouths aflame, 
those terrifying serpents hurtled toward Rama, spewing blazing fire from 
their mouths. All the cardinal directions were filled, and the intermediate 
ones covered, by those serpents with their blazing hoods and deadly venom. 
Their very touch was equal to that of the great serpent Vasuki1. 

[19-21] But when Rama saw those serpents hurtling toward him in 
battle, he produced the dreadful and fear-inspiring divine weapon-spell of 
Garuda. Loosed from Raghava’s bow, the gold-fletched arrows, blazing like 
fire, turned into golden eagles, the foes of the serpents, and intercepted 
them. Rama’s arrows, which could take on any form at will, took the form 
of eagles and struck down all of those swift arrows, which had taken on the 
form of serpents. 

[22-26] Enraged at the thwarting of his divine weapon-spell, Ravana, 
lord of the rdksasas, pelted Rama with dreadful hails of arrows. Then, after 
harassing Rama, tireless in action, with a thousand arrows, he riddled 
Matali with a veritable torrent of them. After first knocking the golden 
battle standard to the floor of the chariot, Ravana struck down Indra’s 
horses with a mass of arrows. Then, seeing that Rama was hard-pressed, the 


gods, gandharvas, danavas, celestial bards, perfected beings, and supreme 
seers became despondent. And the foremost of monkeys, together with 
Vibhisana, seeing the moon in the form of Rama swallowed up, as it were, 
by Rahu, the demon of the eclipse in the form of Ravana, were similarly 
distressed. 

[27-30] Mercury, the planet baleful to all creatures, stood in occlusion of 
Rohini, the constellation beloved of the hare-marked moon and presided 
over by Prajapati, lord of creatures. The sea seemed to be ablaze, its waves 
shrouded in smoke. Heaving upward in its fury, it seemed almost to touch 
the sun, maker of day. The sun, maker of day, its rays dimmed, its color that 
of iron, looked ghastly. In conjunction with a smoke-bannered comet, it 
seemed to be crossed by a headless trunk. And Mars stood in occlusion of 
Visakha, the constellation of the ruling House of Kosala. This constellation, 
whose presiding deities are Indra and Agni, was clearly visible in the sky. 

[31-33] With his ten faces and twenty arms, ten-necked RAavana, 
grasping his bow, looked like Mount Mainaka. Hard-pressed by the raksasa 
ten-necked Ravana in the forefront of the battle, Rama was unable even to 
nock his arrows. Knitting his brows in anger, his eyes turning red with fury, 
Rama flew into a towering rage, seeming almost to scorch his foe with his 
gaze. 


Sarga 91 

[1-4] At the sight of the face of wise Rama in his fury, all creatures were 
stricken with terror, and the earth itself trembled. The mountain, with its 
lions and tigers and its deeply rooted trees, shook violently, while the ocean, 
lord of rivers, grew wildly agitated. And on every side, ominous birds with 
harsh cries, braying like donkeys, circled in the sky, screeching. Seeing 
Rama in such a towering rage and observing those extremely dire portents, 
all creatures were stricken with terror, and fear entered Ravana’s heart. 

[S—8] The gods, standing in their aerial chariots, the gandharvas, the 
great serpents, seers, danavas, daityas, and the great birds, who soar 
through the sky, then watched the battle between those two heroes as they 
engaged with their various fearsome weapons. It seemed like the 
destruction of the universe. And as they watched that great duel, all the 
gods and asuras, hostile as always to each other, shouted words of support 
in their excitement. Arrayed in their ranks, the asuras shouted, “Be 


? 


victorious!” to ten-necked Ravana, while the gods cried out again and again 
to Rama, “May you be victorious!” 

[9-12] At this juncture, evil-minded Ravana, in his rage at Raghava, 
fingered his mighty weapons in his desire to strike him down. Then, 
blazing, as it were, with fury, he seized a lance. Hard as adamant and 
emitting a mighty clangor, it was lethal to all enemies. Fitted with barbs as 
huge as mountain peaks, it was fearsome to look upon. Sharp-tipped and 
belching smoke, as it were, it resembled the holocaust at the end of a 
cosmic era. It was so vastly terrifying and irresistible that even Kala himself 
could not stand before it. Rending and cutting, it was a terror to all beings. 

[13-16] Surrounded in battle by many heroic rdksasas, mighty Ravana, 
in a towering rage, grasped that lance in the middle. His eyes red with rage, 
the gigantic warrior raised the lance on high and roared frighteningly in 
battle, encouraging his forces. That terrifying roar of the raksasa lord 
caused the earth, the atmosphere, and the cardinal and intermediate 
directions to tremble. At that roar of the extremely loudly roaring and evil- 
minded rdksasa, all beings were filled with terror and the sea grew 
tumultuous. 

[17-22] Grasping his huge lance, the immensely powerful Ravana 
released a tremendous roar and spoke harshly to Rama: “Wielded by me in 
my wrath, Rama, this lance, hard as adamant, will instantly steal away your 
life breaths though you have your brother as an ally. Arrogant in battle 
though you be, this very day, striking you down, I shall quickly reduce you 
to the state of the rdksasa heroes who have been slain in the forefront of 
battle. Stand your ground, Raghava, for I shall now kill you with my 
lance!” When the overlord of the raksasas had spoken in this fashion, he 
hurled his lance. As it hurtled onward, Raghava strove to stop it with hails 
of arrows, just as Vasava might strive to suppress with torrents of rain the 
fire that blazes up at the end of a cosmic era. But Ravana’s great lance 
burned up the arrows loosed from Rama’s bow, as a blazing fire might so 
many moths. 

[23-30] When Raghava saw his arrows shattered and reduced to ashes in 
the air by the impact of that lance, he was furious. In a towering rage, 
Raghava, the delight of the Raghus, then took up a javelin that had been 
crafted for Vasava, and which Matali had brought. Hefted by that mighty 
warrior, the javelin, resounding with the sound of its bells, lit up the sky, 


like a blazing meteor at the end of a cosmic era. Once hurled, it collided 
with the lance of the raksasa lord. Shattered by the javelin, the great lance 
fell, its blazing splendor dimmed. Then Rama riddled Ravana’s swift horses 
with arrows, arrows that were powerful, swift, hard as adamant, and sharp. 
Raghava pierced Ravana in the chest with sharp arrows and again, 
concentrating his energies, through the forehead with three feathered shafts. 
His entire body pierced with arrows, gushing blood from every limb, the 
rdksasa lord in the midst of that host looked like an asoka tree in full 
bloom. His every limb riddled with Rama’s arrows and his body drenched 
with blood, the lord of the night-roaming raksasas grew weary there in the 
midst of his hosts, and he gave way to a towering rage. 


Sarga 92 
[1-3] Stricken in battle by Rama in his wrath, Ravana, arrogant in battle, 
gave way to a towering rage. His eyes blazing with fury, that mighty 
warrior drew back his bow and, in his rage, assailed Raghava in that 
ultimate battle. Ravana filled Rama with his arrows, just as a storm cloud 
fills a pond with its thousands of arrowlike torrents of rain from the sky. 

[4-9] Although riddled with a mass of arrows loosed from the bow in 
battle, Kakutstha, as unshakable as a mighty mountain, did not so much as 
tremble. Standing firm in battle, the mighty warrior slowed that mass of 
arrows with arrows of his own, so that he received them as if they were no 
more than rays of sunshine. *Then, enraged, the nimble-handed night- 
roaming rdksasa sank thousands of arrows into great Raghava’s chest. 
Drenched with blood in battle, Laksmana’s elder brother looked like a great 
kimsuka tree in full bloom in the forest. Enraged by the blows of those 
arrows, immensely powerful Kakutstha, in turn, took up arrows whose 
radiance was like that of the sun at the end of a cosmic era. In their fury, 
neither Rama nor Ravana could see the other in the midst of that battle, 
shrouded as it was in the darkness of their arrows. 

[10-15] Then, suffused with rage, heroic Rama, son of DasSaratha, 
laughed and spoke these harsh words to Ravana: “You are surely no hero, 
lowest of the rdaksasas, since you abducted my helpless wife from 
Janasthana, behind my back. You forcibly abducted Vaidehi when she was 
alone in the vast forest, frightened without me to protect her. And now you 
think, ‘Oh, what a great hero am I!’ Great hero! Molester of other men’s 


wives! You commit contemptible acts against defenseless women and then 
think, ‘Oh, what a great hero am I!’ Violator of all boundaries! Shameless 
wretch! You are utterly lacking in character! Having brought death upon 
yourself, in your arrogance, you think, ‘Oh, what a great hero am I!’ 
Indeed, you, the heroic brother of Kubera, bestower of wealth, accompanied 
by your troops, have accomplished a great, praiseworthy, and glorious deed. 

[16—22] “This very day, you shall receive the truly fitting reward for this 
evil and contemptible act that you committed in your arrogance. ‘Oh, what 
a great hero am I,’ that is how you think of yourself, evil-minded wretch, 
and yet you feel no shame for having carried off Sita, as if you were a 
common thief. If you had dared to lay violent hands upon Sita in my 
presence, you would have then and there joined your brother Khara, whom 
I had earlier slain with arrows. But now, evil-minded wretch, by my good 
fortune, you have come into my presence, and, this very day, with my sharp 
arrows, I shall convey you to the abode of Yama. This very day, carrion 
eaters will drag off your head, along with its glittering earrings, as it rolls in 
the dust of the battlefield, severed by my arrows. Let the vultures alight on 
your chest as you sprawl on the ground, Ravana, and thirstily drink the 
blood flowing from the wounds made by my arrowheads. This very day, as 
you lie dead riddled with my arrows, the carrion birds shall drag out your 
intestines, as eagles do serpents.” 

[23-26] Speaking in this fashion, Rama, annihilator of his foes, pelted 
the rdksasa lord, who stood nearby, with hails of arrows. Since he was so 
eager for the destruction of his enemy, Rama’s valor, strength, zeal for 
battle, and the power of his divine weapon-spells were all redoubled. All 
the divine weapon-spells then manifested themselves before that celebrated 
warrior. And in his excitement, that immensely powerful hero became still 
more nimble handed. Perceiving those auspicious signs within himself, 
Rama, exterminator of the rdksasas, pressed Ravana harder still. 

[27-30] As ten-necked Ravana was being pelted by masses of stones 
from the tawny monkeys and by hails of arrows from Raghava, his heart 
began to falter. Then, his heart faltering, he could no longer deploy his 
weapons, draw his bow, or counter Rama’s valor in any way. Even those 
arrows and various other weapons that he managed to deploy proved 
useless in battle—as he now approached the hour of his death. Seeing his 


condition, Ravana’s charioteer, who was controlling the chariot, kept his 
composure and slowly drove the chariot from the field of battle. 


Sarga 93 

[1-9] Furious in his delusion, his eyes red with rage, Ravana, impelled by 
the power of fate, now addressed his charioteer: “Fool! Acting on your own 
authority, you treat me with contempt, as if I were weak, incompetent, 
devoid of manliness, cowardly, a person of no consequence, bereft of 
blazing energy, utterly lacking powers of illusion, and stripped of divine 
weapon-spells. Why have you driven off my chariot in full view of the 
enemy, disregarding my wishes and treating me with contempt? For now, 
ignoble wretch, you have utterly undermined my fame—built up over long 
years—as well as my valor, blazing energy, and reputation. Though I am 
eager for battle, you have made me look like a coward in the eyes of an 
enemy famed for his martial power, one who deserves to be gratified with 
valorous deeds. In that you stupidly failed to drive the chariot forward, fool, 
my conjecture that you have been bribed by the enemy must be true. This is 
not the action of a friend who wishes one well. Indeed, it is more typical of 
one’s enemies. What you have done is wrong. If you are my longtime friend 
or if you recall my many favors, then you must quickly turn the chariot 
around, before my enemy departs.” 

[10-13] Addressed harshly in this fashion by that fool, the charioteer, 
who wished his master well, addressed to Ravana these beneficial and 
conciliatory words: “I am not afraid, nor am I a fool. I have not been 
suborned by your enemies, nor am I derelict in my duties. I am not lacking 
in my affection for you, nor have I forgotten the favors you have bestowed. 
My heart overflowing with love for you, I did you this favor, which has so 
displeased you, out of a desire for your well-being and to preserve your 
reputation. In this matter, great king, you should not, like some lowly and 
ignoble person, find fault with me, who am devoted only to your pleasure 
and well-being. 

[14—17] “Listen! I will tell you the reason that I turned the chariot back 
from the battle, as the current of a river is turned back by the rising tide. I 
perceived your exhaustion resulting from your mighty feats in battle. And, 
heroic warrior, I did not see your wonted enthusiasm and exuberance. 
Moreover, these chariot-horses, exhausted from drawing the chariot and 


overcome by the heat, are as dejected as cattle battered by torrential rain. 
And given all the many portents that have appeared before us, I foresee no 
good outcome for us. 

[18-23] “Moreover, a good charioteer when driving his chariot must be 
familiar with all of these things: the proper time and place, signs and 
gestures, and the despondency, exuberance, exhaustion, and relative 
strength and weakness of his master. He must also be familiar with the 
elevations and depressions of the terrain, where it is level and where it is 
uneven. He must know the proper time to fight and how to spot the weak 
points of the enemy. He must also know when to advance, when to pull 
back, when to stand his ground, and when to retreat. It was in order to 
alleviate this crushing fatigue and provide some respite for you as well as 
for the chariot-horses that I acted in this fitting manner. It was not on my 
own account, heroic warrior, that I drove the chariot off. I did this, my lord, 
since I was overwhelmed with love for you, my master. Command me as is 
proper. With my mind discharged of its obligations I shall do whatever you 
say, heroic slayer of your enemies.” 

[24—27] Satisfied with the charioteer’s words, Ravana, lusting for battle, 
praised him profusely and said this: “Charioteer, turn this chariot 
immediately toward Raghava! Ravana shall never turn back without first 
killing his enemies in battle.” Then, having spoken in this fashion, Ravana, 
lord of the raksasas, pleased, gave him a splendid and unequaled ring. 
Then, urged on by Ravana’s words, the charioteer swiftly drove the horses 
so that, within an instant, the great chariot of the rdksasa lord stood before 
Rama on the battlefield. 


Sarga 94 
[1-7] The king of men watched the chariot of the raksasa king as, with its 
great battle standard, it hurtled toward him with a tremendous din. It was 
yoked to black horses and glowed with a fearsome radiance. It was thick 
with pennants resembling streaks of lightning, and it displayed weapons 
that were like the weapons of Indra himself. It was pouring forth streams of 
arrows as a storm cloud might a torrential downpour. As he watched his 
enemy’s chariot, which looked like a great storm cloud and rumbled with 
the sound of a mountain being shattered by a lightning bolt, Rama said to 
Matali, the charioteer of thousand-eyed Indra: “Matali! Observe my 


enemy’s chariot as it hurtles furiously toward us. Since he is rushing toward 
me once more so rapidly on our right flank, he must now have determined 
to kill me. Therefore, remain vigilant and head for my enemy’s chariot for I 
wish to destroy him utterly, as a strong wind does a cloud that has newly 
formed. Now keeping firm control of the reins, drive the chariot forward— 
swiftly, boldly, calmly, and with a steady heart and eye. Granted, as 
someone well familiar with this chariot of Indra, the smasher of citadels, 
you are not in need of instruction. But single-mindedly eager for battle as I 
am, Iam merely reminding you, not giving you instruction.” 

[8—11] Gratified with that speech of Rama, Matali, foremost of the 
charioteers of the gods, drove his chariot onward. Then, keeping Ravana’s 
great chariot on his right, Matali discomfited him with the dust raised by his 
own wheels. Then, with his arrows, ten-necked Ravana, infuriated, his eyes 
red and wide with rage, assailed Rama, who faced him in his chariot. 
Provoked by this assault, Rama, endowed with great blazing energy, in his 
rage put patience aside, and there, in that battle, took up the enormously 
powerful bow of Indra, along with arrows and with a radiance equal to that 
of the sun’s rays. 

[12-16] Then began the battle between the two of them, who, each intent 
on killing the other, resembled two proud lions face to face. Anxious for the 
destruction of Ravana, the gods, together with the gandharvas, the 
perfected beings, and the great seers, assembled to watch that chariot duel. 
Terrifying and hair-raising omens now appeared. They presaged destruction 
for Ravana and victory for Raghava. It rained blood over Ravana’s chariot, 
and fierce whirlwinds arose, circling to the left. A vast flock of vultures, 
wheeling in the sky, raced after his chariot whichever way it went. 

[17-21] Lanka was shrouded in an untimely twilight as crimson as a 
japa blossom, and, even in bright daylight, the very ground appeared to be 
ablaze. Huge meteors flew past with a thunderous sound, accompanied by 
violent gusts of wind. Then, as they were clearly ominous for Ravana, they 
plunged the rdksasas into despair. The earth trembled wherever Ravana 
went, and, as the rdksasas prepared to strike, it seemed as if something held 
back their arms. As the rays of the sun—red and yellow, pallid and bright 
white—played across Ravana’s body, they looked like veins of variegated 
ores on a mountainside. Jackals, shadowed by vultures, howled angrily and 


inauspiciously, spewing flames from their mouths while staring him in the 
face. 

[22-29] The wind blew directly in the face of the rdaksasa king, 
whipping up dust across the battlefield and blinding him. From every side, 
Indra’s terrible thunderbolts fell upon his army with an unbearable sound. 
And yet, there was no rumbling of storm clouds. All directions—both 
cardinal and intermediate—were shrouded in darkness. A huge dust storm 
made the sky itself impossible to see. In a fearsome assault upon his chariot, 
dreadful sarika birds swooped down by the hundreds with dreadful cries. 
His horses incessantly shed blazing sparks from their hindquarters and tears 
from their eyes so that they poured forth both fire and water equally. 
Indeed, many dreadful portents of this type appeared, foretelling great 
danger and presaging Ravana’s destruction. But in the case of Rama, 
favorable and auspicious portents arose on every side, presaging his victory. 
Observing on the battlefield those portents that augured well for him, 
Raghava, skilled in interpreting portents, was excited, and, supremely 
happy, he redoubled his valor in battle. 


Sarga 95 

[1-5] Then the great battle between Rama and Ravana commenced, a fierce 
chariot duel that terrified all the worlds. Both the raksasa army and the vast 
host of tawny monkeys stood motionless, clutching their weapons. As they 
watched those two mighty warriors—man and raksasa—engaged in battle, 
their attention was riveted, and all of them were struck with the greatest 
amazement. Although their hands were filled with all sorts of weapons, 
their minds were filled with astonishment. Thus, they stood there gazing at 
that battle and struck no blows at one another. With the raksasas gazing at 
Ravana and the monkeys at Rama, both armies, their eyes wide with 
astonishment, seemed frozen as if in a painting. 

[6-10] Observing those various portents, Raghava and Ravana, grimly 
determined and fixed in their enmity, fought on, unafraid. Kakutstha 
thought, “I will surely win,” while Ravana realized, “I must surely die.” 
Then those two resolute warriors displayed their utmost valor in battle. 
Then, in anger, mighty ten-necked Ravana nocked his arrows and, taking 
aim at the battle standard on Raghava’s chariot, let them fly. But those 
arrows never reached the battle standard on the chariot of Indra, smasher of 


citadels. Instead, merely brushing the chariot-javelin, they fell to the 
ground. In turn, mighty Rama drew his bow in anger and resolved to return 
blow for blow. 

[11-14] Taking aim at Ravana’s battle standard, he loosed a sharp arrow 
that, glowing with its own blazing energy, was as impossible to withstand as 
a mighty serpent. After cutting down the battle standard of ten-necked 
Ravana, the arrow came to rest on the ground. Cut down, the battle standard 
of Ravana’s chariot likewise fell to the ground. Upon witnessing the 
destruction of his battle standard, immensely powerful Ravana seemed to 
blaze up on the battlefield with a fire born of anger. In an uncontrollable 
rage, Ravana poured forth an immense hail of arrows and, with those 
arrows, riddled Rama’s celestial horses. 

[15-20] Riddled though they were, the bay steeds never stumbled or 
swerved. They remained as serene at heart as if they had been stroked with 
lotus stalks. Seeing that the horses had been utterly unaffected, Ravana, in a 
towering rage, once more loosed a hail of arrows. He also hurled maces, 
iron clubs, discuses, cudgels, mountain peaks, and trees, as well as lances 
and battle-axes. His heart and energies unflagging, he continued to loose his 
arrows by the thousands, and that hail of weapons that he let fly was 
invested with the power of illusion. It was tremendous and deafening and 
consisted of innumerable weapons. It was fearsome and reverberated 
fearsomely in the midst of the battle. It was unendurable, and it sowed panic 
everywhere. Missing Raghava’s chariot, it fell upon the monkey host from 
every side. But ten-necked Ravana, with unbroken concentration, continued 
to loose his arrows so that he quickly filled the entire atmosphere with 
them. 

[21-26] But Kakutstha, watching Ravana exert himself with such 
concentration in battle, smiled faintly and nocked sharp arrows. Then, in 
that battle, he loosed hundreds of thousands of arrows. Seeing them, 
Ravana filled the entire sky with arrows of his own. By virtue of that 
blazing hail of arrows discharged by the two warriors, it looked as if there 
were a second shining sky composed entirely of arrows. As long as Rama 
and Ravana discharged their arrows in that battle, not one of those arrows 
failed to hit its precise mark, caused excessive damage, or failed to achieve 
its intended purpose. The two heroes fought on without respite, shooting 
left and right. With their torrents of arrows, they seemed to leave no room 


even for air in the sky. Rama struck Ravana’s horses, and Ravana struck 
Rama’s. Thus did the two of them strike at each other, trading blow and 
counterblow. 


Sarga 96 

[1-5] All beings watched with amazement in their hearts as Rama and 
Ravana fought on in this fashion on the battleground. Each pressing the 
other hard in battle and intent on slaying each other, the two splendid 
chariot-warriors assumed terrifying forms. Their charioteers demonstrated 
the various movements exemplary of their skill as drivers—driving in 
circles and in straight lines, advancing and retreating. Pressing each other 
hard—Rama, Ravana; and Ravana, Raghava—the two of them advanced 
and retreated at tremendous speed. And as the two of them loosed their 
hails of arrows, their splendid chariots moved across the battlefield like two 
storm clouds unleashing torrential rains. 

[6-10] Then, when they had demonstrated their various moves on the 
battlefield, they once again took up their positions facing each other. And as 
the two chariots stood there, their yoke poles and battle standards brushed 
each other and their horses stood face to face. But then, with four sharp 
arrows loosed from his bow, Rama drove off Ravana’s four fiery steeds. 
The night-roaming raksasa flew into an uncontrollable rage over the flight 
of his horses and loosed sharp arrows at Raghava. Although he was 
completely riddled by powerful ten-necked Ravana, Raghava seemed 
unaffected and showed no signs of pain. 

[11-14] So then the night-roaming raksasa, taking aim at the charioteer 
of Indra, wielder of the vajra, once again loosed arrows that roared with the 
crash of thunderbolts. But although they fell upon Matali’s body in battle, 
those immensely powerful arrows caused neither the slightest distraction 
nor pain. Enraged at that attack upon Matali as he had never been at those 
upon himself, Raghava made his enemy recoil with a mass of arrows. 
Mighty Raghava then loosed his arrows—twenty, thirty, sixty, and then by 
the hundreds and by the thousands—upon his enemy’s chariot. 

[15-19] The seven seas themselves were thrown into turmoil by the 
sounds of maces, cudgels, and iron clubs, and by the winds stirred up by the 
fletching of the arrows. Since the seas were thrown into turmoil, all the 
thousands of great serpents and danavas who dwelt in the underworld 


Patala were terrified. The whole earth, together with its mountains, groves, 
and forests, shook. The sun, bringer of light, grew dim and the winds ceased 
to blow. Then all the gods, together with the gandharvas, perfected beings, 
great seers, kinnaras, and great serpents, were plunged into anxiety, 
praying: “May all be well with cows and brahmans! May the worlds endure 
forever! May Raghava be victorious in battle over Ravana, lord of the 
raksasas.” 

[20-24] Then, in anger, great-armed Rama, increaser of the glory of the 
Raghus, placed on his bow a razor-tipped arrow that was like a venomous 
serpent. With it, he cut off Ravana’s majestic head, together with its shining 
earrings. As the three worlds looked on, that head fell to the ground. But a 
new head exactly like it emerged from Ravana. Then, with his arrows, 
quick-handed Rama, acting quickly, quickly cut off that second head of 
Ravana in battle. But no sooner had that head been severed than yet another 
appeared in its place. And so, with arrows that were like thunderbolts, 
Rama cut off that one as well. And so in this way, a hundred heads—all 
exactly alike—were cut off. But still, there seemed to be no way to bring 
about the end of Ravana’s life. 

[25-31] Therefore, although valorous Raghava, increaser of Kausalya’s 
joy, was expert in the use of every divine weapon-spell and still had many 
arrows, he fell to brooding: “These are all the very same arrows upon which 
I have always relied in battle and with which I killed Marica and Khara 
along with Disana. They are the very ones with which I killed Viradha in 
the Kraufica forest and Kabandha in the forest of the Dandakas. Why then 
are they so ineffectual against Ravana?” Although he was consumed with 
brooding in this fashion, Raghava kept up his guard in battle and continued 
to rain hails of arrows upon Ravana’s chest. Meanwhile, Ravana, the lord of 
the rdksasas, was in a rage, and, mounted in his chariot, he assailed Rama 
in battle with a hail of maces and cudgels. The great battle raged all night 
long as the gods, danavas, yaksas, pisdcas, great serpents, and raksasas 
looked on. Indeed, the duel between Rama and Ravana continued night and 
day without stopping for an hour or even a moment. 


Sarga 97 
[1-2] But then Matali reminded Raghava: “Why, hero, do you merely 
match him blow for blow, as if you knew no better? In order to kill him, my 


lord, you must unleash upon him the divine weapon of Grandfather 
Brahma. For the moment ordained by the gods for his destruction is now at 
hand.” 

[3-13] Reminded by Matali’s words, Rama took up a blazing arrow that, 
as he did so, made a hissing sound like that of a snake. Presented to him 
earlier by the powerful and holy seer Agastya, it was a gift of Brahma. It 
was a mighty arrow, unfailing in battle. Brahma, whose power is 
immeasurable, had fashioned it long ago for the sake of Indra and had 
presented it to that lord of the gods, who was eager to conquer the three 
worlds. Pavana, the wind god, resided in its feathers. Agni, the purifier, and 
Surya, bringer of light, were in its arrowhead. Its shaft was made of all of 
space, and the mountains Meru and Mandara lent it their weight. Radiant 
with its splendor, beautifully fletched, and adorned with gold, it was 
fashioned with the blazing energy of all the elements, and it was as brilliant 
as Surya, bringer of light. It looked like the smoking fire of universal 
destruction and glistened like a venomous snake. It could instantaneously 
shatter hosts of chariots, elephants, and horses. It could shatter gateways, 
together with their iron beams, and even mountains. With its shaft drenched 
with the blood of many different creatures and smeared with their marrow, 
it was truly frightful. Hard as adamant and roaring deafeningly, it was 
terrifying in every sort of battle. Dreadful, hissing like a serpent, it inspired 
terror in all beings. It was fearsome and looked like Yama. In battle, it 
provided a never-ending supply of food to flocks of vultures and adjutant 
storks as well as raksasas and packs of jackals. Fletched with the various 
feathers of Garuda—beautiful and variegated—it brought joy to the monkey 
chiefs and despair to the raksasas. That ultimate arrow, which robbed one’s 
enemies of their glory but brought joy to oneself, was to encompass the 
destruction of that menace to the Iksvakus and indeed to all the worlds. 

[14-18] Then immensely powerful and mighty Rama consecrated that 
arrow with mantras and placed it on his bow in the manner prescribed by 
the science of archery. Filled with fury toward Ravana and exerting himself 
to the utmost, he bent the bow fully and loosed that arrow, which struck at 
one’s vital points. As unstoppable as the vajra hurled by Indra, the vajra 
wielder, and as inescapable as fate, it fell upon Ravana’s chest. Loosed with 
tremendous force, that lethal arrow pierced evil-minded Ravana’s heart. 


Drenched with blood, the lethal arrow swiftly entered the earth, carrying off 
the life breaths of Ravana. 

[19-22] Once the arrow had accomplished its purpose in killing Ravana, 
it dutifully returned to its quiver, glistening with its still-wet blood. 
Meanwhile, the bow and arrows of him who had been struck down so 
suddenly slipped from his grasp, along with his life breaths, as he lay dying. 
Thus did the lord of the rdksasas, sons of chaos, once so fearsome in his 
power and dazzling in his splendor, now tumble lifeless to the ground from 
his chariot, like Vrtra struck down by Indra’s vajra. Seeing him fallen to the 
ground, the surviving night-roaming rdksasas, their lord slain, fled, 
terrified, in all directions. 

[23-28] Meanwhile, the monkeys, armed with trees, seeing that Raghava 
was victorious and that ten-necked Ravana had been slain, roared loudly 
and fell upon the raksasas. Hard-pressed by the jubilant monkeys, the 
raksasas fled in fear to Lanka, their piteous faces drenched with tears over 
the death of their protector. Then the jubilant monkeys, with a victorious air, 
roared loudly, proclaiming Raghava’s victory and the death of Ravana. The 
auspicious war drums of the thirty gods then resounded in the sky, and a 
pleasant breeze blew, wafting a divine fragrance. An extraordinary and 
delightful shower of blossoms fell from the sky to the earth, covering 
Raghava’s chariot. And from the great gods in heaven a magnificent shout, 
filled with the praise of Raghava, was heard, “Excellent! Excellent!” 

[29-33] Now that fearsome Ravana, the terror of all the worlds, had been 
slain, great exultation filled the gods and celestial bards. In slaying that bull 
among rdksasas, Raghava, delighted, had fulfilled the wishes of Sugriva 
and immensely powerful Angada. The hosts of the Maruts regained 
tranquility. The directions were limpid, and the sky grew clear. The earth 
ceased its trembling, and the winds blew gently, while the sun, the maker of 
day, shone with a steady light. Then Raghava’s closest allies—Sugriva, 
Vibhisana, and the rest—together with Laksmana, gathered around him, 
rejoicing in his victory and, with all due ceremony, paid homage to him 
who was so magnificent in battle. Having thus slain his enemy, the 
immensely powerful hero, the delight of the king of the Raghu dynasty, 
proved true to his vow. Surrounded by his kinsman and his troops there on 
the field of battle, he looked as resplendent as Indra surrounded by the hosts 
of the thirty gods. 


Sarga 98 

[1-5] Now, when the raksasa women heard that Ravana had been slain by 
great Raghava, they rushed from the inner apartments, overwhelmed with 
grief. Although many tried to restrain them, they rolled in the dust of the 
earth, their hair flying loose. They were as stricken with grief as cows 
whose calves have been butchered. Together with the raksasas they poured 
out through the northern gate and entered the ghastly battlefield, searching 
for their slain lord. Crying, “My husband!” “Alas, my lord!” on every side, 
they wandered about the battleground, which was strewn with headless 
trunks and thick with bloody mire. Overcome with grief for their lord, their 
eyes filled with tears, they cried, shrieking like elephant cows when the 
leader of their herd is slain. 

[6-10] Then they saw Ravana lying slain on the ground. With his huge 
body, his tremendous strength, and his vast splendor, he resembled a mass 
of black collyrium. When they suddenly spied their husband lying in the 
dust of the battlefield, they fell upon his limbs like forest creepers that have 
been cut down. One of them embraced him in her devotion and wept. One 
clasped his feet, while yet another clung to his neck. Raising her arms, one 
rolled on the ground. Seeing the face of her dead husband, yet another 
fainted. One placed his head on her lap and, gazing on his face, wept, so 
that his face was bathed with tears, as is a lotus with dewdrops. 

[11-16] Thus, anguished at seeing their lord Ravana lying slain on the 
ground, they keened in various ways in their grief and then began to lament 
once more: “He who once terrorized Sakra and even Yama, he who robbed 
King Kubera Vaisravana of his flying palace Puspaka, and he who sowed 
tremendous fear among the gandharvas, seers, and the great gods, now lies 
slain in battle. He who knew no fear from the asuras, gods, or great 
serpents had much to fear from a mere human. He who was invulnerable to 
the gods, danavas, and raksasas now lies on the battlefield, slain by a mere 
human fighting on foot. He whom neither the gods, the yaksas, nor the 
asuras could kill has, like some feeble creature, been slain by a mere 
mortal.” 

[17-26] Speaking in this fashion, R&avana’s women wept copiously. 
Then, overcome by grief, they began once more to lament repeatedly: 
“Since you consistently refused to heed the words of your friends, who 
advised you for your own good, all of us and you yourself have now been 


ruined all together. Although your dear brother Vibhisana was speaking 
words that were beneficial to you, you, in your delusion, abused him 
cruelly, desiring, it appears, your own destruction. If only you had restored 
Sita Maithili to Rama, this immense catastrophe, this total extermination, 
would not have befallen us. Your brother Vibhisana would have had his 
wish fulfilled, and Rama would have become an ally of our House. None of 
us would have been widowed, nor would your enemies have seen their wish 
fulfilled. But instead, in holding Sita by force, cruel Ravana, you have 
destroyed the raksasas, us, and yourself, all three at the same time. 
Nonetheless, it is true, bull among rdaksasas, that this was not an action 
taken of your own free will. For it is fate that sets all things in motion. 
Whatever is destroyed, is destroyed by fate. And so the destruction in battle 
of the monkeys, the raksasas, and you yourself, great-armed warrior, 
occurred through the power of fate. For in this world the relentless march of 
fate cannot be stopped by wealth or act of will, by valor or by imperious 
command.” Thus did the wretched women of the rdksasa lord lament, 
afflicted with grief, their eyes clouded with tears, shrieking like ospreys. 


Sarga 99 

[1-4] Now, even as the raksasa women were lamenting in this fashion, 
Ravana’s beloved senior-most wife, Mandodari, gazed on her husband in 
her sorrow. And as pitiable Mandodari gazed there upon her husband, ten- 
necked Ravana, who had been slain by Rama of inconceivable deeds, she 
lamented: “Surely, great-armed younger brother of Kubera Vaisravana, even 
Indra himself, the smasher of citadels, feared to stand before you when you 
were angry. And surely it was because of your power that the seers, the 
gods on earth, the illustrious gandharvas, and the celestial bards fled in all 
directions. 

[S—9] “Yet now you have been vanquished in battle by Rama, a mere 
human. Are you not ashamed, your majesty? How could this be, bull among 
raksasas? How could a mere human, a wanderer in the wilderness, have 
slain you, who had conquered the three worlds, who was endowed with 
majesty and might, and whom no one could withstand? It makes no sense 
that Rama could have slain you in battle—you who could wander in realms 
inaccessible to mere mortals and could take on any form at will. I do not 
believe that it was, in fact, Rama who accomplished this feat in vanquishing 


you in the vanguard of the hosts when you were fully equipped for battle. 
Instead, it was your sensual appetites alone that vanquished you, since they 
recalled, as it were, your hostility when, long ago—before you conquered 
the three worlds—you subjugated your senses. 

[10-16] “Or perhaps it was Vasava himself who came here in the form 
of Rama, putting forth some unimaginable power of illusion in order to 
destroy you. For when in Janasthana he killed your brother Khara, who was 
surrounded by many rdaksasas, it was clear right then that this was no mere 
human. And when, through his might, Hanuman entered the city of Lanka, 
which even the gods could not enter, we were all deeply shaken. When I 
told you, ‘You should make peace with Raghava,’ you would not listen. 
And this is the result that has come of it. Unaccountably, bull among 
raksasas, you conceived this desire for Sita, which has only led to the loss 
of your sovereignty, your kinsmen, and your life. You acted utterly 
improperly, you fool, when you assaulted Sita, who is worthy of respect and 
who is superior even to Arundhati and Rohini. This Maithili is in no way 
my superior or even my equal in breeding, beauty, or talent. But in your 
infatuation you did not realize this. 

[17-20] “No creature ever dies without a reason. In your case, then, your 
death has been brought about because of your treatment of Maithilt. Now 
Maithilt, free from all sorrow, will enjoy herself with Rama, while I, a 
person of little merit that I am, have been plunged into a dreadful ocean of 
sorrow. I, who used to enjoy myself with you on Mount Kailasa, Mount 
Mandara, Mount Meru, the Caitraratha garden, and in all the gardens of the 
gods, traveling in unparalleled splendor in a flying chariot befitting our 
station, wearing marvelous garlands and garments, and gazing out upon the 
many different lands, have now, because of your death, hero, been robbed 
of the enjoyment of all pleasures. 

[21—24] “The destruction of the principal raksasas, which my illustrious 
brother-in-law Vibhisana, a speaker of truth, foretold, has now come to 
pass. Through this catastrophe born of your lust and anger and 
characterized by your obsession, you have deprived the entire raksasa race 
of its protector. I really should not grieve for you, for you were a warrior 
famed for strength and manly valor. But still, because of the inherent nature 
of women, my heart is in a pitiable state. Taking with you both the good and 
the evil deeds you performed, you have gone to your proper destination. It 


is for myself that I grieve, miserable as I am, because of my separation from 
you. 

[25-29] “Resembling a black storm cloud, with your yellow garments 
and bright armlets, why do you lie here drenched in blood, splaying out all 
your limbs? I am overcome with sorrow. Why do you not answer me, as if 
you were asleep? Why do you not look at me, the granddaughter of an 
immensely powerful and skillful yatudhana who never fled in battle? You 
always used to worship your iron club, adorned with a fretwork of gold and, 
with a radiance like that of the sun, as if it were the vajra of Indra, the 
wielder of the vajra. With it you used to slaughter your enemies in battle. 
But now that smasher of your foes in battle, shattered by arrows, lies 
scattered in a thousand pieces. Curse me whose heart, oppressed by sorrow, 
does not shatter into a thousand pieces now that you have returned to the 
five elements.” 

[30-34] At this juncture, Rama said to Vibhisana, “Perform the funerary 
rites for your brother and send these women back.” When he had heard 
those words, Vibhisana, who was deferential and understood righteousness, 
reflected and, in order to conform to Rama’s wishes, replied with words that 
were filled with righteousness and political sense: “I cannot perform the 
funerary rites for someone who abandoned both righteousness and his 
vows, who was cruel, heartless, and untruthful, and who assaulted the wives 
of others. Ever intent on injuring all creatures, he was my enemy in the 
form of a brother. So, although he should be respected because of the 
deference one owes to one’s elders, still Ravana does not merit respect. In 
this world, people will say I am heartless, Rama, but once they hear about 
his qualities, they will all say that I acted properly.” 

[35-40] Upon hearing that, Rama, foremost of those who upheld 
righteousness, was greatly pleased, and, skilled in speech, he said this to 
Vibhisana, who was similarly expert in speech: “I really ought to do what 
pleases you, since it was through your might that I have been victorious. 
Nonetheless, I must address you with regard to what is proper, lord of the 
raksasas. Granted, the night-roaming raksasa was given to unrighteousness 
and untruthfulness. Nonetheless, he was always a powerful and energetic 
hero in battle. Ravana, who made the worlds cry out, was a great hero, 
endowed with might. One never heard that the gods, led by Indra of the 
hundred sacrifices, ever defeated him. But hostilities cease with death. Our 


purpose has been accomplished. You may now perform his funerary rites, 
for as he was to you, so he is to me. For he deserves a quick and proper 
funeral at your hands, great-armed knower of righteousness. Thus, you will 
reap glory.” 

[41-44] Having heard Raghava’s words, Vibhisana, hastening, provided 
Ravana with a fitting funeral. Vibhisana then consigned him to the 
purifying fire according to the ritual prescriptions. Then, speaking soothing 
words again and again, he consoled the women. And then, once all the 
rdksasa women had gone back, Vibhisana came to Rama’s side and stood 
there humbly. Then, having slain his mortal enemy, Rama, together with his 
army, Sugriva, and Laksmana, attained as much delight as did Indra of the 
hundred sacrifices after slaying Vrtra. 


Sarga 100 

[1-5] When the gods, gandharvas, and danavas had witnessed the slaying 
of Ravana, they departed, each in his own flying chariot, proclaiming those 
auspicious events. Proclaiming the frightful slaying of Ravana, the valor of 
Raghava, the brave fighting of the monkeys, the counsel of Sugriva, and the 
devotion and heroism of Laksmana Saumitri, those noble beings, in great 
delight, departed as they had come. But as for noble Raghava, he released 
the celestial chariot, radiant as fire, that Indra had loaned him and paid 
homage to Matali. Granted leave by Raghava, Matali, the charioteer of 
Sakra, mounted that celestial chariot and ascended into the sky. 

[6-10] Once that foremost of the charioteers of the gods had ascended 
into the sky, Raghava embraced Sugriva with the greatest delight. After 
embracing Sugriva, he returned to the army’s encampment, reverently 
saluted by Laksmana and honored by the foremost of the tawny monkeys. 
And then Rama spoke to mighty Laksmana Saumitri, of blazing energy, 
who stood beside him: “Gentle brother, you must consecrate Vibhisana in 
the kingship of Lanka, for he has been loyal and devoted and has rendered 
me great assistance. For this is my most cherished desire, gentle brother: 
that I should see Ravana’s younger brother Vibhisana consecrated in the 
kingship of Lanka.” 

[11-15] Addressed in this fashion by great Raghava, Saumitri replied, 
“So be it,” and, greatly delighted, he brought a golden vessel. Then, in the 
midst of the raksasas, at Rama’s command, Saumitri used that vessel to 


consecrate Vibhisana as king in Lanka. Thus did that righteous hero 
consecrate pure-minded Vibhisana, while the latter’s ministers and those 
rdksasas who were devoted to him rejoiced. Upon seeing the lord of the 
raksasas, Vibhisana, consecrated in the kingship of Lanka, Raghava, 
together with Laksmana, experienced the greatest delight. When he had 
received that great kingdom, which Rama had conferred upon him, 
Vibhisana comforted his people and then approached Rama. 

[16-22] In great delight, the night-roaming raksasas of the city then 
brought unhusked rice, sweetmeats, parched grain, and celestial flowers for 
him. When he had received all those auspicious offerings, the unassailable 
and mighty hero presented them in an auspicious fashion to Raghava and 
Laksmana. And Rama, seeing that Vibhisana had accomplished his purpose 
and was now endowed with prosperity, accepted it all, merely out of a 
desire to please him. Raghava then spoke these words to the leaping 
monkey, mighty Hanuman, as huge as a mountain, who stood beside him, 
his hands cupped in reverence: “My gentle friend, after obtaining 
permission of the great king Vibhisana, you must enter Ravana’s palace. 
Once there, foremost among the victorious, you are to humbly approach 
Vaidehi and inform her that Sugriva, Laksmana, and I are well, and that I 
have slain Ravana. Lord of the tawny monkeys, once you have related the 
good news to Maithili, please take a message from her and return.” 


Sarga 101 

[1-6] Instructed in this fashion and honored by the night-roaming rdksasas, 
Hanuman, son of Maruta, entered the city of Lanka. Entering Ravana’s 
palace, that hero of immense blazing energy spied Sita, who resembled the 
constellation Rohini cut off from her lord, the hare-marked moon, and 
occluded by a malevolent planet. Modest, humble, and deferential, he 
approached her, greeted her respectfully, and began to tell her everything 
that Rama had said: “Rama is quite well, Vaidehi, as are Sugriva and 
Laksmana. Having slain his foe and having thus accomplished his purpose, 
that tamer of his enemies inquires after your well-being. With Vibhisana as 
his ally and together with the tawny monkeys, Rama, through the wise 
counsel of Laksmana, has slain Ravana, O queen. Inquiring as to your well- 
being, the mighty hero Rama, delight of the Raghus, greatly delighted, his 
heart having achieved its purpose, now says this to you: 


[7-11] “ ‘I bring you this good news, my lady, and once again I offer you 
my respectful salutations. Thank god, O knower of righteousness, you have 
survived by virtue of my victory in battle. We have gained victory, Sita. You 
may now be at ease and free from care. My enemy Ravana has been slain, 
and Lanka is under my control. With grim determination to win you back, 
without pause even for sleep, I built a bridge across the mighty ocean and 
thus fulfilled my vow. Nor should you have any further anxiety about 
staying in Ravana’s palace, for the lordship of Lanka has now been made 
over to Vibhisana. So, trusting in that, be comforted. For now you are living 
in your own home, as it were. Moreover, in great delight, he is on his way, 
eager to see you.’ ” 

[12—18] Addressed in this fashion, Sita, whose face was like the hare- 
marked moon, sprang to her feet, speechless with joy. Since Sita did not 
reply, that foremost of the tawny monkeys said: “What are you worried 
about, O queen? Why do you not speak to me?” Addressed in this fashion 
by Hanuman, Sita, so firmly grounded in righteousness, replied in the 
greatest delight with a voice that was choked with joy: “When I heard the 
wonderful news concerning my husband’s victory, I was overwhelmed with 
joy and momentarily speechless. Even upon reflection, leaping monkey, I 
can think of no adequate response to you who have brought me this 
wonderful news. Nor, gentle monkey, can I think of anything on this earth 
to give you for reporting this news—so wonderful for me—that would be 
fitting and adequate. Neither gold nor silver, various gems, or even the 
kingship over the three worlds can be said to equal this.” 

[19-22] Addressed in this fashion by Sita Vaidehi, the leaping monkey 
cupped his hands in reverence and, standing before her, replied with these 
words: “You alone are capable of speaking such affectionate words, you 
who are so devoted to your husband’s welfare and have longed so for his 
victory. Indeed, these words of yours, gentle lady, so affectionate and full of 
meaning, are more precious to me than a heap of all kinds of jewels or even 
the kingship of the gods. In that I see Rama still standing after having slain 
his enemy and gained victory, I have truly already attained those treasured 
things, such as the kingship of the gods, and the like. 

[23-28] “However, if you permit me, I should like to kill all these 
raksasa women who previously threatened you. Please grant me this wish. 
These cruel and horrible rdksasa women with their dreadful rumors, their 


fierce glances, and terrifying threats, tormented you, who are so devoted to 
your husband, when you were suffering in the asoka grove. I would really 
like to slaughter them with different types of blows. Illustrious and lovely 
queen, these creatures have done you such injury. »I would like to slaughter 
them with punches, slaps, kicks, fearsome blows of the knees, slashes of my 
fangs, biting off their ears and noses, tearing out their hair, violent clawing, 
dreadful flying kicks, and many more of these kinds of assaults.” 

[29-32] Addressed in this fashion by Hanuman, the illustrious Vaideht, 
daughter of Janaka, responded to him in words that were in keeping with 
righteousness: “Who, foremost of monkeys, could be angry at servant 
women, for, as mere functionaries and dependent on the king, they are 
obedient and act only on the orders of another. It is as a consequence of my 
evil destiny and my own misdeeds in the past that I have suffered all of this. 
For one always experiences the fruits of one’s actions. I have concluded that 
I had to suffer this as a consequence of my fate, and, being helpless, I had to 
endure all of this here at the hands of Ravana’s servant women. 

[33-37] “These raksasa women tormented me only on the orders of 
Ravana. Now that he has been slain, foremost of monkeys, they will not 
torment me anymore. There is an ancient verse in keeping with 
righteousness that a bear once recited in the presence of a tiger. Hear it now 
from me, leaping monkey: ‘A superior person never requites evil on the part 
of evildoers with evil.’ This rule of conduct must always be adhered to. For 
good conduct is the ornament of the virtuous. A noble person must act 
compassionately whether people are wicked, virtuous, or even if deserving 
of death. For, leaping monkey, no one is entirely innocent. One should not 
harm the rdksasas, who can take on any form at will and take pleasure in 
injuring people, even when they do evil.” 

[38-43] When he was addressed in this fashion by Rama’s illustrious 
wife, Sita, eloquent Hanuman replied to her: “You are a fitting, illustrious, 
and righteous wife to Rama. Please give me your return message, queen, 
and I shall go to where Raghava is.” When Vaideht, Janaka’s daughter, had 
been addressed in this fashion, she said, “Foremost of monkeys, I wish to 
see my husband.” When Hanuman, son of Pavana, had heard those words of 
hers, that immensely splendid hero said these words, lifting Maithilt’s 
spirits: “Noble lady, just as the goddess Saci gazes upon Indra, lord of the 
thirty gods, you shall gaze upon Rama, whose face is like the full moon, 


whose allies are staunch, whose enemies have been slain, and who is 
accompanied by Laksmana.” When he had spoken in this fashion to Sita, 
who was as radiant as Sri incarnate, the immensely swift Hanuman returned 
to where Raghava waited. 


Sarga 102 

[1-7] Approaching the exceedingly wise Rama, foremost of all bowmen, 
the leaping monkey, who understood the matter at hand, addressed him with 
these words: “Now you really must see Queen Maithili, who has been 
tormented with grief, she on whose account we undertook this entire 
mission and achieved the culmination of our efforts. For Maithili, who had 
been overwhelmed with grief, her eyes brimming with tears, was filled with 
joy upon hearing of your victory. Since she trusted me because of the 
confidence I had earlier inspired in her, she said to me, ‘I desire to see my 
husband, who, together with Laksmana, has accomplished his purpose.’ ” 
Addressed in this fashion by Hanuman, Rama, foremost among upholders 
of righteousness, was suddenly plunged into gloomy thought and became 
somewhat tearful. Heaving long, hot sighs and staring at the ground, he 
spoke to Vibhisana, who stood beside him, looking like a great storm cloud: 
«a“Have Sita Vaideht come here anointed with celestial unguents, adorned 
with celestial ornaments, her hair freshly washed. Make haste!” 

[8—12] Addressed in this fashion by Rama, Vibhisana, hurrying, entered 
the inner apartments and there had his own wives instruct Sita in these 
words: “Vaidehi, anointed with celestial unguents and adorned with 
celestial ornaments, you are to mount a carriage. For, bless you, your 
husband desires to see you.” Addressed in this fashion, Vaideht replied to 
Vibhisana: “But I wish to see my husband without having bathed, lord of 
the raksasas.” When Vibhisana heard those words of hers, he replied, “You 
should do exactly as your husband, Rama, says.” Upon hearing those words 
of his, virtuous Maithili, whose husband was her god and whose vow was 
devotion to him, responded, “So be it.” 

[13-16] Young women then washed her hair and adorned her with costly 
garments and ornaments. Then Vibhisana took Sita with him, after having 
had her mount a shining palanquin that was draped in costly fabrics and 
guarded by many raksasas. Approaching the great man and noting that he 
was lost in brooding thought, he bowed and, in great delight, announced 


that Sita had come. But when Raghava heard that she who had dwelt so 
long in the rdksasa’s house had come, three emotions—joy, sorrow, and 
anger—took hold of him. 

[17-22] Then, perceiving that Vibhisana now stood beside him, 
Raghava, miserable and debating inwardly, spoke to him, “Gentle lord of 
the raksasas, ever dedicated to my victory, please bring Vaidehi to me at 
once.” Heeding those words of Raghava, Vibhisana quickly made an effort 
to have the area cleared on every side. Guards, wearing mail and turbans 
and holding staves and drums in their hands, began to move about there, 
clearing the area on every side. Then, being driven back on every side, the 
crowds of apes, monkeys, and rdksasas withdrew to a distance. And as they 
were all being driven back, there arose a sound like the roar of the ocean 
being whipped up by a gale. 

[23-29] But when Raghava saw them being driven back in great 
agitation on all sides, he stopped it out of kindness and because he could not 
abide it. Furious, Rama spoke reproachful words to the immensely wise 
Vibhisana, seeming almost to burn him up with his eyes: “Why are you 
harassing these people with complete disregard for my wishes? Stop this 
business at once. These people are like my own kin. It is not houses, 
garments, high walls, curtains, or such royal treatment as this that shields a 
woman; it is her virtuous conduct alone. Moreover, there is nothing wrong 
with a woman being seen in public during emergencies, periods of hardship, 
in time of war, at a ceremony of choosing her husband, during a sacrifice, or 
at a wedding ceremony. She has been through a war and has been placed in 
tremendous hardship. Therefore, there would be nothing wrong in her being 
seen publicly, especially in my company. So bring her into my presence at 
once, Vibhisana. Let Sita see me surrounded by the hosts of my friends.” 

[30-32] Addressed in this fashion by Rama, Vibhisana, reflecting on all 
of this, obediently led Sita into his presence. And as for Laksmana, Sugriva, 
and the leaping monkey Hanuman, they too became deeply troubled upon 
hearing Rama’s words. Because of his demeanor that was so pitiless and 
seemed to show no regard for his wife, they inferred that Raghava was 
displeased with Sita. 

[33-36] Trying to make her body appear small in her shame, Maithil1, 
followed by Vibhisana, approached her husband. Covering her face with her 
garment in her shame there before the assembled people, she wept as she 


came near her husband, murmuring, “My noble husband.” She whose 
husband was her divinity and whose face was more radiant than the moon 
gazed upon the moonlike face of her husband with amazement, joy, and 
love. Then, gazing upon her beloved’s face, which she had not seen for so 
long and which was as lovely as the full moon rising, she shed her 
depression of spirit and her face became as radiant as the hare-marked 
moon. 


Sarga 103 

[1-5] As he gazed upon Maithili, who stood so meekly beside him, Rama 
began to speak, as rage simmered in his heart: “So here you are, my good 
woman. I have won you back after conquering my enemy in battle. 
Whatever there was to be done through manly valor, I have now 
accomplished. I have wiped clean the affront, and so my wrath is appeased. 
For I have eliminated both the insult and my enemy at the same time. Today 
my manly valor has been witnessed. Today my efforts have borne fruit. 
Today, having fulfilled my vow here, I am once more master of myself. You 
were carried off by that wanton rdksasa when you were left alone, but now, 
through manly action, I have expunged that affront brought about by fate. 

[6—9] “What human purpose can man serve if his spirit is so feeble that 
he will not wipe clean through his own blazing energy an insult he has 
received? The leaping of the ocean and the razing of Lanka—today those 
praiseworthy deeds of Hanuman have borne fruit. Today, through their valor 
in battle and their beneficial counsel to me, the efforts of Sugriva and his 
army have borne fruit as well. And the efforts of my devoted Vibhisana, 
who abandoned his evil brother and came to me of his own accord, have 
likewise borne fruit.” 

[10-16] As Rama was saying these words in that fashion, Sita, wide- 
eyed like a doe, was overcome with tears. But as Rama gazed upon her, his 
anger flared up once more, like the raging flame of a blazing fire drenched 
with melted butter. Knitting his brows on his forehead and glancing at her 
from the corner of his eye, he spoke harshly to Sita there in the midst of the 
monkeys and raksasas: “In wiping away this affront, Sita, I have 
accomplished all that a man could do. In my wrath, I have won you back 
from the hands of my enemy, just as, through his austerities, the 
contemplative sage Agastya won back the southern lands that had been 


inaccessible to all living beings. Bless you, but let it be understood that it 
was not on your account that I undertook the effort of this war, now brought 
to completion through the valor of my allies. Instead, I did all this in order 
to protect my reputation and in every way to wipe clean the insult and 
disgrace to my illustrious lineage. 

[17-21] “Since, however, your virtue is now in doubt, your presence has 
become as profoundly disagreeable to me as is a bright lamp to a man 
afflicted with a disease of the eye. Go, therefore, as you please, daughter of 
Janaka. You have my permission. Here are the ten directions. I have no 
further use for you, my good woman. For what powerful man born in a 
respectable family—his heart tinged with affection—would take back a 
woman who had lived in the house of another man? How could I who boast 
of my noble lineage possibly take you back—yust risen from Ravana’s lap 
and gazed upon by his lustful eye? I have recovered my reputation, and that 
is the purpose for which I won you back. I do not love you anymore. Go 
hence wherever you like. 

[22—25] “I have made up my mind in saying this, my good woman. Turn 
your thoughts toward Laksmana or Bharata as you please. Or, Sita, set your 
mind on Sugriva, lord of the monkeys, or on the rdksasa lord Vibhisana, or 
on whomever you please. For surely, Sita, once Ravana had seen you, so 
enchanting with your heavenly beauty, he would not long have left you 
unmolested while you were dwelling in his house.” When Maithili, who 
deserved to hear only kind words, had heard those cruel words of her 
beloved after such a long time, she shed tears and trembled violently, like a 
vallari creeper struck down by the trunk of an elephant lord. 


Sarga 104 

[1-4] When Vaidehi was addressed in this cruel and horrifying manner by 
the furious Raghava, she was deeply wounded. Hearing those cutting words 
of her husband—words such as she had never heard before—in the 
presence of that great multitude, Maithill was overcome with shame. 
Pierced, as it were, by those verbal barbs, the daughter of Janaka seemed to 
shrink within herself and gave way to bitter tears. Wiping her tear-stained 
face, she replied softly to her husband in a faltering voice: 

[S—10] “How can you, heroic prince, speak to me with such cutting and 
improper words, painful to the ears, as some vulgar man might speak to his 


vulgar wife? I am not as you think of me, great-armed prince. You must 
believe in me, for I swear to you by my own virtue. You harbor suspicion 
against all women because of the conduct of the vulgar ones. If you really 
knew me, you would abandon your suspicion. If I came into contact with 
another’s body against my will, lord, I had no choice in this matter. It 1s fate 
that was to blame here. My heart, which I do control, was always devoted to 
you. But I could not control my body, which was in the power of another. 
What could I have done? If, bestower of honor, you do not truly know me 
despite our long-nurtured love and intimacy, then surely I am lost forever. 

[11—16] “When you dispatched the hero Hanuman to search for me, why, 
heroic prince, did you not repudiate me then, while I was still being held in 
Lanka? No sooner had I heard your words to that effect, heroic prince, than, 
abandoned by you, I would have abandoned my own life right before the 
eyes of that monkey lord. Then you would not have had to risk your life in a 
useless effort, nor would your allies have had to suffer hardship to no 
purpose. But now, tiger among men, you have given way to anger like some 
lesser man, taking into account only that I am a woman. Since my name is 
derived from Janaka, you failed to take into account the fact that I was born 
from the earth itself, nor, though you are an expert judge of conduct, have 
you given due consideration to my virtuous conduct. Moreover, you do not 
weigh the fact that, as a boy, you firmly clasped my hand while I was but a 
child. My devotion, my virtuous conduct—you have turned your back on all 
of that.” 

[17-21] As she was speaking in this fashion, Sita turned, weeping, to 
Laksmana, who stood there, despondent and brooding. Then she spoke, her 
voice choked with tears: “Build me a pyre, Saumitri, the only remedy for 
this calamity. I cannot bear to live tainted by these false allegations. 
Rejected in this public gathering by my husband, who is not satisfied with 
my virtues, I shall enter the fire, bearer of oblations, so that I may follow 
the only path proper for me.” When Laksmana, slayer of enemy heroes, had 
been addressed in this fashion by Vaidehi, he was overcome with anger and 
closely studied Raghava’s face. But sensing Rama’s intentions, which were 
betrayed by his facial expression, mighty Saumitri, obedient to Rama’s 
wishes, built the pyre. 

[22—27] Then Vaidehi slowly and reverently circumambulated Rama, 
whose face was downcast, and approached the blazing fire, eater of 


oblations. After making her obeisance to the gods and the brahmans, 
Maithilt cupped her hands in reverence and, in the presence of Agni, said 
this: “Since my heart has never once strayed from Raghava, so may Agni, 
the purifier, witness of all the world, protect me in every way.” When she 
had spoken in this fashion, Vaidehit reverently circumambulated the fire, 
eater of oblations. Then, with complete detachment, she entered the blazing 
flames. The vast crowd assembled there, filled with children and the aged, 
watched as Maithili entered the fire, eater of oblations. As Sita entered the 
fire, a deafening and prodigious cry of “Alas! Alas!” arose from the 
raksasas and monkeys. 


Sarga 105 
[1-4] Then King Kubera Vaisravana; Yama, tormentor of his foes; great 
Indra of the thousand eyes; Varuna, scorcher of his foes; the great god, 
majestic Siva, with his half-six eyes and the bull on his banner; and 
Brahma, foremost of those who know the vedas, the creator of the entire 
universe—all these assembled in their flying chariots as radiant as the sun, 
and, coming to the city of Lanka, they approached Raghava. Then, raising 
their broad arms covered with bracelets, the foremost of the thirty gods 
addressed Raghava, who stood before them, his hands cupped in reverence: 

[5—8] “How can you, the creator of the entire universe, the most ancient 
one, and foremost among those possessing supreme knowledge, stand by 
and watch as Sita falls into the fire, eater of oblations? How can you not 
realize that you are the foremost among the hosts of the gods? Long ago, 
you were the Vasu Rtadhaman, the progenitor of the Vasus. You are the 
primal creator of the three worlds, the untrammeled lord. You are Rudra, the 
eighth among the Rudras, and you are fifth among the sadhyas. The twin 
ASsvins are your ears, the moon and the sun your eyes. You are present 
before the beginning and after the end of the worlds, scorcher of your foes. 
And yet, like some ordinary man, you ignore Vaidehi.” 

[9-10] When Rama Raghava, the lord of the world, was addressed in this 
fashion by those guardians of the world, that foremost of those who uphold 
righteousness said to the foremost of the thirty gods: “I think of myself only 
as aman, Rama, the son of Dasaratha. May the Blessed Lord please tell me 
who I really am, to whom I belong, and why I am here.” 


[11-16] As Kakutstha was speaking in this fashion, Brahma, foremost 
among those who know the vedas, said to him: “Truly valorous Rama, now 
hear the truth from me. You are a god, the majestic Lord Narayana, wielder 
of the discus. You are the single-tusked boar and the conqueror of your 
enemies, past and future. You are the imperishable Brahman, existent in the 
beginning, the middle, and the end. You are the highest governing principle 
of all the worlds, the four-armed Visvaksena. You are the wielder of the 
horn bow, you are Hrsikesa, the primal being, the Supreme Spirit. You are 
Visnu, the invincible wielder of the sword, and you are Krsna of immense 
strength. You are the leader of the hosts. You are the leader of all beings. 
You are intelligence, strength, forbearance, and self-control. You are the 
origin and the dissolution. You are Upendra, Indra’s younger brother, and 
Madhusiidana, slayer of the asura Madhu. You are the author of Indra’s 
deeds. You are the lord of the great gods. You are the lotus-naveled god. 
You are the destroyer of your enemies in battle. The divine great seers call 
you fit for refuge and refuge itself. 

[17-23] “You are the great bull of a thousand horns and a hundred 
tongues that is the veda itself. You are the sacrifice, the sacred utterance 
vasat, and the sacred syllable om, scorcher of your foes. No one knows your 
origin or your end. People wonder, ‘Who are you?’ You are manifest in all 
creatures—especially brahmans and cows—and also in all the directions, 
the sky, the mountains, and the forests. You are the majestic lord of a 
thousand feet, a thousand heads, and a thousand eyes. You support all 
beings as well as the earth with all its mountains. At the end of the world, 
you manifest yourself resting on the great serpent on the waters. You 
support the three worlds, Rama, along with the gods, gandharvas, and 
danavas. | am your heart, Rama, your tongue is the goddess of speech, 
Sarasvati. It is I, Brahma, O lord, who made the gods, who are the hairs on 
your limbs. When you close your eyes, it is night; when you open them, it is 
day. Your ritual practices are the ordinances of the vedas. Without you, 
there is nothing. Your body is this world; your steadfastness, the earth. Agni 
is your wrath; Soma, your gentleness, O bearer of the Srivatsa mark. 

[24—28] “In ancient times, you spanned the three worlds with as many 
strides. After confining the great asura Bali, you made great Indra king. 
Sita is Laksmi; you are the god Visnu. You are Krsna. You are Prajapati, the 
lord of creatures. It was in order to slay Ravana that you entered a human 


body here. Thus have you accomplished our purpose, foremost of upholders 
of righteousness. Ravana has been slain. Now, Rama, in your delight, please 
return to heaven. Your strength and might have not been in vain, nor has 
your valor. Nor will men who are devoted to you ever fail of their purpose. 
You are the ancient god and Supreme Spirit. Those who are firmly devoted 
to you and those men who praise you will never fail in any way.” 


Sarga 106 

[1-3] Upon hearing that auspicious speech uttered by Grandfather Brahma, 
Agni, the shining god of fire, arose, holding Vaidehi at his side. Adorned 
with ornaments of burnished gold and clad in a red garment, the young 
woman was as radiant as the rising sun. Her hair was dark and curling and 
her garland and ornaments were unsinged. Her mind was calm and she 
looked unchanged. Holding Vaidehi at his side, Agni, the shining god of 
fire, gave her back to Rama. 

[4-9] Then Agni, the purifier and witness of all the world, spoke to 
Rama, saying: “Here is your Vaidehi, Rama. She has committed no sin. She 
is of pure conduct and high moral character and has never betrayed you by 
word, thought, imagination, or glance. When you left her alone, she was 
carried off—helpless and sorrowful—from the deserted forest by the 
rdksasa Ravana, arrogant in his power. Hidden and imprisoned in the inner 
apartments, thinking only of you and having you for her only recourse, she 
was guarded by hordes of hideous rdksasa women, dreadful to behold. 
Although she was enticed and threatened in various ways, Maithilt would 
not even think of the rdksasa, since her heart was utterly devoted to you. 
You must take her back, Raghava, for her heart is pure and she is free from 
sin. | am giving you an order; there is nothing further to be said.” 

[10-14] When Rama, of immense blazing energy, steadfast and firm in 
his valor, had been addressed in this fashion, that foremost of those who 
maintain righteousness replied to that most eminent among the thirty gods: 
“Unquestionably Sita needed to be proven innocent before the three worlds, 
since this auspicious woman had long dwelt in Ravana’s inner apartments. 
For surely had I not put Janaki to the test, the virtuous would have said of 
me, ‘Dasaratha’s son Rama is a lustful fool.’ I know full well that Janaka’s 
daughter Maithili could give her heart to no other, since she is devoted to 
me and obeys my every thought. But in order that the three worlds too 


should have faith in her, I, whose ultimate recourse is truth, simply stood by 
as Vaidehi entered the fire, eater of oblations. 

[15-20] “Ravana could no more have violated that wide-eyed lady, 
protected by her own blazing energy, than could the mighty ocean violate 
its shore. That evil-minded wretch was incapable of assaulting Maithil1, 
even in his thoughts. For she is as unapproachable as a blazing flame of 
fire. This auspicious woman could never have ruled over Ravana’s inner 
apartments. For she is as inseparable from me as is its radiance from the 
sun, bringer of light. Janaka’s daughter Maithili has been proven innocent 
before the three worlds, and I am no more able to give her up than is a self- 
controlled man, his good name. Moreover, I must follow the good advice 
that all of you affectionate friends, respected throughout the worlds, have 
uttered in this fashion for my own good.” When he had uttered these words, 
mighty Rama, praised by his mighty companions for the feat he had 
accomplished, was reunited with his beloved. Then Raghava experienced 
the happiness he so richly deserved. 


Sarga 107 

[1-8] Upon hearing that auspicious speech so beautifully spoken by 
Raghava, Mahesvara responded with these still more auspicious words: 
“Lotus-eyed, great-armed, broad-chested scorcher of your foes! Foremost 
of weapon bearers! Thank heavens you have accomplished this feat. Thank 
heavens, Rama, you have dispelled in battle the vast and terrible darkness in 
the form of the fear of Ravana that had engulfed the entire world. You must 
now console despondent Bharata and the illustrious Kausalya and see 
Kaikeyi and Laksmana’s mother, Sumitra. You must assume the kingship of 
Ayodhya and reward all your allies. Then, mighty hero, you must establish 
a lineage in the House of Iksvaku. At last, once you have offered the 
asvamedha and attained unsurpassed glory, you should give away your 
wealth to the brahmans and ascend to the triple heaven. And here, 
Kakutstha, in his flying chariot, is your father, King Dasaratha, who, in the 
world of men, was your illustrious elder. Saved by you, his son, the majestic 
king has attained the world of Indra. Together with Laksmana, you must 
now respectfully salute him.” 

[9-12] Upon hearing these words of the great god Siva, Kakutstha, 
together with Laksmana, made obeisance to his father, who stood atop his 


flying chariot. Then the Lord, together with his brother Laksmana, gazed 
upon his father, who was clad in a spotless garment and was blazing with 
his own innate splendor. Filled with the greatest joy, the lord of the earth, 
Dasaratha, mounted on his flying chariot, gazed upon his son, who was 
dearer to him than life itself. Then, seated on a splendid throne, the great- 
armed lord took him on his lap and, taking him in his arms, said these 
words: 

[13-17] “I swear to you truthfully, Rama, that without you I care nothing 
for heaven and the esteem of the divine seers. And, most eloquent of men, 
those words that Kaikeyi uttered regarding your banishment were still 
rankling in my heart. But today, seeing that you are safe and sound and 
having embraced you and Laksmana, I have been freed from my sorrow, 
like the sun, bringer of light, emerging from a dense fog. My son, you, an 
excellent son and a great man, have saved me, just as a righteous brahman 
was saved by Astavakra. I now realize, my gentle son, that you are the 
Supreme Spirit, who was enjoined by the lords of the gods to slay Ravana. 

[18—23] “Surely, Rama, Kausalya will have achieved her most cherished 
desire when, in delight, she sees that you, slayer of your enemies, have 
returned home from the wilderness. And just as surely, Rama, will the 
people have achieved their most cherished desire when they see that you 
have returned to the city and, dripping with water, have been consecrated as 
lord of the earth, bearer of wealth. I only wish that I could see you reunited 
with devoted, powerful, honest, and righteous Bharata. My gentle son, you 
have spent fourteen years in the wilderness living with Sita and wise 
Laksmana. You have completed your sojourn in the forest and have thus 
fulfilled your vow. Moreover, having slain Ravana in battle, you have 
gratified the gods. You have performed a praiseworthy feat and gained 
renown, slayer of your foes. Now, established in the kingship, may you 
attain long life, together with your brothers.” 

[24—26] As the king was speaking in this fashion, Rama, cupping his 
hands in reverence, said this to him: “O you who understand righteousness, 
please extend your grace to Kaikeyi and Bharata. And may that terrible 
curse that you invoked when you told Kaikeyi, ‘I renounce both you and 
your son,’ not be visited upon Kaikeyi and her son, lord.” The great king 
said, “So be it,’ to Rama, who stood there with his hands cupped in 


reverence. Then, embracing Laksmana, he now spoke to him in these 
words: 

[27-32] “In devotedly serving Rama as well as Sita Vaidehi, you have 
given me the greatest pleasure and attained the fruit of your righteousness. 
And since Rama is pleased with you, O you who know righteousness, you 
will attain righteousness, great renown on earth, heaven, and everlasting 
glory. Bless you, increaser of Sumitra’s joy, you must serve Rama. For 
Rama is perpetually devoted to the welfare of all the world. All these gods, 
including Indra, along with the three worlds, the perfected beings, and the 
supreme seers, have approached him, the great Supreme Spirit, and are 
worshiping him. Rama, scorcher of his foes, has been revealed by them, my 
gentle son, to be Brahman, the unmanifest and imperishable Supreme Spirit, 
the secret heart of the gods. Devotedly serving Rama as well as Sita 
Vaidehi, you have attained righteousness and immense glory.” 

[33-36] When he had spoken in this fashion to Laksmana, who stood 
with his hands cupped in reverence, the righteous and great-armed king 
then said these splendid words to Vaidehi: “You should not be angry over 
this repudiation, Vaidehi. Wishing only what is best for you, Rama did this 
to demonstrate your purity. Fair-browed woman, you do not need to be 
instructed with regard to your obedience to your husband. Nonetheless, it is 
necessary for me to tell you that he is your highest divinity.” When radiant 
Dasaratha had instructed his two sons and his daughter-in-law Sita in this 
fashion, he proceeded in his flying chariot to Indra’s world. 


Sarga 108 
[1—2] When DaSaratha Kakutstha had departed, great Indra, the chastiser of 
Paka, spoke in the greatest delight to Raghava, who stood with his hands 
cupped in reverence: “Rama, scorcher of your foes! Your seeing us should 
not be without its reward. I am pleased, and therefore you must say what 
your heart desires.” 

[3-8] Addressed in this fashion, Kakutstha, together with his brother 
Laksmana and his wife, Sita, cupped his hands in reverence and replied: “If 
you are truly pleased with me, lord of all the gods, I will tell you. Please 
make my words prove true, foremost among the eloquent. May all those 
valorous monkeys who, for my sake, have gone to the abode of Yama rise 
up, restored to life. Let them, who were devoted to my service and heedless 


of death, be reunited through your grace. This is the boon I choose. 
Humbler of pride, I wish to see the langurs and apes free from their pain 
and their wounds and filled once more with strength and vigor. May there 
always be choice roots and fruits, even out of season, and may the rivers 
run clear wherever those monkeys may dwell.” 

[9-13] When great Indra had heard those words of great Raghava, he 
responded with these words, which manifested his pleasure: “This is a 
major boon that you have requested, my son, delight of the Raghus. But 
these tawny monkeys shall arise, just like sleepers when their sleep is done. 
Filled with the greatest joy, they will all be reunited with their friends, their 
relatives, their kinsmen, and their own people. The trees shall be filled with 
fruits and varicolored with blossoms, even out of season, great bowman, 
and the rivers shall be filled with water.” Then all the monkeys—their 
bodies, which had been covered with wounds, now healed and free of 
wounds—were wonderstruck, crying, “What is this?” 

[14-19] When all the principal gods saw that Kakutstha had had his wish 
fulfilled, they first praised him, who was so praiseworthy and who was 
accompanied by Laksmana, and then they said: “Proceed from here to 
Ayodhya, hero, and discharge the monkeys. You should also console your 
devoted and long-suffering Maithilt. You must see your brother Bharata, 
who is practicing austerities in his grief for you. Then, once you have gone 
there, have yourself consecrated, and so bring joy to the people of the city.” 
When they had spoken in this fashion, the gods took their leave of Rama 
and Saumitri, and, in great delight, they went off to heaven in their flying 
chariots, which were as radiant as the sun. Then Kakutstha, along with his 
brother Laksmana, after respectfully saluting all of the most eminent of the 
thirty gods, ordered the army to make camp. Under the protection of 
Laksmana and Rama, that great and glorious army, radiant with splendor, its 
troops delighted, glowed on every side, as does the night illumined by the 
cool-rayed moon. 


Sarga 109 
[1-3] When Rama, tamer of his enemies, had passed the night and arisen at 
his leisure, Vibhisana, cupping his hands in reverence and wishing him 
victory, said to him: “Here is water for your bath, ointments for your body, 
garments and ornaments, heavenly sandalwood paste, and various kinds of 


garlands. These lotus-eyed women, skilled in the arts of grooming their 
like, are at your service. They will bathe you in the proper fashion, 
Raghava.” 

[4-7] Addressed in this fashion, Kakutstha replied to Vibhisana, “You 
should instead invite the tawny monkeys, led by Sugriva, to bathe. For the 
great-armed and righteous prince Bharata, Kaikeyi’s son, who is delicate 
and accustomed to comforts, is nonetheless true to his vows and suffering 
hardship for my sake. Without him—so righteous in his conduct—I do not 
care for baths, garments, and ornaments. Moreover, we must return to the 
city immediately by this very road, for the path of one traveling to Ayodhya 
is extremely difficult.” 

[8—14] Addressed in this fashion, Vibhisana replied to Kakutstha: “I 
shall see to it that you reach your city in a single day, prince. For, bless you, 
there is a flying palace, as radiant as the sun, called Puspaka, which Ravana 
took from my brother Kubera by force. That flying palace, which resembles 
a cloud, is kept nearby. By means of this conveyance you shall go to 
Ayodhya free from anxiety. But if I am at all worthy of your favor, if you 
are cognizant of my virtues, and if you have any affection for me, my wise 
friend, then please stay here for a while. Then, Rama, honored with all 
manner of desirable things, you can depart with your brother Laksmana and 
your wife, Vaidehi. You are very dear to me, Rama, as is your army and 
your host of friends. Therefore, please accept this appropriate hospitality 
that I am offering. But I am not trying to give you orders, Raghava. I am 
your servant, and I am beseeching you out of my affection, esteem, and 
friendship.” 

[15—21] Addressed in this fashion, Rama replied to Vibhisana in such a 
way that all the raksasas and monkeys could hear him: “I have been greatly 
honored by you, heroic scorcher of your foes, through your counsel, your 
wholehearted assistance, and your unparalleled friendship. It is not that I 
would not heed your words, lord of the raksasas. But my heart is eager to 
see my brother Bharata. For he came out to Citrakita to bring me back, and, 
though he beseeched me, bowing his head to my feet, I would not heed his 
words. And my heart is eager also to see Kausalya, Sumitra, and illustrious 
Kaikeyi, as well as my elders, my friends, and the citizens, together with 
their children. So please get that flying palace ready for me immediately, 
lord of the raksasas. For how indeed could I agree to stay here, now that my 


mission has been accomplished? Please grant me leave, Vibhisana, my 
gentle friend. I have already been deeply honored. Please don’t be angry, 
but since I am in haste, I beseech you.” 

[22-27] Vibhisana then stood waiting after announcing to Rama that that 
unassailable flying palace, as swift as thought, had arrived. Each of its parts 
was variegated with gold, and its raised platforms were made of lapis. It 
was covered on every side with penthouses, and it shone like silver. It was 
adorned with white pennants and banners. It was splendid with golden 
mansions and adorned with golden lotuses. It was covered with masses of 
tiny bells and had windows of pearl. It was covered with masses of bells on 
every side so that 1t made a sweet sound. Fashioned by Visvakarman, it 
resembled the peak of Mount Meru. It was adorned with many mansions 
that shone with pearl and silver. It had floors whose sections were 
variegated with crystal, and its splendid and costly seats of lapis were 
spread with expensive coverlets. 


Sarga 110 
[1—2] When Vibhisana saw that the flying palace Puspaka, all adorned with 
flowers, had come, he spoke to Rama, who stood nearby. Cupping his hands 
in reverence, the humble and obedient lord of the rdksasas, filled with a 
sense of urgency, said to Raghava, “What should I do now?” 

[3-7] After some reflection, Raghava of immense blazing energy said 
these affectionate words to him in such a way that Laksmana could hear 
them: “Vibhisana, the forest-dwelling monkeys have performed arduous 
deeds. You must honor them with gems, various ornaments, and other 
valuables. O lord of the raksasas, Lanka was besieged and conquered with 
the assistance of these monkeys, who, filled with the excitement of battle, 
cast off their fear of death and never retreated in battle. Honored in this 
fashion by you, bestower of honor, in your gratitude, these leaders of the 
troops of tawny monkeys, who are deserving of honor, will be delighted. I 
am advising you to do this so that they may recognize that you know both 
how to acquire wealth and dispense it and that you are compassionate and 
illustrious.” 

[8—10] Addressed in this fashion by Rama, Vibhisana honored all the 
monkeys, each according to his share, with gems and other valuables. Then, 
having seen the troop leaders honored with gems and other valuables, 


Rama, taking the illustrious, but embarrassed, Vaidehi on his lap, ascended 
that magnificent flying palace, together with his valorous brother 
Laksmana, who was armed with a bow. 

[11-15] Once he had ascended the flying palace, Kakutstha addressed 
the immensely powerful Sugriva, the raksasa Vibhisana, and all the 
monkeys: “Foremost among the monkeys, you have done all that friends 
could be expected to do. I grant you leave. You may now all depart at your 
leisure. And you, Sugriva, scorcher of your foes, you who fear only 
unrighteousness, have accomplished all that a friend and ally could be 
expected to do. You may now quickly return to Kiskindha accompanied by 
your army. And you, Vibhisana, may dwell in Lanka, your own kingdom, 
which I have given you. Not even the denizens of heaven along with Indra 
will be capable of assaulting you. I will now return to Ayodhya, my father’s 
capital. I wish to take my leave, and I bid you all farewell.” 

[16-20] Addressed in this fashion by Rama, the immensely powerful 
monkeys and the rdksasa Vibhisana cupped their hands in reverence and 
said to him, “We wish to go to Ayodhya. Please, sir, take us all. Once we 
have seen you dripping from your consecration and have respectfully 
saluted Kausalya, we will immediately return to our own homes, O son of 
the lord of men.” Addressed in this fashion by Vibhisana and the monkeys, 
righteous and majestic Raghava replied to them and to Sugriva: “All my 
friends and I would experience a pleasure greater than any other if I could 
share the joy of returning to the city together with all of you. So quickly 
ascend the flying palace, Sugriva, together with your monkeys. And you 
too, Vibhisana, lord of the raksasas, ascend along with your ministers.” 

[21-23] Then, hastening, Sugriva, together with his army, quickly 
ascended the heavenly flying palace Puspaka, as did Vibhisana, together 
with his ministers. Once they had all ascended the superb vehicle of 
Kubera, lord of wealth, it rose into the sky at Raghava’s command. Then 
Rama departed in that radiant flying palace yoked to hamsas. Delighted in 
mind and body, he resembled Kubera himself. 


Sarga 111 
[1-2] At Rama’s command that magnificent flying palace flew onward, like 
a great cloud driven before the wind. Casting his gaze in all directions, 


Rama, the delight of the Raghus, said to Sita Maithilt, whose face was like 
the hare-marked moon: 

[3-7] “Vaidehi, behold Lanka, fashioned by Visvakarman himself, 
situated there on the peak of Mount Triktita, which resembles the peak of 
Mount Kailasa. And look, Sita, there, mired with flesh and blood, is the 
battlefield that was the scene of that huge slaughter of the tawny monkeys 
and the raksasas. It was here, on your account, wide-eyed lady, that I slew 
Ravana. Here too, Kumbhakarna was slain as well as the night-roaming 
raksasa Prahasta. And it was here that Laksmana slew Indrajit Ravani in 
battle, while Viripaksa, impossible to even look upon, as well as 
Mahaparsva and Mahodara were also slain. Akampana was slain here as 
were those other powerful rdksasas, Trisiras, Atikaya, Devantaka, and 
Narantaka. 

[8—13] “And here Ravana’s wife Mandodari, surrounded by a thousand 
of her co-wives all drenched with tears, mourned him. And there you can 
see the shore of the ocean, fair-faced woman, where we camped for the 
night after crossing the sea. And, wide-eyed lady, that bridge is Nala’s 
bridge, all but impossible to build, which, for your sake, I had constructed 
across the ocean, the reservoir of waters. Observe the imperturbable ocean, 
Vaidehi, Varuna’s abode, boundless and roaring, abounding in conch and 
mother-of-pearl. And look, Maithilt, at the golden lord of mountains, Mount 
Mainaka, with its golden peak, which, parting the sea, rose up to provide a 
resting place for Hanuman. And here is where Vibhisana, king of the 
rdksasas, came over to me. 

[14-20] “And there, Sita, one can see Sugriva’s charming city, 
Kiskindha, with its lovely woodlands. That is where I killed Valin. There, 
Sita, one can see RSyamika, foremost of mountains. Laced with golden 
minerals, it resembles a huge storm cloud laced with lightning. It was here 
that I met Sugriva, lord of the monkeys, and where I forged a pact, Sita, 
with the purpose of slaying Valin. And there one can see the lotus pond 
Pampa, with its lovely woodlands, where, bereft of you, I lamented in my 
profound grief. On its banks I met Sabari, who practiced righteousness. And 
it was here that I killed Kabandha, his arms a league in length. And there, 
graceful Sita, in Janasthana, one can see that majestic tree, the lord of the 
forest, where, on your account, a great battle took place between cruel 
Ravana and great Jatayus. And it was here too that, with my straight-flying 


arrows, I slew Khara and struck down Disana and immensely powerful 
Trisiras in battle. 

[21-29] “There one can see the charming and beautiful leaf hut from 
which you were forcibly abducted by Ravana, the lord of the raksasas. And 
there is the lovely and auspicious Godavari River with its limpid waters. 
Look, Maithili, one can see the ashram of Agastya. And, Vaidehi, here one 
can see the vast ashram of Sarabhafiga to which thousand-eyed Sakra, 
smasher of citadels, himself came. Over there, slender-waisted woman, one 
can see the dwellings of the ascetics, where Atri, the ashram elder, whose 
radiance is like that of Stirya or Agni VaisSvanara, dwells. It was here, Sita, 
that you met the ascetic woman who practiced righteousness. It was in this 
region that I killed the giant Viradha. And here, slender woman, just coming 
into view, is Citraktita, the lord of mountains, where Kaikey1’s son came to 
beseech me to return. Over there, in the distance, where Bharadvaja’s 
majestic ashram is just coming into view, one can see the Yamuna with its 
lovely woodlands. And over there one can see the Ganges, which flows by 
three paths, lady of the fair complexion. And that is the city of Srigavera, 
where Guha met us. And there one can see Ayodhya, my father’s capital. 
Now that you have returned, Vaidehi, you should make obeisance to 
Ayodhya.” 

[30-31] Then all the monkeys and the rdksasa Vibhisana, jumping up 
again and again, gazed at that beautiful city. Those leaping monkeys gazed 
upon the city of Ayodhya, garlanded with white mansions. It had spacious 
courtyards and was crowded with elephants and horses, just like Amaravatt, 
the city of great Indra. 


Sarga 112 

[1—2] And so, on the fifth day of the fortnight when the fourteenth year was 
just complete, Laksmana’s older brother reached Bharadvaja’s ashram and, 
with complete self-possession, praised that sage. When he had respectfully 
saluted that treasure trove of asceticism Bharadvaja, he inquired of him: “I 
trust, holy sage, that you hear that the people of the city are healthy and 
well fed. I trust that Bharata is intent on his duties and that my mothers are 
still living.” 

[3-8] Addressed in this fashion by Rama, the great sage Bharadvaja 
smiled and, in great delight, replied to that foremost of the Raghus: 


“Smeared with mud and wearing matted locks, Bharata awaits you, having 
placed your sandals in a position of honor. And, yes, everything is fine in 
your household. When last I saw you, conqueror in battle, you were 
entering the deep forest on foot, clad in barkcloth garments, with but one 
lone companion and a woman. Desiring only righteousness, you had been 
driven from the kingdom, giving up everything to obey your father’s 
instructions and intent on obeying those of Kaikeyt. Stripped of all objects 
of enjoyment and subsisting on wild roots and fruits, you were like an 
immortal god fallen from heaven. At that time, I was deeply saddened. But 
now, when I see that you have accomplished your mission and triumphed 
over your enemy in the company of your kinsmen and your hosts of friends, 
I feel unsurpassed delight. 

[9-15] “And I know, Raghava, about all the many joys and sorrows you 
experienced, starting with the slaughter in Janasthana. There was the 
encounter with Marica and the assault on Sita while you were employed on 
behalf of the brahmans to protect all the ascetics. Then there was the 
encounter with Kabandha, your arrival at Lake Pampa, and your alliance 
with Sugriva on account of which you slew Valin. I know about the search 
for Vaidehi, the feats of the son of the wind god, and how Nala’s bridge was 
built once Vaidehi had been found. I know too about how the excited troop 
leaders of the tawny monkeys set Lanka ablaze, and how Ravana, that thorn 
in the side of the gods, was destroyed, along with his sons, his kinsmen, his 
ministers, his army, and his vehicles. Finally, I know about your meeting 
with the thirty gods and how they granted you a boon. All of that is known 
to me, lover of righteousness, through the power of my asceticism. And I 
too will grant you a boon, foremost of those who bear weapons. So please 
accept my guest-offering. Tomorrow you shall go to Ayodhya.” 

[16-18] The majestic son of the king, bowing his head, accepted his 
instructions with the words, “Very well.” Then, in great delight, he 
requested his boon: “Holy sage, may all the trees along the road I take to 
Ayodhya bear fruit out of season and drip with honey.” Then, suddenly, 
those trees that had no fruit were filled with fruit, those that had no 
blossoms were covered with them. Those that were bare were covered with 
leaves, and all of them dripped with honey. 


Sarga 113 


[1-6] But once Raghava had caught sight of Ayodhya, he was plunged into 
thought. Then, after some reflection, he cast his glance upon the monkeys. 
Then wise Rama of blazing energy, wishing to do a kindness, spoke kindly 
to the leaping monkey, swift-striding Hanuman: “Go quickly, best of 
leaping monkeys. Hastening to Ayodhya, you must find out if all is well 
with the people in the king’s palace. When you reach the city of Srigavera, 
you must inform the chief of the Nisadas, Guha, whose realm is the deep 
forest, in my words, that I am safe. For once my friend and equal Guha 
hears that I am safe, well, and free from anxiety, he will be delighted. And 
Guha, chief of the Nisadas, in great delight, will show you the way to 
Ayodhya and will inform you of Bharata’s activities. 

[7-11] “You are to inform Bharata in my words that I am safe. Tell him 
that, together with my wife and Laksmana, I have accomplished my 
purpose. Tell him about Vaidehi’s abduction by powerful Ravana, my 
negotiations with Sugriva, the slaying of Valin in battle, the search for 
Maithill, and how you found her after leaping across the great water, the 
imperishable lord of rivers. And tell him about the march to the sea and the 
encounter with Sagara, god of the ocean, and how the bridge was built and 
Ravana slain. Tell him about the granting of the boon by great Indra, 
Brahma, and Varuna, and about my reunion with our father through the 
grace of the great god Siva. And tell him: ‘Having conquered the hosts of 
his enemies, attained unsurpassed glory, and accomplished his purpose, 
immensely powerful Rama has returned with his allies.’ 

[13-17] “And whatever facial expression Bharata may adopt upon 
hearing this, you must report that to me fully. Through the color of his face, 
his glance, and his manner of speaking, you should accurately determine 
everything about Bharata’s state of mind and his intentions. For whose head 
would not be turned by an ancestral kingdom rich in every object of desire 
and filled with elephants, horses, and chariots? And should majestic 
Bharata, being long accustomed to it, desire the kingship for himself, then 
let that delight of the Raghus rule the entire earth without exception. Once 
you have determined his state of mind and his intentions, monkey, you must 
return quickly before we have gone very far.” 

[18—22] Instructed in this fashion, Hanuman, son of Maruta, took on a 
human form and hastened to Ayodhya. Leaping along the path of his father 
and crossing the fearsome confluence of the Ganges and the Yamuna 


Rivers, the auspicious abode of the serpent lords, powerful Hanuman 
reached the city of Srigavera, and, approaching Guha, he delightedly 
addressed him with these auspicious words: “Your truly valorous friend 
Rama Kakutstha, who is accompanied by Sita and Saumitri, informs you 
that he is safe. On the instructions of Bharadvaja, Raghava spent last night, 
the night of the fifth, with him. Now, since he has taken his leave of the 
sage, you shall see him this very day.” 

[23—25] When he had spoken in this fashion, swift Hanuman of immense 
blazing energy, without further hesitation, swiftly flew up once more, the 
hairs of his body bristling with excitement. He saw the spot sacred to Rama 
and the river Valukini. And he saw the Gomatt River and a fearsome forest 
of sala trees. When he had swiftly traveled a long way, that elephant among 
monkeys reached the blossoming trees that grew near Nandigrama. 

[26-31] A quarter of a league from Ayodhya he spied Bharata, who was 
living in an ashram. Dejected and emaciated, he was clad in garments of 
barkcloth and black antelope skin. Wearing matted locks, his body was 
smeared with dirt. Tormented by the catastrophe that had befallen his 
brother and practicing righteousness, he engaged in asceticism, restrained 
and subsisting on fruits and roots. He had a mass of matted hair piled high 
and was clad in barkcloth and animal skins. Self-controlled and with 
focused mind, he was equal in blazing energy to a brahman-seer. Having 
placed Rama’s sandals in a position of honor, he ruled the earth, protecting 
the people of all four social classes from every danger. He was attended by 
incorruptible ministers, purohitas, and attentive army chiefs, all clad in 
ochre garments. For the citizens, who loved righteousness, were determined 
never to abandon the prince, who was clad in barkcloth and black antelope 
skin. 

[32-36] Cupping his hands in reverence, Hanuman, son of Ma§aruta, 
spoke these words to that knower of righteousness, who was like a second 
Dharma, god of righteousness, incarnate: “Kakutstha, for whom you have 
been grieving and who had been living in the Dandaka forest wearing 
barkcloth garments and matted hair, informs you that he is safe. I bring you 
wonderful news, your majesty! Reunited with your brother Rama within the 
very hour, you shall put aside your terrible sorrow. Having slain Ravana and 
recovered Maithili, Rama, who has accomplished his purpose, has come 
back with his immensely powerful allies. And so have Laksmana of 


immense blazing energy and illustrious Sita Vaideht, who is united with 
Rama, just as is Saci with great Indra.” 

[37-43] Addressed in this fashion by Hanuman, Bharata, Kaikeyi’s son, 
in a sudden access of delight, fell and fainted dead away in his joy. 
Regaining consciousness and getting up after a short while, Bharata 
Raghava then said this to Hanuman, who had told him the good news. 
Embracing the monkey in his excitement, majestic Bharata drenched him 
with copious teardrops of joy and delight, saying: “Whether you be a god or 
a man, you have come here out of compassion. My gentle friend, I shall 
give you, the bearer of this good news who reported it to me, a hundred 
thousand cows, a hundred prosperous villages, and sixteen maidens of 
excellent character, adorned with earrings, to be your wives. These are 
women of excellent caste and family, adorned with every ornament. Their 
complexions are like gold, their faces as lovely as the moon, and their noses 
and thighs perfect.” When the king’s son had heard from the monkey hero 
about Rama’s seemingly miraculous return, he was delighted, and in his joy 
and eagerness to see Rama, he once more spoke these words. 


Sarga 114 
[1—3] “I am hearing such delightful news of my lord, who had gone to the 
deep forest for so many years. So it seems to me that the popular verse, “Joy 
comes to a man even if he has to wait a hundred years,’ is quite true. How 
and in what country and for what reason did Raghava come to be associated 
with the tawny monkeys? Tell me truthfully, since I am asking you.” 

[4-9] Questioned in this fashion by the prince, Hanuman, seated on an 
ascetic’s seat, recounted all of Rama’s adventures in the forest: “Great- 
armed prince, you already know all about how Rama was exiled, about the 
two boons given to your mother, and about how King Dasaratha died from 
grief for his son. And you know how you yourself, lord, were hastily 
brought back from Rajagrha by messengers, and how, when you entered 
Ayodhya, you declined the kingship. You also know how, when you had 
gone to Mount Citrakiita, your brother, the tormentor of his foes, remained 
faithful to the king’s vow and rejected the kingdom, even though you— 
following the righteous path of the virtuous—begged him to accept it. And 
you know, of course, how, taking your noble brother’s sandals, you came 


back once again. Now learn from me what took place once you had gone 
back. 

[10-14] “Once you had departed, Rama entered the vast and deserted 
Dandaka forest, whose beasts and birds were wildly agitated. And as they 
were making their way through that dense forest, the powerful Viradha 
appeared before them, roaring a mighty roar. Seizing him, they hurled him, 
face down with his arms raised, into a pit, as he roared a mighty roar like an 
elephant. After accomplishing that difficult feat, the brothers Rama and 
Laksmana came, that very evening, to Sarabhafiga’s lovely ashram. Once 
Sarabhajiga had gone to heaven, truly valorous Rama respectfully saluted 
all the sages and then proceeded to Janasthana. 

[15-20] “While great Raghava was living there, he slaughtered fourteen 
thousand rdksasas of fearsome deeds. Then, a little later, Sirpanakha 
approached Rama. Instructed by Rama, immensely powerful Laksmana 
suddenly sprang up, seized his sword, and hacked off her ears and nose. 
Mutilated by him, that foolish creature then approached Ravana. Next, a 
fearsome rdksasa, a servant of Ravana named MaArica, turned himself into a 
bejeweled deer and infatuated Vaidehi. When she caught sight of it, Vaidehi 
said to Rama, ‘You must catch it! Oh, how charming and beautiful 1t would 
be in our ashram!’ Then Rama chased him as he fled and, as he fled, killed 
him with a straight arrow. 

[21-25] “Then, gentle prince, when Raghava had gone after the deer, 
and Laksmana too had gone out, ten-necked Ravana entered the ashram. He 
violently seized Sita, just as a baleful planet might seize the constellation 
Rohini in the heavens. Once he had killed the vulture Jatayus, who tried to 
rescue her, Ravana seized Sita violently and swiftly departed. However, 
some monkeys of extraordinary form, as huge as mountains, who were 
there on a mountaintop, were astonished to see Ravana, lord of the 
raksasas, going by, clutching Sita. Ravana, who made the world cry out, 
then entered Lanka. There Ravana installed Maithili in a vast and beautiful 
palace covered with gold and tried to calm her with soothing words. 

[26-29] “Finding the vulture upon his return, Kakutstha was distraught. 
ccAfter cremating the slain vulture, a dear friend of his father, Rama 
wandered along the Godavari River and through its forest regions all in 
blossom. Then the two princes encountered the raksasa Kabandha in the 
vast forest. On the advice of Kabandha, truly valorous Rama went to Mount 


Rsyamika and met with Sugriva. Even before they had met, the two had 
formed an emotional bond through their mutual affection. Through their 
conversations with each other, it became a profound love. 

[30-36] “Once he had slain the gigantic and immensely powerful Valin 
through the strength of his own arms in battle, Rama bestowed upon 
Sugriva a kingship of his own. Once Sugriva had been established in the 
kingship, he promised Rama that, together with all the monkeys, he would 
search for the princess. Under orders from Sugriva, the great lord of the 
monkeys, a hundred million monkeys were sent out in all directions. And 
then, while we were lost in the great Vindhya mountain range and were 
sorely afflicted with sorrow, a great deal of time passed. But the mighty 
brother of the king of vultures, Sampati by name, informed us about Sita’s 
dwelling in the abode of Ravana. Then, relying on my own strength, I leapt 
a hundred leagues, dispelling the sorrow of my kinsmen, who were 
overcome with sorrow. And there I found that woman, all alone, in an asoka 
grove, clad in a silken garment, covered with dirt, miserable but firm in her 
vows. 

[37-39] “After meeting with that blameless woman and _ having 
thoroughly questioned her in the proper fashion, I took a jewel as a token of 
recognition and, having accomplished my mission, returned. When I 
returned, I presented that great and glittering gem to Rama, tireless in 
action, as a token of recognition. Once he had heard about Maithili, he was 
delighted and regained his will to live, as might a gravely ill man at the 
point of death after drinking the nectar of immortality. 

[40—46] “Putting in motion a great undertaking, he turned his thoughts to 
the destruction of Lanka, just as Agni, the shining god of fire, desires to 
destroy all the worlds at the end of a cosmic era. Then, when he reached the 
sea, he had Nala construct a bridge. It was by means of that bridge that the 
army of monkeys crossed over. Nila slew Prahasta, and Raghava killed 
Kumbhakarna. Laksmana slew Ravana’s son Indrajit, and Rama himself 
killed Ravana. Then Kakutstha, that scorcher of his foes, having met with 
Sakra, Yama, and Varuna, along with the gods and seers, received boons. 
And when he had received those boons, he was reunited with the monkeys 
in great delight. He then proceeded to Kiskindha in the flying palace 
Puspaka. Nothing can prevent you from seeing Rama tomorrow on the 
auspicious day of the moon’s conjunction with the constellation Pusya. For 


having once more reached the Ganges, he is staying there with the sage 
Bharadvaja.” Then, when Bharata had heard that great and truthful speech 
of Hanuman, he was delighted. Cupping his hands in reverence, he spoke 
these words that delighted one’s heart, “At long last, indeed, my fondest 
wish has been fulfilled.” 


Sarga 115 

[1-3] When truly valorous Bharata, slayer of enemy heroes, had heard those 
words that filled him with joy, he gave instructions to Satrughna, who was 
similarly delighted: “Let pious men worship all the divinities and the 
shrines of the city with fragrant garlands and musical instruments. And let 
the king’s wives and his ministers, the soldiers, the army troops and their 
womenfolk go out to see Rama’s face, which is like the hare-marked 
moon.” 

[4-8] When powerful Satrughna, slayer of enemy heroes, had heard 
those words of Bharata, he commanded his many thousands of conscripted 
laborers: “Level the road—depressions, rough places, as well as smooth 
areas—from Nandigrama onward, sparing only the roadside shrines. Have 
some men sprinkle the whole ground with ice-cold water, and then have 
others strew it everywhere with parched grain and flowers. Let them raise 
flags along the main road in our splendid city, and let them beautify their 
houses starting at daybreak. Let hundreds of men strew the broad royal 
highway with garlands, festoons, and loose blossoms and with fragrant 
powders in five colors.” 

[9-12] Given their orders, great chariot-warriors went forth swiftly in 
their chariots along with thousands of rutting elephants adorned with gold, 
while others went forth with bull- and cow-elephants with golden girths. 
Next, all of DasSaratha’s wives went forth mounted in carriages, placing 
Kausalya and Sumitra at their head. The thundering of the horses’ hooves, 
the rumbling of the chariot wheels, and the din of conches and war drums 
seemed to shake the very earth. Indeed, the entire city went forth to 
Nandigrama. 

[13-17] Thus did great and righteous Bharata, together with his 
counselors, set forth to meet Rama. He was surrounded by twice-born 
eminent brahmans, the leaders of the caste guilds, and merchants, as well as 
by his ministers, who held garlands and sweets in their hands. To the sounds 


of conches and bheri drums, he was lauded by panegyrists. Deeply learned 
in righteousness, he bore his noble brother’s sandals on his head and carried 
with him a white umbrella festooned with white garlands, and a pair of 
white yak-tail fly whisks adorned with gold and fit for a king. He who had 
been earlier downcast and was still emaciated with fasting and clad in 
garments of barkcloth and black antelope skin was now filled with joy upon 
hearing of his brother’s return. Looking about him, Bharata said these 
words to the son of Pavana: “I hope you have not fallen prey to the typical 
flightiness of monkeys. For I do not see the noble Rama Kakutstha, the 
scorcher of his foes.” 

[18—25] When these words had been spoken, Hanuman said this to truly 
valorous Bharata, informing him of the reason: “They have reached those 
trees that, through the grace of Bharadvaja, are always in fruit and flower, 
dripping honey, and resounding with intoxicated bees. For such, scorcher of 
your foes, was the boon granted to Rama by Vasava. And this was the 
hospitality, complete with every desirable thing, that was offered to him and 
his army. One can hear the fearsome racket of the excited forest-dwelling 
monkeys. I think the monkey army must be crossing the Gomati River. 
Look at the cloud of dust that has been kicked up over toward the Valukini 
River. I think that the leaping monkeys must be crashing their way through 
the lovely forest of sala trees. And there in the distance one can see the 
bright celestial flying palace Puspaka, which looks like the moon and was 
created by the mind of Brahma. Through the grace of Kubera, bestower of 
wealth, great Rama obtained this celestial flying palace, as swift as thought, 
after killing Ravana together with his kinsmen. In it are the two heroic 
Raghava brothers, together with Vaidehi as well as Sugriva of immense 
blazing energy and Vibhisana, the lord of the raksasas.” 

[26-29] Then a great clamor of joy arose, reaching to the heavens, as the 
women, children, youths, and elderly cried out, “There’s Rama!” The men 
got down from their chariots, elephants, and horses and, standing on the 
ground, gazed at Rama, who, in his flying palace, resembled the moon in 
the sky. Cupping his hands in reverence and facing Raghava, Bharata 
joyfully honored Rama with a fitting welcome. In that flying palace, which 
Brahma created with his mind, the elder brother of Laksmana, with his long 
and wide eyes, looked as splendid as a second Indra, wielder of the vajra. 


[30-35] Then Bharata humbly praised his brother Rama, who stood atop 
the flying palace, like the sun, bringer of light, on the summit of Mount 
Meru. Invited on board the flying palace, truly valorous Bharata approached 
Rama in great delight and once more respectfully saluted him. Then 
Kakutstha, raising up Bharata, whom he had not seen in such a long time, 
placed him on his lap and embraced him in great joy. After warmly greeting 
Laksmana, Bharata, scorcher of his foes, respectfully saluted Vaidehi and, 
in great delight, announced his name. Next, the son of Kaikeyi embraced 
Sugriva, Jambavan, Angada, Mainda, Dvivida, Nila, and Rsabha. Those 
monkeys, who could take on any form at will, took on human forms and, in 
great delight, inquired of Bharata about his welfare. 

[36-41] Then Bharata graciously spoke these words to Vibhisana: 
“Thank heavens that through your assistance this all-but-impossible feat has 
been accomplished!” Next, Satrughna respectfully saluted Rama and 
Laksmana and, afterward, humbly worshiped Sita’s feet. Then Rama 
approached his mother, who was so disconsolate and drawn with grieving, 
and, bending, he clasped her feet, soothing her heart. Then, after 
respectfully saluting Sumitra and illustrious Kaikey1, he approached all his 
other mothers and the purohita. And then all the people of the city 
addressed him, their hands cupped in reverence, crying, “Welcome great- 
armed increaser of Kausalya’s joy!” And Bharata’s elder brother gazed 
upon those thousands of cupped hands that were extended by the people of 
the city and that were like so many full-blown lotuses. 

[42-46] Then, taking Rama’s sandals, Bharata, who knew righteousness, 
himself placed them on the feet of the lord of men. Cupping his hands in 
reverence, Bharata said to Rama: “Here, your majesty, is your well-guarded 
kingdom, which I have now given back. Today the purpose of my birth has 
been accomplished and my most cherished wish fulfilled, in that I see you 
returned to Ayodhya once more as king. Sir, please inspect the treasury, the 
granary, the city, and the army. Through your blazing energy, I have 
increased all of them tenfold.” When the monkeys and the raksasa 
Vibhisana saw Bharata speaking in this fashion, with such love for his 
brother, they shed tears. 

[47-51] Then, taking Bharata on his lap in great delight, Raghava 
proceeded with his army in the flying palace to Bharata’s ashram. Once he 
reached Bharata’s ashram, Raghava, together with his army, descended 


from atop the flying palace and stood on the ground. Rama then addressed 
that unsurpassed flying palace, saying: “You must now carry the god 
Kubera Vaisravana. I give you leave. You may go.” Given leave by Rama, 
that unsurpassed flying palace departed in a northerly direction to the abode 
of Kubera, bestower of wealth. And then, just as Sakra, lord of the immortal 
gods, might grasp the feet of Brhaspati, mighty Raghava clasped the feet of 
his purohita, who was his equal. Then they sat down together, each on a 
separate, splendid seat. 


Sarga 116 

[1-5] Cupping his hands to his forehead in reverence, Bharata, increaser of 
Kaikeyi’s joy, addressed his elder brother, truly valorous Rama: “You 
showed my mother respect and gave over the kingdom to me. I now give it 
back to you, just as you once gave it to me. I am no more able to bear this 
heavy burden than could a young calf bear a yoke set down by a powerful 
but solitary bullock. I think that any threat facing the kingdom, if 
unaddressed, would be as difficult to remedy as it would be to repair a dike 
that, breached by a tremendous flood of water, has sprung a leak. Your 
majesty, tamer of your foes, Iam no more able to follow the path you have 
blazed than is a donkey to match the speed of a horse, or a crow to match 
that of a hamsa. 

[6-12] “A tree planted in one’s inner court might grow to a great height, 
impossible to climb with its huge trunk and many branches. But after 
coming into blossom, it might wither and fail to bear fruit. And thus he for 
whose sake it was planted would reap no benefit from it. This is merely an 
analogy, great-armed lord of men. But if you do not rule us, your devoted 
servants, you will come to realize its significance. Let the whole world see 
you consecrated this very day, shining with radiant energy like the blazing 
sun at noon. You should fall asleep and waken to the sounds of musical 
ensembles, the jingling of women’s anklets and girdles, and the sweet 
sounds of singing. As long as the wheel of heavenly bodies shall turn and as 
long as the earth, bearer of wealth, shall endure, so long may you exercise 
lordship over all in this world.” Upon hearing Bharata’s words, Rama, the 
conqueror of enemy citadels, accepted them, saying, “So be it,” as he sat on 
his splendid seat. 


[13-18] Then, at the command of Satrughna, skillful barbers with a 
gentle touch and quick at their work attended upon Raghava. Once Bharata, 
immensely powerful Laksmana, the monkey lord Sugriva, and the rdksasa 
lord Vibhisana had all bathed before him, Rama gave up his matted locks 
and bathed. Then, wearing multicolored garlands and unguents and clad in 
costly garments, he stood there, blazing with splendor. Thus did mighty and 
splendid Satrughna, increaser of the House of Iksvaku, see to the adornment 
of Rama and Laksmana. Then the virtuous wives of Dasaratha themselves 
saw to the ravishing adornment of Sita. Finally, with great care, Kausalya, 
delighted and deeply fond of her son, beautified all the wives of the 
Raghavas. 

[19-20] Then, at the command of Satrughna, the charioteer named 
Sumantra yoked a chariot that was richly adorned throughout and brought it 
up. When he saw that heavenly chariot standing before him and blazing like 
the orb of the sun, great-armed and truly valorous Rama mounted it. 

[21-23] Meanwhile, those ministers of King Dasaratha who had 
remained in Ayodhya, placing the purohita at their head, purposefully took 
counsel together. They took counsel with regard to the prosperity of Rama 
and the maintenance of the city, saying, “Preceding all your actions with 
auspicious rites, you must do everything necessary for the consecration of 
great Rama, so worthy of success.” Having thus instructed the purohita, all 
the ministers quickly left the city, their minds intent on seeing Rama. 

[24-30] Like blameless, thousand-eyed Indra mounting his chariot 
yoked to bay steeds, Rama mounted his chariot and proceeded toward the 
splendid city. Bharata held the reins and Satrughna the umbrella, while 
Laksmana waved a fan over Rama’s head. Sugriva, the lord of the monkeys, 
held one white yak-tail fly whisk, while Vibhisana, the lord of the rdksasas, 
held another as bright as the moon. In the heavens was heard the sweet 
sound made by the hosts of seers and gods, together with the Maruts, as 
they praised Rama. Then Sugriva, the lord of the monkeys, filled with 
immense blazing energy, mounted an elephant named Satrumjaya, as huge 
as a mountain. The other monkeys too, who had taken on human form and 
were adorned with every ornament, mounted nine thousand elephants and 
set forth. Thus, to the sound of conches, cheers, and the thundering of war 
drums, did the tiger among men proceed toward the mansion-garlanded 
city. 


[31-35] And as the great chariot-warrior Raghava, radiant with splendor, 
passed in his chariot with his retinue, the people gazed upon him. 
Congratulating Rama Kakutstha and graciously acknowledged by him, they 
followed the great man, who was accompanied by his brothers. Like the 
moon surrounded by the constellations, Rama, surrounded by the brahmans, 
his ministers, and his subjects, shone with splendor. As he proceeded, he 
was accompanied by musicians who went before him, holding cymbals and 
svastikas in their hands, and by delighted people shouting out blessings. 
And before Rama went cows, maidens, and twice-born brahmans, bearing 
unhusked, golden rice, and men with sweetmeats in their hands. 

[36-39] Rama then told his counselors about his friendship with Sugriva, 
the supernatural strength of Hanuman, the son of Anila, and the deeds of the 
monkeys. When the people of Ayodhya heard this, they were wonderstruck. 
After reporting all of this, Rama, resplendent and surrounded by the 
monkeys, made his entrance into Ayodhya, which was thronged with 
delighted and prosperous people. Then, as the citizens raised flags on house 
after house, he reached his father’s lovely residence, the ancestral home of 
the Iksvakus. When he reached the palace of his great father, he entered it 
and respectfully saluted Kausalya, Sumitra, and Kaikeyi. 

[40-43] Then the prince, the delight of the Raghus, sweetly addressed 
Bharata, foremost among the righteous, with these significant words: “Place 
at Sugriva’s disposal my vast and splendid palace, the one adjacent to the 
asoka grove and covered with pearls and lapis.” When truly valorous 
Bharata had heard those words of his, he took Sugriva by the hand and 
entered that dwelling. Then, ordered by Satrughna, servants entered at once 
holding oil lamps and bed coverings. 

[44-46] Raghava’s younger brother, of immense blazing energy, then 
said to Sugriva, “Lord, you must dispatch emissaries in connection with 
R&ma’s consecration.” At once, Sugriva gave four golden vessels, adorned 
with every gem, to four of the monkey lords, saying, “Monkeys, you must 
act in such a way that you are waiting for me at daybreak with these four 
vessels filled, respectively, with water from each of the four oceans.” 

[47-52] Addressed in this fashion, those great monkeys, as huge as 
elephants, swiftly flew up into the sky, like so many Garudas, swift in 
flight. Jambavan, Hanuman, the monkey Vegadarsin, and Rsabha then 
fetched pitchers full of water. And in urns they brought the waters of five 


hundred rivers. From the eastern ocean, Susena, endowed with might, 
fetched a pitcher adorned with every gem and filled with water. Rsabha 
swiftly brought water from the southern ocean. Gavaya brought a golden 
vessel covered with camphor and red sandalwood paste. In it was water 
from the vast western ocean. He whose power was that of Maruta and 
whose pace that of Garuda or the wind swiftly brought frigid water from the 
northern ocean in a great jeweled urn. 

[53-59] Then Satrughna, together with his ministers, presented that 
water to the foremost of purohitas and his assistants for the purpose of 
Rama’s consecration. Then the aged and devout Vasistha, together with the 
brahmans, seated Rama and Sita on a jeweled throne. Vasistha, Vamadeva, 
Jabali, Kasyapa, Katyayana, Suyajia, Gautama, and Vaya all consecrated 
that tiger among men with fragrant and pellucid water, just as the Vasus 
consecrated thousand-eyed Indra Vasava. And thus, in great delight, with 
that water and with the extracts of all the different herbs, did they perform 
the consecration, first with the sacrificial priests and brahmans, and then 
with maidens, counselors, soldiers, and merchants, as well as with the 
divinities who were hovering in the sky, the four world guardians, and all 
the assembled gods. Satrughna held his splendid white umbrella. Sugriva, 
the lord of the monkeys, held one white yak-tail fly whisk, while Vibhisana, 
the lord of the raksasas, held another as bright as the moon. 

[60-63] Then, on the orders of Vasava, Vayu gave Raghava a golden 
necklace with a hundred lotuses that glowed with splendor. And on the 
orders of Sakra, he also gave the lord of men a pearl necklace strung with 
every sort of jewel and adorned with an immense gem. The gods and 
gandharvas sang and the troops of apsarases danced at the consecration of 
wise Rama, who so richly deserved it. And on the festive occasion of 
Raghava’s consecration, the land grew rich in grain, the trees heavy with 
fruit, and the flowers redolent with fragrance. 

[64-67] First, that bull among men made gifts to the twice-born 
brahmans of a hundred bulls and a hundred thousand each of cows that had 
newly calved and horses. Next, Raghava gave the brahmans three hundred 
million gold pieces as well as costly jewels and garments of every kind. 
Then that bull among men gave Sugriva a heavenly diadem of gold 
encrusted with gems and shining like the rays of the sun. And as he was 
greatly pleased with Angada, the son of Valin, Rama gave him a pair of 


armlets adorned with diamonds and gems and variegated with lapis and 
jewels. 

[68—73] Rama then presented Sita with an unsurpassed pearl necklace set 
with the finest gems, its luster equal to that of moonbeams. Then, keeping 
her eyes on her husband, Vaideht gave the son of Vayu two spotless and 
divine garments as well as splendid ornaments. Unfastening the necklace 
from her neck, the delight of Janaka looked back and forth repeatedly from 
her husband to all the tawny monkeys. Rama, skillful at divining people’s 
true intentions, looked closely at Janaka’s daughter and said, “Beloved and 
charming lady, you should give the necklace to him with whom you are 
pleased, that is, to him in whom might, valor, and wisdom are ever present.” 
Then that dark-eyed woman gave the necklace to the son of Vayu. Wearing 
that necklace, Hanuman, bull among monkeys, looked as resplendent as a 
mountain wreathed with a white cloud illuminated by a flood of moonlight. 

[74-76] Then the lord of the earth, that scorcher of his foes, after some 
thought, gave every desirable thing to Dvivida, Mainda, and Nila. And all 
the senior-most monkeys and the other monkey lords as well were honored 
according to their merit with garments and ornaments. When each one of 
them had been honored according to his merit with many jewels and other 
desirable things, they all returned as they had come, delighted at heart. 

[77-79] Supremely magnanimous Raghava then ruled in supreme 
felicity. And Rama, who loved righteousness, said to Laksmana, a knower 
of righteousness: “Knower of righteousness, please govern with me this 
land of which those kings who came before us took possession with their 
forces. In the capacity of prince regent, you must, as my equal, bear this 
burden, which was borne by our forefathers.” But although Saumitri was 
being offered the position of prince regent of the land and was most 
earnestly entreated to accept this appointment, he would not do so. So great 
Rama therefore consecrated Bharata. 

[80-83] Once righteous Raghava had obtained that unsurpassed 
kingdom, he performed many different kinds of sacrifices, together with his 
friends, his brothers, and his kinsmen. That bull among kings performed the 
paundarika, asvamedha, and vdjapeya sacrifices many times, as well as 
various other sacrifices. Raghava ruled his kingdom for ten thousand years 
and performed one hundred asvamedha sacrifices with splendid sacrificial 
horses and generous sacrificial fees. With broad shoulders and his arms 


extending to his knees, valorous Rama ruled the land with Laksmana at his 
side. 

[84-90] While Rama ruled the kingdom, no widows mourned, nor was 
there any fear of snakes or threat of disease. The world was free from 
thieves, and misfortune afflicted no one. The elders never had to perform 
the funerary rites for their children. Everyone was content. Everyone was 
devoted to righteousness. Looking constantly to Rama alone, people did not 
harm one another. While Rama ruled the kingdom, people lived for 
thousands of years and had thousands of sons. They suffered no illness and 
were free from all sorrow. The trees with their spreading boughs were 
always in flower and filled with fruit. Parjanya brought the rains at the 
proper time, and the breeze was pleasant to the touch. While Rama ruled, 
his subjects adhered to their own proper occupations and were satisfied with 
their own duties. Devoted to righteousness, they adhered always to the 
truth. Everyone was endowed with auspicious marks. Everyone was 
devoted to righteousness. And so, for ten thousand years, Rama ruled his 
kingdom. 

The end of the Yuddhakanda. 


a Emendation: see PVR 6: 1561. 
b Emendation: see PVR 6: 1561. 
c Emendation: see PVR 6: 1561. 
d Emendation: see PVR 6: 1561. 
e Emendation: see PVR 6: 1561. 
f Emendation: see PVR 6: 1561. 
g Emendation: see PVR 6: 1561. 
h Emendation: see PVR 6: 1561. 
i Emendation: see PVR 6: 1561. 
j Emendation: see PVR 6: 1561. 
k Emendation: see PVR 6: 1561. 
| Emendation: see PVR 6: 1561. 
m Emendation: see PVR 6: 1561. 
n Emendation: see PVR 6: 1561. 
o Emendation: see PVR 6: 1561. 
p Emendation: see PVR 6: 1561. 
q Emendation: see PVR 6: 1561. 
r Emendation: see PVR 6: 1561. 
s Emendation: see PVR 6: 1561. 
t Emendation: see PVR 6: 1561. 
u Emendation: see PVR 6: 1561. 


v Emendation: see PVR 6: 1561. 
w Emendation: see PVR 6: 1561. 
x Emendation: see PVR 6: 1561. 
y Emendation: see PVR 6: 1561. 
z Emendation: see PVR 6: 1562. 
aa Emendation: see PVR 6: 1562. 
bb Emendation: see PVR 6: 1562. 
cc Emendation: see PVR 6: 1562. 


Chapter 7 
The Uttarakanda 


Sarga 1 

[1-5] Now that the slaughter of the rdksasas had been accomplished and 
Rama had attained sovereignty, all the seers came to felicitate Raghava. 
There were those who dwelt in the east: Kausika, Yavakrita, Raibhya, 
Cyavana, and Kanva, the son of Medhatithi. And then, together with 
Agastya, came those who dwelt in the south: holy Svastyatreya, Namucu, 
and Pramucu. Next, together with their disciples, came those who dwelt in 
the west: Prsadgu, Kavasa, Dhaumya, and the great seer Raudreya. And 
there were also the seven great seers: Vasistha, KaSyapa, Atri, Visvamitra, 
Gautama, Jamadagni, and Bharadvaja. 

[6-8] When these great seers, whose radiance was like that of Agni, 
eater of oblations, reached Raghava’s dwelling, they paused so that their 
arrival could be announced. So then, hastening at the words of Agastya, the 
doorkeeper quickly entered the presence of great Raghava. Rushing in to 
see Rama, whose splendor was equal to that of the full moon, he reported 
that Agastya had arrived together with the seers. 

[9-11] When the king heard that the sages, whose radiance was like that 
of the newly risen sun, had arrived, he then said to the doorkeeper, “Have 
them enter as they please.” Seeing that those sages had arrived, Rama rose, 
his hands cupped in reverence, and devoutly bade them be seated. Those 
bulls among seers then took their places according to their merit on 
comfortable seats, which were splendidly covered and variegated with gold. 

[12-18] Once Rama had inquired about their well-being, the great seers, 
knowers of the veda, together with their leaders and their disciples, said 
these words to him: “All is well with us, great-armed delight of the Raghus, 
since, thank heavens, we see that you, having slain your enemies, are well. 
By no means did Ravana, the lord of the raksasas, present you with a 
serious challenge. For, armed with your bow, there is no doubt that you 
could conquer the three worlds. Thank heavens, Rama, you have slain 


Ravana together with his sons and grandsons. Thank heavens we see you 
victorious together with your wife. Thank heavens you have slain those 
night-roaming rdksasas Prahasta, Vikata, Virupaksa, Mahodara, and the 
unassailable Akampana. Thank heavens, Rama, you struck down in battle 
Kumbhakarna, whom no one in this world exceeded in sheer size. And 
thank heavens you engaged in single combat with the lord of the raksasas 
—whom even the gods could not kill—and achieved victory. 

[19-22] “The defeat of Ravana in battle was no great thing. But thank 
heavens you engaged in single combat with Indrajit Ravani and slew him. 
Thank heavens, great-armed hero, you were freed from that foe of the gods, 
who rushed onward like Kala himself, and so you achieved victory. We 
were amazed, gentle Rama, upon hearing that Indrajit had been slain; for he 
was invulnerable to all beings and wielded powerful illusion in battle. 
Having granted us this holy and precious gift, freedom from fear, heroic 
Kakutstha, tormentor of your foes, you are to be congratulated on your 
victory.” 

[23—27] When Rama had heard that speech of the contemplative seers, 
he was greatly amazed, and, cupping his hands in reverence, he said: “Why 
is it, sirs, that you pass over those two immensely powerful warriors 
Kumbhakarna and the night-roaming rdksasa Ravana only to praise Indrajit 
Ravani? Why is it that you pass over those immensely powerful warriors 
Mahodara, Prahasta, and the raksasa Viripaksa only to praise Indrajit 
Ravani? What was his power like? What was his strength? What was his 
valor? And what was the reason that he surpassed even Ravana? I am not 
commanding you, but if I am permitted to hear it, if it is not a secret, and if 
you can tell me, I wish to hear it. Please tell me. How did he conquer Sakra 
and how did he obtain his boons?” 


Sarga 2 
[1-3] When the pot-born sage, immensely powerful Agastya, had heard this 
speech of great Raghava, he spoke these words: “Listen, your majesty, to 
how he came to possess his enormous power of blazing energy, how he 
slaughtered his enemies in battle, and how he came to be invulnerable to his 
foes. I shall tell you, Raghava, about Ravana’s lineage, his birth, and how 
the gift of boons was conferred upon him. 


[4-9] “Long ago, Rama, in the Krta Yuga, there lived the lordly 
brahman-seer named Pulastya. He was just like Grandfather Brahma, as he 
was, indeed, the son of Prajapati, lord of creatures. His virtues in respect to 
righteousness and conduct need not be rehearsed. All this can be inferred 
merely from his epithet ‘the son of Prajapati.’ Because of his profound 
devotion to righteousness, that bull among sages went to the ashram of 
Trnabindu on the slopes of the great mountain Meru, where he made his 
dwelling. That righteous sage, restraining his senses through vedic 
recitation, practiced austerities. But some young girls, having come to that 
ashram, distracted him. For the daughters of the gods and great serpents, as 
well as the apsarases and the daughters of the royal seers, used to come to 
that place in the course of their play. Because those woodlands were so 
lovely and enjoyable in every season, those young girls would always come 
to that place to play. 

[10-15] “Then, furious, that great sage of immense blazing energy 
declared, ‘Any young girl who comes within sight of me shall become 
pregnant.’ When they heard those words of the great sage, all the girls who 
had been coming there were fearful of the danger of the brahman’s curse 
and came to that place no more. But the daughter of the royal seer 
Trnabindu did not hear that, and so she went to his ashram and wandered 
about unafraid. Now, at that very time, that great seer, the son of Prajapatt, 
shining with radiance through his austerities, was engaged in vedic 
recitation. No sooner had she heard the sound of vedic recitation and caught 
sight of that sage, so rich in austerities, than she grew pallid and showed 
clear signs of pregnancy. When she saw the appearance of her body, she 
was terrified. Thinking, ‘What has happened to me?’ she went and stood 
before her father. 

[16-19] “Now, when Trnabindu saw her in such a condition, he said, 
‘How could you have come to have so unseemly an appearance?’ But the 
young girl, deyected and cupping her hands in reverence, said to that sage so 
rich in austerities: ‘I don’t know the reason, father, why I look this way. But 
earlier I went alone to the heavenly ashram of the contemplative great seer 
Pulastya to look for my friends. I didn’t see that a single one of my friends 
had come there. But when I saw the transformation of my appearance, I 
came straight back here.’ 


[20-23] “Then the royal seer Trnabindu, shining with radiance through 
his austerities, entered into meditation and saw that this had come about 
through the action of the seer. He realized that this was the curse of the 
great contemplative sage. Taking his daughter, he went to Pulastya and said 
this: ‘Great seer, holy one, please accept as alms this daughter of mine, who 
is adorned with her own virtues and has offered herself willingly. And you 
should have no doubt that she will constantly devote herself to your service 
as you are subduing your senses in the practice of austerities.’ 

[24-27] “Even as that righteous royal seer was saying these words, the 
twice-born sage, eager to accept the girl, said to him, ‘Very well.’ After the 
king had given her away, he returned to his own ashram. But as for his 
daughter, she dwelt there, pleasing her husband with her virtues. Then, 
delighted, that sage of immense blazing energy spoke these words: ‘Bless 
you, I am greatly pleased with the abundance of your virtues. Therefore, I 
shall this very day grant you a son who will be my equal in virtues. He shall 
continue both our lineages and shall be renowned as Paulastya. And since 
you overheard the vedas as I was reciting them, he shall, no doubt, also be 
renowned as Visravas.’ 

[28-29] “Addressed in this fashion, that young girl, with a delighted 
heart, soon gave birth to a son, Visravas. That bull among sages, Visravas, 
endowed with austerity like his father and filled with purity and 
righteousness, was famed throughout the three worlds.” 


Sarga 3 
[1-7] “Now, within a short time, Pulastya’s son, that bull among sages 
Visravas, became established in austerity just like his father. He was 
truthful, virtuous, skillful, pure, and devoted to vedic recitation. He was 
wholly detached from all objects of the senses and was constantly devoted 
to righteousness. When the great seer Bharadvaja came to know of his 
virtuous conduct, he gave him his daughter, Devavarnini, to be his wife. 
That bull among sages, Visravas, filled with the greatest delight, accepted 
Bharadvaja’s daughter in keeping with righteousness. With her, that 
righteous sage had a truly extraordinary child, filled with power and 
endowed with all the virtues of a brahman. When he was born, his 
grandfather was delighted. Then, in his delight, he chose a name for him, in 
consultation with the divine seers, saying, ‘Since he is the offspring of 


Visravas and because he is so like him, he shall be renowned by the name 
of Vaisravana.’ 

[8—13] “Then, retiring to a penance-grove there, VaiSravana grew great 
as one of immense blazing energy, like a fire into which oblations are 
offered. While that great sage was dwelling in his ashram, this idea 
occurred to him: ‘Controlling myself, I shall practice righteousness; for 
righteousness is the highest recourse.’ He performed austerities in the great 
forest for thousands of years. And after each period of a thousand years, he 
adopted a different ascetic practice. Thus, he lived in turn only on water, 
only on air, and then on no sustenance at all. And so, in this fashion, 
thousands of years passed like a single year. Then, pleased, Brahma of 
immense blazing energy came to his ashram, together with Indra and the 
hosts of the gods, and said this: ‘I am greatly pleased with you, my child of 
excellent vows, and with your deeds. Please choose a boon, for I think that 
you deserve one.’ 

[14—19] “Vaisravana then said to Grandfather Brahma, who stood before 
him, “Holy one, I wish to be a world guardian and the keeper of all wealth.’ 
And so, with a delighted mind, Brahma addressed Vaisravana, together with 
the hosts of the gods, happily saying: ‘Excellent! I was just about to add a 
fourth to the group of world guardians—Yama, Indra, and Varuna—the very 
position that you seek. You shall have this position that I have created, 
knower of righteousness, and you shall obtain the lordship of all wealth. 
This very day you shall be the fourth among the world guardians— Yama, 
Indra, and Varuna. And please accept this flying palace called Puspaka, as 
radiant as the sun, to be your vehicle. You shall be the equal of the thirty 
gods. Farewell! We shall all now depart just as we came. In having awarded 
you this great boon, my son, we have accomplished our purpose.’ 

[20-22] “When the gods, preceded by Brahma, had departed for the 
heavens, the lord of wealth, prostrating himself in humility, said these 
words to his father: ‘Holy one! I have obtained a boon from the lotus-born 
Brahma Prajapati. But that god did not ordain a dwelling for me. Therefore, 
holy lord, please think of some place for us to dwell where there would be 
no harm to any living being.’ 

[23—26] “When Visravas, that bull among sages, had been addressed in 
this fashion by his son, that knower of righteousness spoke these words: 
‘Listen, knower of righteousness. There is a city called Lanka, built by 


Visvakarman as a dwelling for the raksasas. It is as lovely as Indra’s 
Amaravati. It is an exquisite city with gateways of gold and lapis. It was 
abandoned long ago by the raksasas, who were overcome with terror of 
Visnu. And so it has been emptied of the hosts of raksasas, who have all 
fled to the underworld Rasatala. You should resolve to live there. There will 
be nothing wrong with your dwelling there, and no one will be harmed by 
it.’ 

[27-31] “Then, when the righteous Vaisravana had heard his father’s 
extremely righteous words, he settled in Lanka, which was situated on a 
mountaintop. In a very short time, at his command, Lanka was filled with 
thousands of rdksasas, sons of chaos, who were excited and always happy. 
And so the son of Visravas—that righteous lord of the rdksasas, sons of 
chaos—dwelt happily there in ocean-shrouded Lanka. From time to time, 
taking the Puspaka flying palace, the dutiful lord of wealth in great delight 
would visit his mother and father. Haloed with splendor and lauded by the 
hosts of gods and gandharvas, who were accompanied by the perfected 
beings and celestial bards, he resembled the sun haloed with radiance, 
together with its rays, as he approached his father.” 


Sarga 4 

[1-7] When Rama heard the words that Agastya had uttered to the effect 
that there had been rdksasas in Lanka even before that time, he was 
astonished. Then, shaking his head in astonishment and gazing fixedly at 
Agastya, whose appearance was like that of the three sacrificial fires, he 
spoke. “So, holy one, Lanka belonged to the flesh-eating rdksasas even 
before that time. Upon hearing this from you, sir, I am astonished. We had 
always heard that the raksasas sprang from the lineage of Pulastya. But 
now you have said that their origin was from somewhere else. Were those 
raksasas more powerful even than Ravana, Kumbhakarna, Prahasta, Vikata, 
and the sons of Ravana? Who was their progenitor, O brahman? What was 
his name? What was the power of his austerities? And what crime did they 
commit that they were driven out long ago by Visnu? Please tell me all 
about this in detail, blameless sage. Just as the sun dispels the dark, please 
dispel this curiosity that has been produced in me.” 

[8—13] When Agastya had heard Raghava’s words, adorned as they were 
with such refinement, he was mildly astonished, and he said to him: “In the 


beginning, lotus-born Prajapati, who was born from the waters, created the 
waters and then created creatures to protect them. Oppressed with the fear 
of hunger and thirst, those creatures stood humbly before their creator, 
saying, ‘What are we to do?’ And Prajapati, gently smiling, replied to those 
creatures. That bestower of self-esteem addressed them with these words: 
“You must stand guard diligently.’ The creator of beings was then addressed 
by those who were not hungry, who said, ‘We shall stand guard 
[raksamah],’ and also by the others who were hungry, who said, ‘We shall 
eat [vaksamah].’ And he said to them, ‘Let those among you who said, “We 
shall stand guard,” be the “raksasas,” and let those among you who said, 
“We shall eat,” be the “yvaksas.’” 

[14-18] “Now, among the former, there were two brothers Heti and 
Praheti. Those two bulls among the raksasas were tamers of their foes just 
like Madhu and Kaitabha. Of the two of them, righteous Praheti did not 
desire a wife, while Heti made strenuous efforts to get married. And so the 
immeasurable and highly intelligent Heti of his own accord married KaAala’s 
sister, the terrifying maiden named Bhaya. With her, that bull among 
raksasas Heti, foremost of those possessing sons, fathered a son known as 
Vidyutkesa. And Heti’s son, Vidyutkesa, whose radiance was equal to that 
of a blazing fire and who possessed immense blazing energy, grew like a 
lotus in the midst of the waters. 

[19-22] “When that night-roaming raksasa attained the splendid bloom 
of youth, his father undertook to arrange his marriage. On his behalf, that 
bull among raksasas, Heti, asked for the daughter of Sandhya, who was like 
Sandhya, “Twilight,” herself in radiance. Thinking, ‘She must be given 
away to someone,’ Sandhya gave her daughter to Vidyutkesa, O Raghava. 
And the night-roaming raksasa Vidyutkesa, having obtained Sandhya’s 
daughter, made love with her, just as does munificent Indra with Paulom!1. 

[23-26] “Now, after some time, Rama, Salakatankata became pregnant 
by Vidyutkesa, just as a bank of storm clouds becomes laden with water 
from the ocean. Then that raksasa woman went to Mount Mandara, where 
she gave birth to a child, as lustrous as lightning, the child of the clouds, 
just as the Ganges gave birth to the child born of Agni. But no sooner had 
she given birth to Vidyutkesa’s child than, eager to make love, she forgot all 
about the son that had been born to her and made love with her husband. 
Abandoned by her, that infant, whose radiance was equal to that of the 


autumnal sun, put his hand in his mouth and cried like a mighty 
thundercloud. 

[27-31] “At that very time, Lord Hara, mounted on his bull, together 
with Uma, was passing by through the heavens and spied the weeping 
raksasa child. Moved by Parvati’s tenderheartedness, Bhava, the slayer of 
Tripura, made the raksasa child the same age as its mother. And moreover, 
in his desire to please Parvati, Mahadeva, who is indestructible and 
unchangeable, made him immortal and gave him a city that could fly 
through the sky. And, O prince, for her part, Uma granted this boon to 
raksasa women such that they should conceive and deliver a child at the 
very same moment and that the child should instantly become the same age 
as its mother. Then SukeSa, having received such divine majesty from Lord 
Hara, was proud at having received those boons. And because he had 
obtained that city that could fly through the sky, that highly intelligent 
raksasa, moving through the sky, traveled everywhere, just like Indra, the 
smasher of citadels.” 


Sarga 5 

[1-4] “Now, when the gandharva named Gramanit, who was equal in 
radiance to Visvavasu, saw that the raksasa SukeSa was righteous and had 
received those boons, he gave him, in accordance with righteousness, his 
daughter named Devavati, who was like a second Sri, goddess of fortune, 
just as Daksa gave Sri herself. Once she had acquired her beloved husband, 
who was endowed with lordly power through the gift of those boons, 
Devavati was as happy as a pauper who has come into wealth. With her at 
his side, that night-roaming rdksasa looked as splendid as a great bull 
elephant—a descendant of Afjana—with his cow. 

[S—7] “And, Raghava, the rdksasa lord Sukesa fathered three sons with 
Devavati. They were the raksasas Malyavan, Sumalin, and Malin, foremost 
among the mighty, and they were the equals of the three-eyed lord, Siva. 
They were as imperturbable as the three worlds, and they were as well 
established as the three sacred fires. They were as formidable as the three 
mantras and as terrible as the three dreaded diseases. The three sons of 
Sukesa, whose splendor was equal to that of the three sacred fires, 
continued to grow there like illnesses that have been neglected. 


[8—10] “Realizing that their father had obtained boons and enormous 
lordly power, the brothers then went to Mount Meru and resolved to 
perform austerities. And, O foremost of kings, taking fearsome vows, they 
practiced fearsome austerities that were terrifying to all beings. With these 
austerities—so hard to accomplish in this world and practiced with truth, 
sincerity, and self-control—they tormented the three worlds, including the 
gods, asuras, and men. 

[11-14] “Then, mounted in a splendid flying chariot, the four-faced Lord 
Brahma addressed the sons of SukeSa, saying, ‘I am the granter of boons.’ 
Recognizing that Brahma, who was accompanied by Indra and the hosts of 
gods, was the granter of boons, they all cupped their hands in reverence 
and, trembling like trees, said: ‘If, O lord, you are pleased with our 
austerities and wish to grant us a boon, then may we become unconquerable 
slayers of our enemies, long-lived, powerful, and devoted to one another.’ 
‘It shall be so!’ said the Lord to the sons of Sukesa. Then Brahma, who is 
so fond of brahmans, departed for the Brahmaloka. 

[15-19] “Then, Rama, once they had obtained that boon from him, all 
those night-roaming rdksasas became quite fearless through the gift of the 
boon, and they harried the gods and asuras. Being slaughtered by them, the 
thirty gods, together with the hosts of seers and the celestial bards, could 
find no one to save them any more than can men who have gone to hell. 
Then, best of the Raghus, those rdksasas came together and, in great 
delight, said to the imperishable Visvakarman, the foremost of artisans: 
“You, sir, are the builder of the mansions of the gods. Please, O highly 
intelligent lord, build one for us as well, such as our heart desires. Whether 
resting on Himalaya, Meru, or Mandara, please build a great mansion for 
us, just like the mansion of Mahesvara.’ 

[20-26] “Then great-armed Visvakarman told those rdksasas about a 
dwelling place that was just like Sakra’s Amaravatt. ‘On the shore of the 
southern ocean stands the mountain called Triktita. On its cloudlike middle 
peak, inaccessible even to the birds and leveled on all four sides by 
stonecutters’ tools, I, instructed by Sakra, have built a city called Lanka. It 
is thirty leagues in breadth, and its ramparts and gateways are of gold. You 
unassailable and most excellent raksasas should dwell in that city, just as in 
Amaravati do the gods, the denizens of heaven, together with Indra. Once 
you, surrounded by many rdksasas, have settled in the citadel of Lanka, you 


will be unassailable by your enemies, O destroyers of your foes.’ When 
those rdksasas had heard these words of Visvakarman, Rama, they went 
with thousands of followers to the city of Lanka and dwelt there. Once 
those night-roaming rdksasas had taken possession of Lanka with its moats 
and massive ramparts and with its hundreds of golden mansions, they were 
delighted and dwelt there happily. 

[27-30] “At that time, there was a gandharva woman by the name of 
Narmada, who had prospered through her various virtues. And she had 
three daughters, who were equal in splendor to Hri, the goddess of modesty, 
Sri, the goddess of good fortune, and Kirti, the goddess of fame. Although 
she was not a raksasa woman, she happily gave her daughters, whose faces 
were like the full moon, to those three raksasas in order of their age. And 
thus were those three illustrious gandharva maidens given by their mother 
to the three rdksasa lords under the lunar asterism presided over by Bhaga, 
the god of marriage. Once the sons of SukeSa were married, Lord Rama, 
they amused themselves with their wives, just as do the immortal gods with 
the apsarases. 

[31-32] “Malyavan’s wife was the beautiful Sundart. Now learn of the 
offspring that he fathered with her. They were Vajramusti, Virtipaksa, the 
raksasa Durmukha, Suptaghna, Yajiiakopa, and Matta and Unmatta as well. 
And, Rama, Sundari had a beautiful daughter named Anala. 

[33-36] “And Sumalin too had a wife, whose face was like the full 
moon. Her name was Ketumati, and she was dearer to him than life itself. 
Now, your majesty, learn, in due order, of the offspring that the night- 
roaming raksasa Sumalin fathered upon Ketumati. And these are known as 
the offspring of Suméalin: Prahasta, Akampana, Vikata, Kalakarmuka, 
Dhiimraksa, Danda, immensely powerful Suparsva, Samhradi, Praghasa, 
the raksasa Bhasakarna, Raka, Puspotkata, Kaikasi of the bright smile, and 
Kumbhinasti. 

[37-39] “And as for Malin, his wife was the beautiful and lovely-eyed 
gandharva woman named Vasuda. With her eyes like lotus petals, she was 
equal to the foremost of yaksa women. And now, Lord Raghava, hear from 
me, as I relate them, the offspring that the younger brother of Sumalin 
fathered with her. Those night-roaming raksasas, the sons of Malin, were 
Anala, Anila, Hara, and Sampati, and they became the ministers of 
Vibhisana. 


[40-41] “Then those three bulls among the raksasas, arrogant in their 
strength and valor, surrounded by hundreds of their sons and the night- 
roaming rdaksasas, harassed the gods—including Indra—the seers, great 
serpents, and danavas. In their overwhelming arrogance at the gift of their 
boons, those raksasas, unstoppable as a mighty gale, tore through the 
world. Intent and equal to Mrtyu himself in battle, they constantly destroyed 
the sacred rites.” 


Sarga 6 
[1—2] “Since the gods as well as the seers, so rich in austerities, were being 
slaughtered by those rdksasas, they were overwhelmed by fear and took 
refuge with Mahesvara, the god of gods. Coming together, the gods cupped 
their hands in reverence, and, their speech choked with fear, they addressed 
the three-eyed foe of Kama and Tripura: 

[3-7] “ ‘O holy lord of all creatures, harrier of your foes! All creatures 
are being harried by the sons of Sukesa, who have become arrogant through 
the boons of Grandfather Brahma. Our ashrams, which were places of 
refuge, no longer offer sanctuary. Sakra has been cast out of heaven, and 
they disport themselves there as if they were he. Crying, “I am Visnu! I am 
Rudra! I am Brahma! I am Indra, king of the gods! I am Yama! I am 
Varuna! I am Candra, the moon god! I am Ravi, the sun god!” those 
raksasas, O lord, arrogant through the gift of their boons and reveling in 
battle, harry us as do their followers. So please, Lord, grant us protection, as 
we are overcome with fear. Please take on a fearsome form and slay them 
who are a thorn in the side of the gods.’ 

[8—10] “When he had been addressed in this fashion by all of the gods, 
the dark blue lord of the matted locks, being partial to SukeSa, said this to 
the hosts of the gods: ‘I shall not slay them, for these asuras are not to be 
killed by me. However, I shall give you some advice that will surely bring 
about their death. You must exert yourselves in the following manner, O 
bulls among gods! You must go for refuge to Visnu. That lord will kill 
them.’ 

[11-16] “Then, once they had extolled Mahesvara with cries of ‘Be 
victorious!’ they approached Visnu, afflicted as they were by fear of the 
night-roaming raksasas. Afflicted with fear of SukeSa’s sons, they 
prostrated themselves and honored the god who bears the conch and the 


discus. In their agitation, they spoke these words: ‘Through the gift of their 
boons, O God, the three sons of Sukesa, who resemble the three sacred 
fires, have attacked us and usurped our places. Situated on the peak of 
Mount Trikitta, there is a fortified citadel called Lanka. With that as their 
base, those night-roaming rdksasas harass us all. As a favor to us, please 
kill them, Madhusiidana. Please make an offering to Yama of their lotuslike 
faces severed by your discus. For when danger arises, there is none to equal 
you as grantor of protection for us. Please dispel this danger to us, Lord, as 
the sun, bringer of light, does the mist.’ 

[17—20] “When he had been addressed in this fashion by the gods, the 
god of gods, Janardana, who inspires fear in his enemies, granted protection 
and said to the gods: ‘I realize that the raksasa SukeSa has grown arrogant 
through the boon of Lord Siva. And I also know about his sons, of whom 
Malyavan is the eldest. I shall slaughter in battle those lowest of rdaksasas, 
who have transgressed all bounds. You need not be anxious, O gods.’ 
Addressed in this fashion by the powerful Lord Visnu, the gods all returned 
in great delight to their respective abodes, praising Janardana. 

[21-22] “Now, when the night-roaming raksasa Malyavan heard about 
the mission of the wise gods, he said this to his two heroic brothers: ‘I have 
heard that the gods and seers, desiring to bring about our death, have joined 
forces and have said this to three-eyed Safkara: 

[23-25] “ ‘ “O lord, the fearsome-looking sons of Sukesa, arrogant 
because of the power of the boons they have been given, have put forth 
their energies and are harrying us at every step. We have been defeated by 
the rdksasas, O lord of Uma, and, for fear of those evil creatures, we cannot 
even remain in our own homes. Therefore, for our sake, O three-eyed Lord, 
please kill them all. O foremost of those who burn! Burn up those raksasas 
by uttering the syllable ‘Hum.’ ” 

[26-28] “ ‘Addressed in this fashion by the thirty gods, Siva, the slayer 
of Andhaka, first listened and then, shaking his head and his hand, said this: 
“Tt is not for me to kill the sons of SukeSa in battle, O gods. However, I will 
give you some advice that will surely bring about their death. But 
Janardana, who wears yellow garments and holds the discus and mace in his 
hands, will slay them in battle. You must approach him for refuge.” 

[29-32] “ ‘Not having received what they desired from Hara, they 
respectfully saluted that foe of Kama and then, proceeding to the abode of 


Narayana, reported everything to him. Then the gods, headed by Indra, 
were addressed thus by Narayana: “I shall slaughter the foes of the gods. 
You need not be anxious, O gods.” Thus, O bulls among rdksasas, Hari has 
vowed to the terrified gods to kill us. Therefore, you must think of some 
appropriate response. For he was the death of Hiranyakasipu and other foes 
of the gods. This Narayana, who desires to kill us, is extremely difficult to 
defeat.’ 

[33-38] “Then, when Sumalin and Malin had heard Malyavan’s words, 
they spoke to their elder brother as might Bhaga and Amsa to Vasava. ‘We 
have studied the vedas, given charitably, offered sacrifices, and safeguarded 
our sovereignty. We have lived a healthy life and have adhered to our 
proper duties. With mighty rivers in the form of our weapons, we have 
plunged deep into the imperturbable ocean that is the host of the gods. We 
have always defeated them in battle. For us there is no fear of death. 
Narayana, Rudra, Sakra, and Yama—all of them fear to stand before us. It is 
no fault of Visnu that is the cause of this, O lord of the rdksasas. It is the 
fault of the gods alone that Visnu’s mind has been stirred up. Therefore, this 
very day, putting forth our energies and surrounded by all of our troops, we 
shall willingly slaughter the gods on account of whom this trouble has 
arisen.’ 

[39-42] “When Malin and Sumalin and their elder brother, the lord 
Malyavan, had declared their plan in this fashion, all three raksasas 
marched forth in a rage to battle, just like Jambha, Vrtra, and Bala. Then, 
arrogant in their strength, all the raksasas, enemies of the gods, leaving 
Lanka in order to do battle, set out for the world of the gods mounted on 
chariots, splendid elephants, horses as huge as mountains, donkeys, cattle, 
camels, dolphins, serpents, crocodiles, tortoises, fish, birds that resembled 
Garuda, lions, tigers, boars, gaur, and yaks. 

[43-47] “Meanwhile, all those beings who dwelt in Lanka, foreseeing 
the destruction of the city and anticipating the danger, became despondent. 
Then, set in motion by KAala, dreadful portents swiftly arose on the ground 
and in the air, presaging the destruction of the raksasa lords. The clouds 
rained down bones and hot blood. The ocean breached its shore and the 
mighty mountains shook. Thousands of malevolent spirits whirled about, 
dancing and releasing raucous laughter with a sound like that of thunder. 


And a great wheeling flock of vultures, spewing fire from their beaks, 
circled above the raksasas like the wheel of time itself. 

[48-51] “But disregarding those dire omens, the rdksasas, arrogant as 
they were in their strength and snared in the noose of Mrtyu, did not turn 
back but marched onward. The night-roaming raksasas Malyavan, Sumalin, 
and Malin preceded them, just as the three sacred fires precede the 
sacrificial rites. All the night-roaming rdksasas placed their faith in 
Malyavan, unshakable as Mount Malyavan, just as all creatures place their 
faith in the Creator. Thundering like a great bank of storm clouds, that army 
of the rdksasa lords, desirous of victory, under Malin’s command marched 
upon the world of the gods. 

[52-53] “Now, when Lord Narayana had heard from a messenger of the 
gods about the expedition of the raksasas, he resolved to fight. Lauded by 
the apsarases and the foremost gandharvas and wielding his excellent 
discus, sword, ploughshare, and the rest, together with the gods, perfected 
beings, seers, and great serpents, he advanced upon the army of the enemies 
of the gods. 

[54-55] “With its divisions driven back by the wind from Suparna’s 
wings, its pennants flapping and its weapons scattered, the army of the 
raksasa king was shaken like a dark lord of mountains, its boulders shaken 
loose. Then, surrounding Madhava in their thousands, the night-roaming 
raksasas, whose appearance was like that of the fire at the end of a cosmic 
era, riddled him with their splendid weapons, sharp and stained with blood 
and flesh.” 


Sarga 7 
[1-8] “Just as storm clouds pelt a mountain with torrential rains, thundering 
storm clouds in the form of raksasas pelted that mountain in the form of 
Narayana with torrents of arrows. Surrounded by the dark chieftains of the 
night-roaming rdaksasas, dark and lustrous Visnu resembled a mountain of 
collyrium shrouded by clouds releasing torrential rains. As locusts swarm 
into a field of grain and flies enter a mountain, as living beings might 
plunge into a pot of nectar or crocodiles into the sea, indeed, as all the 
worlds enter him at the time of universal destruction, so, loosed from the 
raksasas’ bows, did those arrows, powerful as thunderbolts and swift as the 
wind or thought itself, plunge into Hari. With arrows, javelins, 


broadswords, and iron cudgels, those mountainous rdksasa lords—the 
chariot-warriors with their chariots, the elephant riders with their elephants, 
the cavalrymen with their splendid steeds, and the foot soldiers moving 
through the air—made Hari hold his breath as the exercise of breath control 
does a twice-born brahman. Harried by the night-roaming raksasas, like a 
mighty whale by shoals of fish, Visnu drew his horn bow, and, in that great 
battle, with his swift thunderbolt-headed arrows drawn back fully and then 
released, he cut into pieces no bigger than sesame seeds the bodies of the 
raksasas in their hundreds and thousands. 

[9-12] “Driving away that hail of arrows, as does the wind a shower of 
rain that has sprung up, Visnu, the Supreme Spirit, winded his great conch, 
Paficajanya. Mightily winded by Hari, that king of conches, born of the 
waters, sounded with a fearsome roar like a storm cloud at the end of a 
cosmic era. The blare of that king of conches terrified the rdksasas as a 
lion, the king of beasts, does forest elephants in rut. The horses could not 
keep their footing, and the elephants were stripped of all their ardor. The 
warriors tumbled from their chariots, unmanned by the blare of the conch. 

[13-16] “Released from his horn bow, his well-fletched arrows, their 
heads like thunderbolts, tore through the rdksasas and plunged into the 
earth. Pierced by the arrows loosed from Narayana’s bow, the remaining 
fearsome rdksasas fell like mountains struck by lightning. Those injurious 
and inimical rdksasas gushed forth blood in streams from the wounds 
inflicted by Adhoksaja’s arrows, just as mountains might a golden stream. 
The blare of that king of conches, the twang of the horn bow, and Visnu’s 
war cry drowned out the cries of the rdksasas. 

[17-23] “Like the fierce rays of the sun or waves of the ocean, like 
serpent lords from a mountain or like torrents of water from a storm cloud, 
so did those arrows—artrows loosed from the horn bow and set in motion by 
Narayana—fly swiftly onward in their hundreds and thousands. Put to flight 
by powerful Visnu, just like lions by a Sarabha, elephants by a lion, tigers 
by an elephant, leopards by a tiger, dogs by a leopard, cats by a dog, snakes 
by a cat, or rats by a snake, some of the raksasas fled in battle, while others 
lay sprawled on the ground. When Madhusidana had slain thousands of 
raksasas, he made his conch, born of the waters, resound, as the king of the 
gods does a storm cloud. Overwhelmed by Narayana’s arrows and utterly 


dazed by the blare of his conch, the rdksasa host broke ranks and fled 
toward Lanka. 

[24—27] “When the raksasa host, battered by Narayana’s arrows, had 
broken ranks, Sumalin covered Hari with a hail of arrows in battle. Raising 
a gold-ornamented hand, as an elephant might its trunk, the raksasa roared 
in his excitement like a cloud laced with lightning. But even as Sumalin 
roared, Visnu cut off his charioteer’s head, with its flashing earrings, so that 
the raksasa’s horses ran wild. The rdksasa lord Sumalin was dragged away 
by those horses as they ran wild, just as is a man lacking self-control, by the 
horses in the form of the senses when they run wild. 

[28-29] “Seizing a bow and arrows, Malin raced forward in battle. 
Loosed from Malin’s bow, his arrows, adorned with gold, struck Hari and 
passed through him like birds through Mount Kraufica. Assailed by those 
arrows loosed by Malin in their thousands, Visnu was no more shaken in 
battle than is a man who has subdued his senses troubled by worldly cares. 

[30-32] “Then, twanging his bowstring, the holy creator of all beings, 
bearer of the sword and mace, released a torrent of arrows upon Malin. 
Those arrows, whose brilliance was like that of the vajra or lightning, 
struck Malin’s body and drank his blood just as, long ago, the great serpents 
drank the nectar. Hari powerfully struck down Ma§lin’s diadem, chariot, 
battle standard, bow, and horses, forcing Malin to retreat. 

[33-36] “Robbed of his chariot, Malin, foremost of night-roaming 
rdaksasas, seized a mace and with it in hand sprang up, as might a lion from 
a mountain peak. With that mace he struck Garuda on the forehead in battle, 
just as Yama, the ender of all things, struck Lord Siva or as Indra might 
strike a mountain with his vajra. Violently struck with that mace by Malin, 
Garuda, reeling from the pain, forced the god to retreat from the battlefield. 
After Malin had made Garuda force the god to retreat from the battlefield, a 
mighty roar arose from the roaring rdksasas. 

[37-41] “Even though he had been forced to retreat, Visnu, the younger 
brother of Indra of the bay steeds, hearing the roar of the roaring raksasas, 
hurled his discus in his desire to kill Malin. Its radiance, like that of the disc 
of the sun lighting up the heavens with its own radiance, that discus, like 
the wheel of time itself, severed Malin’s head. Gushing blood, the fearsome 
head of the raksasa lord fell, just as did Rahu’s long ago. Then the gods in 
their delight released a cry, uttered with all their might, like a lion’s roar, 


shouting, ‘Well done, O God!’ When Sumalin and Malyavan saw that 
Malin had been slain, they were tormented with grief, and, together with 
their army, they fled back to Lanka. 

[42-44] “Once great-minded Garuda had recouped his strength and 
turned back, he was enraged and, with the wind of his wings, drove the 
rdksasas before him. With his thunderbolts in the form of the splendid 
arrows loosed from his bow, Narayana rent the night-roaming rdksasas, 
their hair broken loose and flying about, just as great Indra, armed with 
lightning, might with his thunderbolts. Their umbrellas shattered, their 
weapons fallen, their bodies scattered and torn by arrows, their entrails 
spilling forth, their eyes rolling in terror, the troops seemed to have gone 
mad. 

[45-47] “The screams and flailing of the night-roaming raksasas and 
their elephants—like those of elephants attacked by a lion—were similar to 
the screams and flailing of those who were slaughtered by the one who was 
himself a lion long ago. Covered by the mass of Hari’s arrows, those black 
storm clouds in the form of the night-roaming rdaksasas, dropping their own 
masses of arrows, fled like black storm clouds driven by the wind. Their 
heads severed by blows of the discus, their limbs smashed by blows of the 
mace, and hacked to pieces by strokes of the sword, the rdksasa lords 
collapsed like mountains. 

[48—50] “Their lotuslike heads were severed by the discus. Their chests 
were crushed by the mace. Their necks were lopped off by the ploughshare. 
Their foreheads were shattered by the cudgels. Some were hacked by the 
sword, while others were struck with arrows. And thus, the rdksasas fell 
swiftly from the sky into the waters of the ocean. As they were being hurled 
down with their necklaces and earrings slipping off, the night-roaming 
raksasas, resembling black storm clouds, completely filled the sky so that it 
looked as if it were filled with black mountains that were being hurled 
down.” 


Sarga 8 
[1-5] “Now, as the retreating army was being slaughtered by lotus-naveled 
Visnu, Malyavan turned back, as does the ocean when it has gone beyond 
its shore. His eyes red with rage, and, his diadem trembling, the night- 
roaming rdksasa then addressed these harsh words to lotus-naveled Visnu: 


‘Narayana, you must not know the immemorial code of the warrior, since 
like some commoner you are slaughtering us, who have been broken and 
have no heart to fight. O lord of the gods! A killer who commits the sin of 
slaying a fleeing foe cannot attain the heaven of the virtuous after death. 
But if you still crave combat, bearer of the conch, discus, and mace, then 
here I am. Show me your power! I am watching.’ 

[6-7] “Then the mighty younger brother of the king of the gods 
addressed the raksasa lord, saying: ‘I promised the gods—who were 
terrified in fear of you—protection in the form of the annihilation of the 
raksasas. This is the fulfillment of that. I must always do what pleases the 
gods, even if it costs me my life. So I will slaughter you all even should you 
flee to the underworld Rasatala.’ 

[8—10] “But even as the god, his eyes like red lotuses, was speaking in 
this fashion, the radksasa lord, infuriated, pierced him with his javelin and 
roared. Hurled by Malyavan’s arm and resounding with the sound of its 
bells, that javelin, now in Hari’s chest, shone like a bolt of lightning 
shooting from a storm cloud. But then the lotus-eyed lord, beloved of the 
javelin-wielder Skanda, pulled out that javelin and taking aim, hurled it at 
Malyavan. 

[11-13] “Loosed from Govinda’s hand as if hurled by Skanda, that 
javelin sped onward, heading straight for the raksasa, like a blazing meteor 
heading straight for a mountain of collyrium. It fell upon the raksasa lord’s 
chest, broad and splendid with the luster of his necklace, like a thunderbolt 
upon a mountain peak. His armor pierced by that javelin, Malyavan fell into 
a profound stupor. But then, once more coming to his senses, he took his 
stand like an immovable mountain. 

[14-17] “Then, seizing a lance of black iron studded with many spikes, 
he struck the god firmly in the middle of his chest. And then that night- 
roaming rdaksasa, so fond of battle, having struck the younger brother of 
Vasava with his fist, stepped back a bow’s length. Then in the sky there 
arose a mighty cheer, ‘Well done! Well done!’ After striking Visnu, the 
raksasa also struck Garuda. Enraged, Vainateya drove off the raksasa with 
the wind from his wings, just as a powerful gale might a heap of dry leaves. 

[18—21] “Now, when Sumalin saw his elder brother driven off by the 
wind from the wings of the lord of birds, he turned toward Lanka and, 
together with his troops, fled. And the raksasa Malyavan, himself having 


been driven back by the force of the wind from those wings, was filled with 
shame and, rejoining his troops, also fled to Lanka. In this way, lotus-eyed 
Rama, the rdksasas, their foremost leader slain, were broken in battle time 
and again by Hari. Unable to stand against Visnu in battle and overcome 
with fear, they abandoned Lanka and, together with their wives, went to live 
in the underworld known as Patala. 

[22—25] “And so, delight of the Raghus, those raksasas in the lineage of 
Salakatankata, renowned for their valor, rallied around the rdksasa Sumalin 
and dwelt there. Now the rdadksasas that you yourself killed, illustrious 
Rama, were known as the Paulastyas. But Sumalin, Malyavan, Malin, and 
their followers were all much more powerful than Ravana. There is no one, 
conqueror of citadels, even among the gods, who could kill those raksasas 
other than Lord Narayana, the bearer of the conch, discus, and mace. And 
you are that God, the eternal four-armed Narayana, the unconquerable and 
unchanging Lord, who took birth in order to slaughter the rdksasas.” 


Sarga 9 
[1—2] “Now, after some time, the raksasa Sumalin, who with his earrings of 
burnished gold resembled a black storm cloud, left Rasatala and wandered 
all over the world of men, taking with him his unmarried daughter, who was 
like Sri but for the lotus. Then he spied Kubera, the lord of wealth, going by 
in the flying palace Puspaka. 

[3-9] “When the raksasa saw him going by looking like an immortal 
god and resembling Agni, the purifier, he spoke to his daughter, who was 
called by the name Kaikast. “Your youth is passing, daughter, it is time to 
give you away. Intent on practicing righteousness, we have made every 
effort on your behalf. For you, dear daughter, you are endowed with every 
virtue, like S1i with her lotus. Still, you have not been chosen by any suitor 
out of fear of rejection. For all those concerned about their honor, being a 
father of an unmarried girl is a burden, since, dear daughter, one does not 
know who might wish to marry the girl. A young girl will always remain a 
source of suspicion for three families—that of her mother, that of her father, 
and the one into which she is given. Daughter, you must approach that 
foremost of eminent sages Visravas Paulastya, born in the lineage of 
Prajapati, and ask him yourself to marry you. Without a doubt, daughter, 


you shall have sons who will be equal in blazing energy to the sun, bringer 
of light, and who will be just like the lord of wealth.’ 

[10-13] “At that very time, Rama, Pulastya’s son, a brahman resembling 
a fourth sacrificial fire, was performing the agnihotra rite. Taking no 
thought for that fearsome hour out of respect for her father, she approached 
and stood before the seer, her gaze lowered to her feet. Looking at that fair- 
hipped woman, her face like the full moon, the highly illustrious sage, 
blazing, as it were, with his vital energy, spoke: ‘Whose daughter are you, 
my good woman? Where have you come from and for what reason? What 
can I do for you? Tell me truthfully, lovely lady.’ 

[14-15] “Addressed in this fashion, the young girl cupped her hands in 
reverence and then said: ‘Please determine my intention through your own 
power, sage. But, brahman, you must know that I have come here on my 
father’s instructions, and that I am known by the name Kaikasi. Please 
determine the rest for yourself.’ 

[16-18] “Entering into meditation, the sage said these words: ‘My good 
woman, I have discovered the purpose that you have in mind. However, 
since you approached me at a fearsome hour, now learn what kind of sons 
you will bear. Fair-hipped woman, you shall give birth to raksasas of cruel 
deeds. They shall be fearsome, fearsome in appearance, and devoted to their 
fearsome kin.’ 

[19-20] “Now, when she had heard these words, she prostrated herself 
and spoke these words: ‘Holy one, sons such as these are not worthy of you, 
a descendant of Lord Brahma.’ Then, regarding her concern, the sage said, 
“Your youngest son shall be righteous and worthy of my lineage.’ 

[21-25] “After some time, Rama, the young girl, who had been 
addressed in this fashion, gave birth to a horrendous and very fearsome 
child, who had the form of a raksasa. He had ten heads, huge fangs, and he 
looked like a heap of black collyrium. He had coppery lips, twenty arms, 
huge mouths, and hair that glowed like fire. The moment he was born, 
jackals, their mouths emitting flames, and other carnivorous beasts circled 
in a clockwise direction. The god rained down blood, and the clouds made a 
harsh rumbling. The sun vanished from the sky, and great meteors crashed 
to the ground. Then his father, who was the equal of Grandfather Brahma, 
gave him his name: ‘He was born with ten heads, and so he shall be called 
Dasagriva, “Ten-necked.”” 


[26-30] “Immediately after him was born the immensely powerful 
Kumbhakarna, whom no one in this world exceeded in sheer size. Then 
were born Sirpanakha, with her hideous face, and Kaikasi’s youngest son, 
the righteous Vibhisana. There, in the great forest, they grew to be 
immensely powerful beings. But among them, it was the cruel ten-necked 
Ravana who was a source of terror to the worlds. And as for the reckless 
and evil Kumbhakarna, he roamed about, terrifying the three worlds and 
devouring the great seers, who were devoted to righteousness. But as for 
righteous Vibhisana, never deviating from the path of righteousness, he 
lived with his senses controlled, practicing vedic study and restricting his 
diet. 

[31-34] “Now after some time, the divine lord of wealth came there in 
his flying palace, the Puspaka, to see his immensely powerful father. When 
Kaikasi saw Kubera there, blazing, as it were, with his blazing energy, she, 
thinking like a raksasa, said to ten-necked Ravana: “My son, look at your 
brother, who is haloed with blazing energy. And then, even though your 
status as his brother makes you his equal, just look at your own condition. 
DaSagriva, my son of immeasurable valor, you must exert yourself so that 
you will quickly become just like Vaisravana.’ 

[35-37] “When powerful ten-necked Ravana had heard those words of 
his mother, he was filled with intolerable envy, and he then made this vow: 
‘I swear to you truthfully, mother, that I shall soon be my brother’s equal or 
even his superior. So give up this heartfelt anguish.’ Filled with that jealous 
rage, ten-necked Ravana formed a resolution and vowed, ‘I will attain my 
desire through asceticism.’ Then, together with his younger brothers, he 
proceeded to the splendid ashram of Gokarna in order to accomplish his 
purpose.” 


Sarga 10 

[1—2] Then Rama asked the twice-born brahman, “How did those brothers 
of great ascetic vows practice their austerities in the forest, and what, O 
brahman, was the nature of their austerities?” And regarding that, Agastya 
told Rama, whose thoughts were focused, about the various righteous 
practices in which the brothers engaged there. 

[3-5] “At that time, Kumbhakarna, strictly controlled and constantly 
devoted to righteousness, practiced the austerity of the five fires during the 


hot season. During the rainy season, drenched with rainwater, he assumed 
the heroic posture, and, during the cold season, he remained constantly 
immersed in water. In this fashion, ten thousand years passed while he, 
intent upon righteousness, remained fixed on the path of virtue. 

[6-9] “Now as for righteous Vibhisana, who was pious and constantly 
devoted to righteousness, he stood on one foot for five thousand years. 
When his vow was completed, the troupes of apsarases danced, a shower of 
flowers fell, and the gods became agitated. For yet another five thousand 
years he gazed steadily at the sun, standing with his arms raised above his 
head and his mind fixed upon vedic recitation. In this fashion, ten thousand 
years passed for Vibhisana, whose mind was tightly controlled, as they 
might for a heavenly being in the Nandana garden. 

[10-14] “Now as for their ten-faced brother, he remained without food 
for ten thousand years. And when each full thousand years was completed, 
he offered one of his heads into the fire as an oblation. And so, in this 
fashion, nine thousand years passed for him, and nine of his heads entered 
the fire, eater of oblations. Now at the end of the tenth period of a thousand 
years, the righteous rdksasa was just about to sever his tenth head when 
Grandfather Brahma came there. Greatly pleased, Grandfather Brahma 
approached him, along with the gods, and said to him: ‘Dasagriva! My 
child! My child! I am pleased. So quickly, knower of righteousness, choose 
whatever boon you desire. Shall I grant a wish for you so that your 
exertions shall not have been in vain?’ 

[15-18] “Then, delighted at heart, ten-necked Ravana, bowing his head, 
spoke to the god in a voice stammering with excitement. ‘Holy one, there is 
nothing that living beings constantly fear other than death. Indeed, there 1s 
no foe equal to death, and so I choose immortality. Lord of creatures, let me 
be forever invulnerable to the great birds, mighty serpents, and yaksas, as 
well as the daitvas, danavas, raksasas, and gods. For, O lord worshiped by 
the immortal gods, I do not care about other creatures. Indeed, I regard all 
creatures such as men as if they were mere straws.’ 

[19-22] “And, Rama, addressed in this fashion by the rdaksasa ten- 
necked Ravana, the righteous Grandfather Brahma, together with the gods, 
said these words: ‘It will be just as you wish, bull among rdksasas. And 
now, since I am pleased, hear my additional auspicious words. Those heads 
that you earlier offered as oblations into the fire, blameless raksasa, will all 


be yours once more, just as they were.’ When the rdksasa ten-necked 
Ravana had been addressed in this fashion by Grandfather Brahma, those 
heads that had been offered as oblations into the fire materialized. 

[23-24] “When Prajapati, the grandfather of the worlds, had addressed 
ten-necked Ravana in this fashion, Rama, he spoke these words to 
Vibhisana: ‘Vibhisana, my child, knower of righteousness, I am pleased 
with you, for your mind is focused on righteousness.’ 

[25-28] “Cupping his hands in reverence, righteous Vibhisana, ever 
endowed with every virtue, as is the moon with its beams, said these words: 
‘Holy one, I have accomplished my purpose in that you, the guru of the 
worlds, have appeared in person before me. But if you are pleased, hear 
now, O you of excellent vows, what boon you should give to me. May 
every thought that I may have in each and every stage of life in this world 
be supremely righteous. And may I always uphold the righteous conduct 
appropriate to every stage. Most munificent Lord, I believe this to be the 
greatest of all boons, for nothing whatever in this world is beyond the reach 
of those who are devoted to righteousness.’ 

[29-30] “Then, pleased, Prajapati said to Vibhisana: ‘Since you are so 
supremely righteous, my child, all of this shall come to pass. Since, 
tormentor of your foes, no thought of yours is ever unrighteous, even 
though you are born from a raksasa womb, I shall grant you immortality.’ 

[31-34] “But, Rama, tamer of your foes, just as Prajapati was about to 
grant a boon to Kumbhakarna, all the gods, their hands cupped in reverence, 
said these words to him: ‘You must by no means grant a boon to 
Kumbhakarna, for you know how that evil-minded wretch terrorizes the 
three worlds. In the Nandana garden he has devoured seven apsarases as 
well as ten servants of great Indra. And, Brahma, he has also devoured seers 
and men. O lord of immeasurable radiance, under the pretext of a boon, we 
must befuddle him. And so the welfare of the worlds will be assured, and he 
himself will be brought down.’ 

[35-38] “Addressed in this fashion by the gods, Brahma, born from a 
lotus, called to mind the goddess Sarasvati, and she, called to mind, 
presented herself beside him. Cupping her hands in reverence as she stood 
beside him, Sarasvati spoke these words: ‘I have come, Lord. What duty 
must I perform?’ Then Prajapati spoke these words to Sarasvati, who had 
come to him: ‘O goddess of speech! You must become the speech that the 


gods desire to hear from the raksasa lord.’ Saying, ‘So be it,’ she entered 
the rdksasa’s mouth. Then Prajapati said, ‘Great-armed Kumbhakarna, 
choose whatever boon you like.’ 

[39-42] “Now, when Kumbhakarna heard those words of his, he spoke 
these words: ‘O God of gods! What I desire is to sleep for many years.’ 
And Grandfather Brahma said to him, ‘So be it.” Then he and the goddess 
Sarasvati, together with the gods, left him and proceeded to heaven. But as 
for evil-minded Kumbhakarna, he pondered in his misery: ‘What kind of 
words have issued from my mouth this day and why?’ When those brothers 
of intense blazing energy had all received boons in this fashion, they went 
to a forest of slesmdtaka trees and dwelt happily there.” 


Sarga Il 
[1—3] “Now, when Sumalin learned that those night-roaming rdksasas had 
been granted those boons, he abandoned his fear and, together with his 
followers, came up from Rasatala. The rdksasa’s ministers—Mé€arica, 
Prahasta, Viripaksa, and Mahodara—also came up, filled with bitter 
indignation. And surrounded by all of those bulls among rdksasas, Sumalin 
approached ten-necked Ravana and, embracing him, said this: 

[4-10] “ ‘Through great good fortune, my son, you have attained your 
long-cherished desire in that you have received such a boon from the ruler 
of the triple world. Our great fear of Visnu, because of which we abandoned 
Lanka and fled to Rasatala, is now banished, O great-armed hero. For, 
broken by him again and again, we abandoned our own home and, fleeing 
all together, entered Rasatala. Our own city of Lanka, once inhabited by the 
raksasas, has now been occupied by your brother, the wise lord of wealth. 
Indeed, blameless one, if it is possible to get it back, whether by 
conciliation, bribery, or force, then, great-armed one, it ought to be done. 
And you, my child, will, without doubt, become the lord of Lanka. Thus, 
immensely powerful warrior, you will become the ruler of us all.’ But ten- 
necked Ravana replied to his maternal grandfather, who stood before him, 
“You must not speak in this fashion. The lord of wealth is our revered 
elder.’ 

[11-18] “Then the night-roaming raksasa Prahasta humbly addressed 
these purposeful words to ten-necked Ravana, who had spoken in this 
fashion: ‘Great-armed DaSagriva, you should not speak in this fashion. 


There can be no brotherly affection among heroes. Now listen to these 
words of mine: It is said that the two exquisitely beautiful sisters Aditi and 
Diti together became the wives of Prajapati Kasyapa. Aditi gave birth to the 
gods, the lords of the triple world, while Diti gave birth to the daitvas. They 
were all sons of Kasyapa. They say, heroic knower of righteousness, that 
long ago this earth, together with its forests, oceans, and mountains, 
belonged to the daitvas. Thus, they became the more powerful. But then, 
when the powerful Lord Visnu had slaughtered them in battle, this 
imperishable triple world was brought under the control of the gods. You, 
sir, would not be the only one to engage in such enmity, for it was engaged 
in long ago by the gods themselves. Therefore, you should do as I say.’ 
When ten-necked Ravana had been addressed in this fashion by the evil- 
minded Prahasta, he reflected for a moment and then said, ‘Very well.’ 

[19-23] “And so that very day mighty ten-necked Ravana, filled with 
delight, proceeded with the night-roaming raksasas to the forest. When the 
night-roaming rdksasa ten-necked Ravana had reached Mount Trikita, he 
dispatched Prahasta, who was skilled in speech, as a messenger, saying: 
‘Prahasta! You must go at once and, in a conciliatory manner, using my 
own words, address this speech to the lord of wealth, that bull among the 
raksasas, sons of chaos. “Your majesty, this city of Lanka belongs to the 
great raksasas. It is not right, gentle and blameless brother, that you have 
occupied it. If you, sir, a person of unequaled valor, were to surrender it 
peacefully, you would be doing me a favor while adhering to 
righteousness.’”’ 

[24—27] “Addressed in this fashion, Prahasta, who was skilled in speech, 
went and reported the entire speech of ten-necked Ravana to the lord of 
wealth. Now, when the divinity Vaisravana, who was skilled in speech, had 
heard these words from Prahasta, he replied to him with these words: ‘Go 
and say to DaSsagriva: “The city and kingdom that are mine are yours as 
well, great-armed hero. Please enjoy them without impediment of any kind. 
Rest assured, I will shortly do everything that the raksasa lord has asked, 
but please wait a bit while I inform our father.’”’ 

[28—29] “When the overlord of wealth had spoken in this fashion, he 
approached his father. After respectfully saluting his elder, he told him what 
Ravana wanted: ‘Dear father, DaSagriva has sent me an emissary with the 
message: “Please give back the city of Lanka, which was formerly 


inhabited by the hosts of raksasas.” So now, sage of excellent vows, tell me 
what I should do in this matter.’ 

[30-37] “Addressed in this fashion, that bull among sages, the brahman- 
seer ViSravas, spoke these words to the giver of wealth: “Listen, my son, to 
these words of mine: Great-armed DaSagriva said this in my presence as 
well. But I rebuked that extremely evil-minded one, and I warned him 
repeatedly. I angrily told him again and again, “You will surely bring ruin 
upon yourself!” But now listen, my son, to these words of mine, which are 
in keeping with righteousness and will work to your advantage. Deluded by 
the granting of his boon, this very evil-minded raksasa, who 1s of a vicious 
nature because of my curse, does not know whom he should and should not 
treat respectfully. Therefore, great-armed hero, you should go to Mount 
Kailasa and found a city where you may dwell. You must leave Lanka 
together with your followers. There the best of rivers, the lovely Mandakini 
River, flows—its waters covered with golden lotuses as radiant as the sun. 
For, giver of wealth, you cannot possibly engage in hostilities with this 
raksasa. You know how he attained that greatest of boons.’ Addressed in 
this fashion, he accepted those words out of respect for his father and so 
departed together with his wives, townsfolk, ministers, vehicles, and 
wealth. 

[38-41] “Meanwhile, Prahasta went back to ten-necked Ravana and 
reported everything, saying, ‘The city of Lanka, thirty leagues in breadth, is 
now deserted. Enter it with us and there carry out the duties of your station.’ 
Then, when the rdksasa Ravana had been addressed in this fashion by 
Prahasta, he entered the city of Lanka, along with his brothers, his troops, 
and his followers. Then the ten-faced rdksasa, consecrated by the night- 
roaming rdksasas, settled the city. The city thus came to be densely 
populated with night-roaming raksasas, who resembled black storm clouds. 
Then, out of respect for his father’s words, the lord of wealth founded on 
that mountain as bright as the moon a city that was as adorned with well- 
ornamented mansions as is Amaravati, the city of Indra, smasher of 
citadels.” 


Sarga 12 
[1-2] “Once ten-necked Ravana had been consecrated as the lord of the 
raksasas, he and his two brothers considered giving away in marriage their 


sister, the raksasa woman Sirpanakha. He gave in marriage his sister, the 
raksasa woman called Sirpanakha, to the danava lord named Vidyujjihva, 
the son of Kalaka. 

[3-4] “Now, Rama, after giving away his sister in marriage, the king was 
wandering about hunting when he encountered Diti’s son, who was called 
Maya. Seeing him accompanied only by his daughter, the night-roaming 
raksasa ten-necked Ravana asked, ‘Who are you, sir, who stay alone in this 
forest unpeopled save by wild beasts?’ 

[S—13] “And then, Rama, Maya said to that night-roaming raksasa, who 
was inquiring: ‘Please listen. I will tell you everything about myself, just as 
it happened. As you may have heard, my boy, there is an apsaras named 
Hema. She was given to me in marriage, just as was Paulomi to Indra of the 
hundred sacrifices. For five hundred years, my boy, I was infatuated with 
her. But now this is the fourteenth year since she has been gone in the 
service of the gods. For Hema’s sake, I then constructed through my 
creative power an entire city of gold, inlaid with diamonds and lapis. But 
finding no pleasure there without her, in my great sorrow, I took my 
daughter out of that city and came to this forest. This is my daughter, your 
majesty, nourished in Hema’s womb. I came here with her to find her a 
husband. For men concerned about their honor, being a father of an 
unmarried girl is a great trouble. A young girl will always remain a source 
of suspicion for two families. And I also had two sons with my wife. The 
first, my boy, was Mayavin followed by Dundubhi. Since you are inquiring, 
I have told you all of this just as it took place. But now, my boy, may I 
know who you are?’ 

[14—16] “Addressed in this fashion, the lord of the rdksasas courteously 
said this: ‘I am Dasagriva by name, the son of Paulastya.’” Now, no sooner 
had Maya learned that ten-necked Ravana was the son of a brahman-seer 
than, delighted, he decided to give him his daughter in marriage right then 
and there. Smiling, the daitya lord said these words to the lord of the 
rdksasas: ‘Your majesty, here is my daughter, the maiden named 
Mandodari, who was borne by the apsaras Hema. Please accept her as your 
wife.’ 

[17-19] “And, Rama, ten-necked Ravana said, ‘So be it!’ Then, kindling 
a sacred fire on that very spot, he took her hand in marriage. For, Rama, 
Maya was unaware of the curse that ten-necked Ravana had received from 


his father, who was so rich in austerities. Therefore, recognizing that his 
lineage derived from his grandfather, Maya gave her to him in marriage. He 
also gave him an extremely marvelous and infallible javelin, which he had 
obtained through the most severe austerities—the very same one with 
which Ravana later struck down Laksmana. 

[20-25] “When he had taken a wife in this fashion, the mighty lord of 
Lanka returned to the city and had his two brothers each marry a wife. 
Ravana had Kumbhakarna take as his wife Vairocana’s granddaughter, who 
was named Vajrajvala. Vibhisana, a knower of righteousness, took as his 
wife the daughter of Sailiisa, the great king of the gandharvas. Her name 
was Sarama. She was born on the shore of Lake M@anasa, and once, during 
the rainy season, dear boy, Lake Manasa flooded. Then, in her love for her 
daughter, her mother uttered this wailing cry: ‘O lake! Do not flood!’ For 
that reason she was named Sara-ma, ‘Flood Not.’ Having thus taken wives, 
those rdksasas enjoyed themselves there, each with his own wife, just as do 
the gandharvas in the Nandana garden. 

[26-29] “Then Mandodari gave birth to a son, Meghanada, the one you 
refer to by the name Indrajit. No sooner had he been born than, crying, that 
son of the rdksasa unleashed a tremendous roar, which was like that of a 
thundercloud. Since all of Lanka was stupefied by that roar of his, his father 
himself gave him the name Meghanada, ‘Cloud Thunderer.’ Then, Rama, 
he grew up in Ravana’s splendid inner apartments, hidden by beautiful 
women as is fire by firewood.” 


Sarga 13 
[1-7] “Now, after some time, intense drowsiness brought on by Brahma, 
lord of the worlds, took hold of Kumbhakarna. Kumbhakarna then said 
these words to his brother, who was seated before him: ‘Drowsiness 
overwhelms me, your majesty. Please have them build an abode where I 
may sleep.’ Then, commanded by the king, artisans who were like 
Visvakarman himself constructed an abode for Kumbhakarna that 
resembled Mount Kailasa. And so they built one for Kumbhakarna that was 
a league in width and twice that in length. It was splendid, exquisite, and 
flawless. It was adorned everywhere with columns variegated with crystal 
and gold. Its luster was enhanced by lapis, and it was filled with masses of 
little bells. It was surrounded by gateways of ivory and filled with raised 


platforms of diamond and crystal. It was ever delightful in all seasons like a 
sacred cavern of Mount Meru. There the night-roaming rdksasa 
Kumbhakarna fell asleep, and he lay there for many thousands of years 
without waking. 

[8—10] “Once Kumbhakarna had been overcome by sleep, ten-faced 
Ravana continually harassed the gods, seers, yaksas, and gandharvas. 
Going to the magnificent heavenly gardens, Nandana and the rest, the ten- 
faced Ravana tore them up in his tremendous rage. As a playful elephant 
might roil a river, a driving wind might scatter trees, or the loosed vajra 
might shatter mountains, he constantly wrought destruction. 

[11-15] “When Vaisravana, the lord of wealth, came to know that ten- 
necked Ravana was acting in such a fashion, that knower of righteousness, 
reflecting upon the conduct befitting his lineage, sent a messenger to Lanka 
for the benefit of ten-necked Ravana and to demonstrate his own fraternal 
affection. Proceeding to the city of Lanka, the messenger met Vibhisana. 
The latter honored him in keeping with righteousness and inquired as to 
why he had come. After inquiring about the well-being of his king and his 
king’s relatives on both sides of the family, Vibhisana presented him to ten- 
faced Ravana, who was seated in his assembly hall. When the messenger 
saw the king there radiant with his own blazing energy, he addressed him 
reverently with blessings of victory and then stood silent for a moment. 

[16-17] “Once the messenger had taken his seat on a couch that had 
been brought for him and which was covered with fine cushions, he said 
these words to ten-necked Ravana: ‘Your majesty, I will report to you 
everything that your brother has said. It is, kind sir, in keeping with the 
conduct and lineage of both of you: 

[18-20] “ ‘ “Enough! The course of conduct you have adopted has gone 
far enough. Enough! If at all possible, you must establish yourself in 
righteousness. For I have seen the Nandana garden destroyed, and I have 
heard that seers have been slain. But I have also heard, your majesty, of the 
measures the gods are taking against you. You have spurned me, time and 
time again, lord of the rdksasas, and, in your folly, you have committed 
crimes against your own kinsmen, whom you should have been protecting. 

[21-24] “ * “But I had gone to the slopes of the Himalayas in order to 
practice righteousness, undertaking a vow to Rudra, controlling my senses, 
and maintaining self-control. There I saw that powerful god, together with 


the goddess Uma, and it was there that I cast my left eye upon the goddess. 
I did so merely wondering, ‘Who can this lovely woman be?’ and for no 
other reason, since Parvati had taken on incomparable beauty and was 
dallying there. Nonetheless, because of the radiance of the goddess, my left 
eye was burned so that its sight grew dim as if obscured by dust. 

[25-30] “ ‘ “Then I proceeded to another broad slope of that mountain 
and fully performed a great vow for a full eight hundred years. When those 
austerities were completed there, the god Lord Mahesvara was delighted, 
and, with a delighted heart, he spoke these words: ‘Lord of wealth! You of 
excellent vows! Knower of righteousness! I am pleased with these 
austerities of yours, for I myself have performed this vow as you have. No 
third person could perform such a vow, for this vow, which I devised long 
ago, 1S all but impossible to perform. Therefore, lord of wealth, please 
accept my friendship. Since I have been won over by your austerities, you 
must become my friend, sinless lord. And since, through the splendor of the 
goddess your left eye was burned, your name shall forever remain 
Ekaksipingala, “Dusky in One Eye.” 

[31-32] “ ‘ “When I had earned the friendship of Sankara in this fashion 
and taken my leave of him, I returned. Only then did I hear of your evil 
intentions. And so, defiler of your lineage, you must desist from indulgence 
in such extreme unrighteousness, for even now the gods, together with the 
hosts of seers, are considering a strategy for your destruction.” 

[33-37] “When he had been addressed in this fashion, ten-necked 
Ravana was enraged, and his eyes grew red. Clenching his fists and his 
teeth, he spoke these words: ‘I know, messenger, the real meaning of these 
words that you have spoken. Neither you nor my brother who sent you shall 
live! The guardian of wealth is not saying this for my benefit. Instead, fool, 
you are merely boasting about his friendship with Mahesvara. I always 
thought, “I must not kill him, for he is my elder and my superior.” But now, 
after hearing his words, this is exactly what I intend to do. This very hour, 
relying on the strength of my arms, I shall conquer the three worlds, and, on 
account of just one of them, I shall send all four world guardians to the 
abode of Yama.’ 

[38-39] “When the lord of Lanka had spoken in this fashion, he killed 
the messenger with his sword and gave him to the evil-minded rdaksasas to 
eat. Then, once he had performed benedictory rites, Ravana mounted his 


chariot and, eager to conquer the three worlds, proceeded to where the lord 
of wealth was.” 


Sarga 14 
[1-3] “Majestic Ravana then marched forth, as if to burn up the worlds in 
his anger. He was surrounded by six ministers, who were ever arrogant in 
their might. Those that accompanied him were Mahodara, Prahasta, Marica, 
Suka, Sarana, and the mighty Dhtmraksa, who was ever eager for battle. 
Passing towns, rivers, mountains, parks, and woodlands, in a short time he 
reached Mount Kailasa. 

[4—7] “When the yaksas had heard that the raksasa lord was encamped 
on the mountain, they said, ‘It is the king’s brother!’ and went to where the 
lord of wealth was. They went and told him all about his brother’s intention, 
and, granted permission by the giver of wealth, they marched off to battle. 
There was a great surge of agitation in the army of the king of the raksasas, 
sons of chaos, as in the ocean when it floods. It seemed to shake the very 
mountain. Then there arose a battle swarming with yaksas and raksasas in 
which the rdksasa’s ministers were sorely afflicted. 

[8—11] “When the night-roaming raksasa ten-necked Ravana saw that 
his fighters were in such a plight, he unleashed a roar in his excitement, 
and, in a rage, he rushed to the attack. Fearsome in their valor, each one of 
the raksasa lord’s ministers then engaged in battle with a thousand of those 
thousands of foes. Although he was being struck with maces, iron clubs, 
swords, javelins, and iron cudgels, ten-necked Ravana plunged into the 
yaksa army. Being struck by those weapons there, ten-faced Ravana, nearly 
breathless, was closely pressed on every side by the yaksa lords, as if by 
pelting storm clouds. 

[12—17] “Then that evil-minded rdaksasa, raising his mace, which was 
like the rod of Kala, plunged into the army of the yaksas, sending them to 
Yama’s abode. Just as a fire driven by the wind might consume a vast, 
parched woodland filled with dry tinder, he consumed that very fearsome 
army. Just like clouds decimated by the winds, the yaksas were all but 
destroyed in battle by his ministers, Mahodara, Suka, and the rest. Some of 
them fell on the battleground, their limbs hacked off by weapons. Others 
were knocked to the ground, biting their lips with their sharp teeth. 
Clutching one another in terror, their weapons fallen on the battlefield, 


some of the yaksas then collapsed like the banks of a river undercut by the 
current. What with the slain, who, after fighting on the surface of the earth, 
had ascended to heaven, and the hosts of seers, who were watching from 
there, there was no room left in the heavens. 

[18-20] “At this juncture, Rama, an enormous yaksa named 
Samyodhakantaka arrived with a large host of troops and mounts. Struck 
down by that yaksa as if by Visnu himself, Marica fell and crashed to the 
earth, as someone might fall from the heavens when his merit is exhausted. 
Regaining consciousness after a moment, the night-roaming raksasa 
composed himself and then engaged that yaksa in battle. The latter, broken, 
fled. 

[21-25] “Then, at the perimeter, watched over by the gatekeepers, 
Ravana breached the gateway, every part of which was ornamented with 
gold and which was inlaid with lapis and silver. But, Rama, a gatekeeper 
known as Siryabhanu blocked the night-roaming rdaksasa_ ten-necked 
Ravana as he was entering. Tearing up the gateway, the yaksa struck him 
with it. Although the raksasa was struck by the gateway hurled by the 
yaksa, he was not injured, Rama, because of the boon of Brahma, who was 
born from the waters. And then, with that very same gateway, he struck 
down that yvaksa. Pulverized, the yaksa simply vanished. Witnessing his 
valor, all of the yaksas fled. Oppressed by terror, they then entered the 
rivers and caves.” 


Sarga 15 

[1-5] “Then, seeing that the yaksas had fled in their hundreds and 
thousands, the lord of wealth himself went forth to battle. There was an all- 
but-invincible yaksa there by the name of M@anicara. Surrounded by four 
thousand yaksas, he gave battle. Those yaksas charged the rdksasas, 
striking them in battle with maces, cudgels, darts, javelins, iron cudgels, 
and war hammers. Nonetheless, Prahasta slew a thousand of them in battle, 
while Mahodara slew another thousand with his mace. And then, Rama, the 
evil-minded Marica, enraged, struck down two thousand in the blink of an 
eye. 

[6-10] “In that great battle, Manibhadra confronted Dhimraksa. 
Although he was angrily struck in the chest with a cudgel, he was not 
shaken. Then the raksasa Dhtimraksa was struck on the head by 


Manibhadra, who was whirling his mace. Stunned, he collapsed. When ten- 
faced Ravana saw that Dhtmraksa had been struck and, drenched with 
blood, had fallen, he charged at Manibhadra in a towering rage. But as he 
charged toward him in his rage, like the fire blazing up at the end of a 
cosmic era, that bull among yaksas pierced him with three javelins. But he, 
in turn, was then struck with a mace by the raksasa king in battle. Because 
of that blow, his diadem was knocked to one side, and, from that time 
onward, that yaksa was known as Parsvamauli, ‘He of the Sideways 
Diadem.’ 

[11-13] “When the great yaksa Manibhadra had retreated, Rama, a 
deafening cheer arose on that mountain. Then, accompanied by Safikha and 
Padma, the lord of wealth, bearing a mace, appeared from afar with Sukra 
and Prosthapada. Seeing his brother, who because of the curse was deprived 
of all sense of decorum, the wise Kubera, there in the midst of battle, 
addressed him in words that were befitting the lineage of their grandfather: 

[14-21] “ ‘Although I tried to stop you, evil-minded wretch, you did not 
understand. Only after you have received your just deserts and have gone to 
hell will you come to realize this. A foolish man who mistakenly drinks 
poison without knowing it will, once it has taken effect, nonetheless come 
to realize the consequences of his action. Indeed, the gods take delight only 
in one who is righteous. It is because of this that you have been reduced to 
such a state, and you do not even realize it. A person who disrespects his 
mothers, fathers, brothers, and preceptors will experience the fruit of that 
once he has come under the power of the king of the dead. The fool who 
fails to amass austerities while still in this impermanent body will later, 
once dead, come to regret it when he sees where he has gone. No evil- 
minded person spontaneously acquires good judgment. A _ person 
experiences the fruit of whatever action he performs. Intellect, beauty, 
strength, wealth, sons, and greatness—men obtain all of this through the 
previous actions they have performed. And thus, you, whose mind is of 
such a nature, will surely go to hell. I shall not speak with you again, as this 
is the proper resolution with regard to one of evil ways.’ 

[22—25] “When Kubera had spoken in this fashion, he assailed Ravana’s 
ministers. All of them, headed by Marica, turned tail and fled en masse. 
Then, although the great yaksa lord struck him on the head with his mace, 
ten-necked Ravana did not give any ground. After that, Rama, the two, 


assailing each other in fierce combat, were neither shaken nor fatigued and 
remained unyielding. Then, in battle, the bestower of wealth loosed the 
divine weapon of Agni, but ten-necked Ravana parried that divine weapon 
with that of Varuna. 

[26-28] “Now, having recourse to the rdksasas’ power of illusion, the 
raksasa lord, whirling his huge mace, struck the bestower of wealth on the 
head. Struck in this fashion with that, the lord of wealth, shaken and 
drenched with blood, fell like an asoka tree cut off at the roots. Then the 
presiding deities of his treasuries, Padma and the rest, brought the lord of 
wealth, that bestower of wealth, to the Nandana grove and there revived 
him. 

[29-31] “And now, Rama, when the lord of the raksasas had defeated 
the bestower of wealth, he seized his flying palace Puspaka as a token of his 
victory. It was enclosed by golden columns, and its gateways were of lapis 
and gemstones. It was covered with fretworks of pearls and had trees that 
bore whatever was desired as their fruit. Having vanquished the god 
Vaisravana, the king mounted that flying palace, which was steered by its 
owner’s will and which he had won through his valor, and descended from 
Mount Kailasa.” 


Sarga 16 

[1-5] “Now, Rama, once the lord of the raksasas had vanquished his 
brother, the bestower of wealth, he then proceeded to the Saravana, the 
birthplace of Skanda Mahasena. Ten-necked Ravana then gazed upon the 
golden Saravana, which, haloed with a mass of rays, resembled a second 
sun, bringer of light. But as he approached that mountain, he spied some 
other lovely grove, and there, Rama, the Puspaka was brought to a halt in 
the sky. Perceiving that the Puspaka, which had been steered by its owner’s 
will, had been stopped and rendered motionless, the raksasa, surrounded by 
his ministers, fell to brooding. ‘What is the reason that the Puspaka does not 
move for me? Who on this mountain could have done this?’ 

[6—9] “Then Marica, skilled in discernment, said to ten-necked Ravana, 
‘It cannot be, your majesty, that the Puspaka does not move without a 
reason.’ Then, coming up beside him, Nandisvara, the mighty servant of 
Bhava, boldly said this to the raksasa lord: ‘You must turn back, DaSagriva, 
for Saikara is dallying on this mountain. Therefore, the mountain has been 


forbidden to the great birds, great serpents, yvaksas, daitvas, danavas, 
raksasas, and, indeed, to all living beings.’ 

[10-12] ““Ten-necked Ravana, his eyes red with rage, descended from the 
Puspaka and saying, ‘Who is this Safikara?’ he approached the base of the 
mountain. He glared at Lord Nandisvara, who, like a second Safikara, stood 
close by, holding a blazing lance. Seeing that he had a monkey’s face, the 
raksasa regarded him with contempt, and, as might a storm cloud charged 
with rain, in his folly, he unleashed a roar of laughter. 

[13-16] “Then, infuriated, the blessed Lord Nandin, like a second body 
of Safikara, addressed the rdksasa ten-necked Ravana, who was standing 
there: “Since, evil-minded rdksasa, in your folly, you were contemptuous 
when you saw me in my simian form and roared with laughter, monkeys— 
bearing my form and with blazing energy equal to my might—will be born 
for the destruction of your race. But although I am well able to deal with 
you here and now, night-roaming rdksasa, I must not kill you. For you have 
already been slain by your own actions.’ 

[17-19] “However, heedless of Nandin’s words, the night-roaming 
raksasa approached the mountain and said these words: ‘I shall tear up this 
mountain of yours by its roots, lord of cattle, on account of which the 
passage of Puspaka was interrupted while I was traveling. By what 
authority does Bhava dally there, as if he were a king? You do not realize, 
as you should, what a dangerous situation is at hand.’ 

[20-24] “After having spoken in this fashion, your majesty, he thrust his 
arms under the mountain and then hefted it together with its deer, its beasts 
of prey, and its trees. Then, Rama, Mahadeva, smiling when he saw what 
ten-necked Ravana had done, playfully pressed down the mountain with his 
big toe. Then the rdksasa’s arms, which were beneath the mountain, were 
crushed, on account of which his ministers were astonished. In his rage and 
because of the crushing of his arms in this fashion, the rdksasa released a 
tremendous cry that filled the three worlds. Terrified by that sound, people 
thought that it was the end of the world. Even the gods were disturbed as 
they discharged their duties. 

[25-29] “But, your majesty, Mahadeva, resting on the summit of the 
mountain, was pleased. Freeing ten-faced Ravana’s arms, he spoke these 
words to him: ‘I am pleased with your might and boldness, night-roaming 
raksasa. The howl you released in your agony as you cried out was truly 


terrifying. And since this triple world, reverberating with your cries, was 
terrified, you shall be known by the name “Ravana.” Therefore, the gods, 
humans, yaksas, and everyone else in this world will call you Ravana, “He 
Who Makes the Worlds Reverberate with His Cries.” Go now, Paulastya, 
without fear, by whatever path you choose. I grant you leave, lord of the 
raksasas. You may go.’ 

[30-31] “And so, having been given his name by Mahesvara Mahadeva, 
Ravana first reverentially saluted him and then mounted his flying palace. 
Then, Rama, Ravana roamed the earth, oppressing mighty kshatriyas 
wherever he went.” 


Sarga 17 

[1-5] “Then, your majesty, while wandering the earth, great-armed Ravana 
reached the Himalayan forests and roamed about there. There he spied a 
young woman wearing black antelope skin and matted locks. She was 
engaged in asceticism according to the ordinances of the seers, and she 
looked like a goddess. When he saw that beautiful young woman observing 
severe penitential vows, his mind was overcome with lust and delusion. 
Laughing softly, he asked her: ‘Lovely lady, why are you living like this? It 
is completely unsuitable to your youth. Such perverse behavior is not at all 
consonant with your beauty. Lovely lady, whose daughter are you? Or who, 
blameless lady, is your husband? Tell me at once, since I am asking you. 
For what purpose do you amass these austerities?’ 

[6-10] “Addressed in this fashion by the ignoble rdksasa, that young 
woman, rich in austerities, performed the rites of hospitality for him 
according to custom and then said: ‘My father was the righteous brahman- 
seer named Kusadhvaja. He was the majestic son of Brhaspati, and he was 
Brhaspati’s equal in intellect. I am his daughter, born from that great being 
who was ever engaged in vedic recitation. As an incarnation of vedic 
speech, I am known by the name Vedavati. Then the gods, along with the 
gandharvas, as well as the yaksas, raksasas, and great serpents, approached 
my father and asked for my hand in marriage. But my father did not give 
me to them, lord of the rdksasas. Listen, great-armed hero, and I shall tell 
you the reason. 

[11-13] “ ‘They say that it was Visnu, foremost of the gods and lord of 
the three worlds, whom my father intended as his son-in-law, and that is 


why that righteous man did not want to give me to anyone else. Upon 
hearing that, the king of the daityas, Sambhu by name, arrogant in his 
strength, was furious. And so that wicked creature killed my father as he 
slept at night. Then my illustrious mother, desolate, embraced my father’s 
body and entered the fire with him. 

[14-17] “ ‘And so the wish is firmly lodged in my heart that I will make 
my father’s dream with respect to Narayana come true. Having thus vowed 
that I will fulfill my father’s desire even though he has departed, I am 
engaged in extensive austerities. I have now told you everything, bull 
among raksasas. Know that I am resorting to righteousness in my desire to 
make Narayana my husband. I know all about you, your majesty. So please 
go away, delight of the Paulastyas. For through my austerities, I know 
everything that transpires in the three worlds.’ 

[18-21] “But Ravana, tormented by the arrows of Kandarpa, the god of 
love, descended from atop his flying palace and there addressed that young 
woman of very severe vows: “You are very arrogant, fair-hipped lady, in 
that you entertain such a resolution. The amassing of righteous actions, 
fawn-eyed woman, is an adornment only of the elderly. Timorous woman, 
you are endowed with every virtue and are indeed the most beautiful 
woman in the triple world. You ought not in your youth be acting in such a 
manner that is fitting only for the elderly. Who, after all, is this individual to 
whom you refer as Visnu? Surely, lovely lady, he whom you so desire is not 
equal to me in valor, asceticism, wealth, or strength, my lady.’ 

[22-27] “ ‘Don’t do this! Don’t!’ cried the young woman to that night- 
roaming rdaksasa, as he seized her by the hair with his hand. Enraged, 
Vedavati then cut off her hair with her hand. Eager to end her life, she 
kindled a fire and said: ‘As I have been violated by you, ignoble wretch, my 
life is at an end. Therefore, rdksasa, I shall enter the fire, the eater of 
oblations, right before your very eyes. Since I, innocent and without a 
protector, have been violated, I shall be born again for your destruction. 
Truly it is not possible for a woman to kill anyone, least of all you, evil 
raksasa. Moreover, were I to unleash a curse, 1t would exhaust the power of 
my asceticism. If I have performed good deeds, made charitable donations, 
and offered sacrificial oblations, then, by virtue of that, may I be born as the 
virtuous daughter of a righteous man and not from a human womb.’ 


[28-31] “When she had spoken in this fashion, she entered the blazing 
fire, the eater of oblations. Then, on every side, there fell from the heavens 
a heavenly shower of blossoms. That foe, who had previously been doomed 
by her in her wrath, has now been slain by you, who have taken recourse to 
your mountainous and superhuman strength. And thus, this illustrious 
woman has been born once again among men in a field torn up by a 
ploughshare, where she looked like a flame of fire on a sacrificial altar. And 
thus, the woman called Vedavatt, who lived long ago in the Krta Yuga, has 
appeared in the Treta Yuga to accomplish the destruction of that raksasa. 
Since she was born from a furrow [sita], men always call her Sita.” 


Sarga 18 
[1-3] “After Vedavati had entered the fire, eater of oblations, Ravana 
mounted the flying palace Puspaka and roamed the earth. Then, arriving at 
the country of Usirabija, the raksasa spied King Marutta, who was offering 
a sacrifice together with the gods. The brahman-seer Samvarta by name, the 
brother of Brhaspati himself and a knower of righteousness, officiated at the 
sacrifice, surrounded by all the hosts of brahmans. 

[4—5] “But when the gods saw that raksasa, invincible through the gift of 
his boon, they betook themselves to the wombs of various creatures, 
terrified that he would attack them. Indra became a peacock; Yama, the king 
of righteousness, a crow; while the lord of wealth became a lizard; and 
Varuna, a hamsa. 

[6-9] “Approaching the king, Ravana, lord of the raksasas, said, ‘You 
must either offer me battle or acknowledge defeat.’ Then King Marutta said 
to him, ‘And who, sir, are you?’ But the raksasa laughed derisively and said 
these words: ‘I am amused by how unimpressed you are, your majesty, in 
that you do not seem to grasp that I am Ravana, the younger brother of 
Kubera, the bestower of wealth. For who in the three worlds does not know 
my strength, whereby I defeated my brother and seized this flying palace?’ 

[10-12] “Then King Marutta said this to the raksasa: ‘What a splendid 
fellow you are, sir, to have defeated your own elder brother in battle. That 
which is inconsistent with righteousness is not praiseworthy, nor is that 
which goes against proper conduct. After having carried out this depraved 
act, you now boast about defeating your brother. Did you perform some 
perfect act of righteousness in the past, such that you received a boon? The 


sort of thing you yourself boast of is something I have never heard of 
before.’ 

[13-18] “Then the king, seizing his bow and arrows in a rage, set out for 
battle. But Samvarta blocked his path. The great seer spoke affectionately to 
Marutta: ‘If you want my advice, battle is not appropriate for you. If left 
incomplete, this sacrifice dedicated to Mahesvara would consume your 
dynasty. And how can one who is consecrated for sacrifice engage in battle? 
How can there be violence on the part of one so consecrated? Moreover, 
battle is always uncertain and this raksasa is invincible.’ And so, 
withdrawing on the advice of his guru, Marutta, lord of the earth, put aside 
his bow and arrows and, fully composed, turned his attention to the 
sacrifice. Then, regarding him as vanquished, Suka proclaimed: ‘Ravana is 
victorious!’ and he roared with delight. Ravana then devoured the great 
seers who had assembled there for the sacrifice and, sated with their blood, 
once more began to roam the earth. 

[19-22] “Once Ravana had gone, the gods, denizens of heaven, along 
with Indra, resumed their natural forms and addressed those creatures 
whose forms they had taken. In his delight Indra then addressed the peacock 
with its indigo tail feathers: ‘I am pleased with your assistance, O sky-going 
bird who knows righteousness. The thousand eyes that I possess shall 
appear upon your tail, and, as a token of my gratitude, you shall experience 
delight whenever I send my rains.’ And so, lord of kings, they say that 
formerly the tails of peacocks were solid indigo, but after receiving that 
boon from the lord of the gods, they all became variegated. 

[23-26] “Then, Rama, King Dharma addressed that crow, which now 
was perched on the beam of the eastern sacrificial hall: ‘O bird, I am 
pleased with you. Now hear my words of gratitude. Since I am pleased, 
those various ailments with which I afflict other creatures shall have no 
power over you. Of this there can be no doubt. Through my boon, O sky- 
going bird, you shall have no fear of death. Indeed, so long as men do not 
kill you, you shall live forever. And when you are fed, those men who 
reside in my realm and are afflicted by hunger will be sated together with 
their kinsmen.’ 

[27-30] “Next Varuna addressed the hamsa, who frequents the waters of 
the Ganges: ‘O lord of winged creatures, hear my grateful words. Your 
color will be ravishing, bright, like the orb of the moon, excellent, and equal 


in luster to shining foam. In contact with the water, my particular domain, 
you shall always be beautiful, and you shall obtain unequaled delight as a 
token of my gratitude.’ Formerly, Rama, the color of hamsas was not pure 
white. Their wings had dark tips, while their breasts were as bright as the 
tips of new grass. 

[31-32] “Then Vaisravana addressed that lizard, which now sat on a hill: 
‘As I am pleased with you, I shall grant you a golden color. Your head shall 
be immutably golden forever. This golden hue will be yours through my 
gratitude.’ 

[33] “When the sacrificial ceremony was completed, the gods, having 
granted these boons to those creatures, returned to their respective abodes 
together with the king.” 


Sarga 19 

[1-5] “Having thus defeated Marutta, the ten-faced lord of the raksasas, 
spoiling for battle, proceeded to the capitals of other kings. Accosting those 
lords among kings, the equals of great Indra and Varuna, the lord of the 
rdksasas said: ‘You must either give me battle or declare yourselves 
vanquished! This is my resolve. There will be no escape for those of you 
who act otherwise.’ Then those many wise kings who were resolved upon 
righteousness, recognizing that their enemy’s might derived from a boon, 
declared, ‘We are vanquished!’ Then, Rama my son, all those kings— 
Dusyanta, Suratha, Gadhi, Gaya, and King Purtiravas—declared, ‘We are 
vanquished.’ 

[6-8] “At length Ravana, the lord of the raksasas, came to Ayodhya, 
which was as carefully guarded by Anaranya as is Amaravatt by Sakra, and, 
accosting that king, he said: ‘Give me battle or declare yourself vanquished. 
Such is my command.’ In a towering rage, Anaranya said to the lord of the 
raksasas, ‘1 grant you single combat, O lord of the rdksasas.’ 

[9-11] “Then the vast army of the lord of men, which he had made ready 
after hearing of those earlier conquests, marched forth intent on 
slaughtering the raksasas. At once many thousands of elephants and ten 
thousand cavalry marched forth, along with infantry and chariots, covering 
the earth. When the king’s army encountered that of Ravana, it was 
consumed, your majesty, like an oblation offered in the sacrificial fire. 


[12-15] “The lord of men watched as his vast army was being 
annihilated, like the waters of the five rivers when they merge with the 
mighty ocean. And, beside himself with rage, the lord of men, twanging his 
bow, which was like the bow of mighty Indra, assailed Ravana on his own. 
Then the delight of the House of Iksvaku rained down eight hundred arrows 
on the raksasa king’s head. But, like showers of rain falling from the clouds 
on a mountain summit, his arrows, in falling, produced no injury 
whatsoever. 

[16-19] “But then, with the palm of his hand, the enraged king of the 
raksasas struck King Anaranya on his head so that he fell from his chariot. 
Fallen to the ground, the king, trembling, his limbs twitching, resembled a 
mighty sala tree struck down in the forest by a thunderbolt. Mocking the 
Iksvaku king, the raksasa said: ‘Now what benefit have you reaped in doing 
battle with me? For there is no one in the triple world who can offer me 
single combat, lord of men. I guess you have not heard of my might as you 
were addicted to sensual pleasures.’ 

[20-24] “As Ravana was speaking in this fashion, the king, his life 
breaths ebbing, said these words: ‘Since fate is insuperable, what could I 
have done here? For it is not you who have defeated me, raksasa, although 
you boast about it. It is by fate that I have been slain here. You, sir, have 
merely been its instrument in my case. But what I can do now—as my life 
breaths ebb away—is utter a prophecy, rdksasa, since you have insulted the 
House of Iksvaku. If I have given charitably, if I have performed sacrifices, 
if I have properly engaged in penances, and if I have duly protected my 
people, then may this prophecy of mine prove true: In this House of the 
great Iksvakus, there shall be born a king of immense blazing energy who 
shall rob you of your life.’ 

[25—26] ““No sooner had this curse been uttered than the war drum of the 
gods, loud as a thundercloud, was beaten, and a shower of blossoms fell 
from the sky. Then, O lord of kings, the king ascended to his heavenly 
abode. And once the king had gone to heaven, Rama, the rdksasa 
departed.” 


Sarga 20 
[1-2] «Then, as the lord of the raksasas continued terrorizing the people of 
the earth, he encountered Narada, foremost of sages, in a forest. Perched on 


the back of a cloud, the divine seer Narada of immense blazing energy and 
immeasurable splendor addressed Ravana, who was mounted on the flying 
palace Puspaka: 

[3-5] “ ‘My good sir, lord of the raksasas, stay a moment. Son of 
Visravas, endowed with noble birth, I am pleased with your glorious feats 
of valor. I have been greatly pleased with Visnu’s slaughter of the daityas, 
Tarksya’s defeat of the great serpents, and your crushing blows in battle. 
Now I will tell you something that you should hear, if you will listen. And 
once you have heard it, bull among raksasas, you should then act upon it. 

[6-10] “ ‘Why do you, who are invulnerable to the gods, go on killing 
mere mortals? For being under the power of death, these mortals have 
already been slain. Just look at this world of mortals, great-armed lord of 
the raksasas, filled with innumerable cross-purposes and totally unaware of 
its own fate. In one place joyous people are playing music and dancing, 
while others, tormented, are weeping, their faces marked by eyes flooded 
with tears. With their affection for their mothers, fathers, and sons, and 
delighting in their wives and friends, the people, in their infatuation, are lost 
and fail to grasp their own misery. So why go on tormenting the world in 
this fashion since it has already been destroyed by delusion? For you have 
already completely subjugated the world of mortals, good sir. Of this there 
is no doubt.’ 

[11-13] “Addressed in this fashion, the lord of Lanka, blazing, as it 
were, with splendor, respectfully saluted Narada and, smiling, said to him 
regarding that: ‘Great seer, you who take your pleasure among the gods and 
gandharvas and are so fond of battle, I am indeed preparing to go to the 
underworld known as Rasatala in search of victory. Then, once I have 
subjugated the three worlds and brought the great serpents and gods under 
my control, I shall churn the ocean, the receptacle of every essence, for the 
nectar of immortality.’ 

[14—15] “But the holy seer Narada said to ten-necked Ravana: ‘So where 
then are you going now by this path? For, tormentor of your foes, this path, 
difficult and impassable, leads to the city of Yama, the king of the 
ancestors.’ 

[16-19] “Bursting out with a laugh like an autumnal cloud, ten-faced 
Ravana replied, ‘I have already accomplished this!’ Then he spoke these 
words: “Therefore, great brahman, resolved as I am to slay Vaivasvata, I 


shall proceed to the south, where that king, the son of Stirya, dwells. Eager 
for battle, O blessed lord, I vowed in my fury: “I shall conquer the four 
guardians of the world!” Therefore, I shall set out for the city of the king of 
the ancestors and I shall put that tormentor of living beings to death.’ 

[20-25] “When ten-necked Ravana had spoken in this fashion, he 
respectfully saluted the sage and set out for the southern region, 
accompanied by his excited counselors. But that foremost of brahmans, 
who was of immense blazing energy and resembled a smokeless fire, the 
purifier, remained lost in thought for a while and reflected: ‘It is Kala who 
afflicts the three worlds with their fixed and moving contents, including 
Indra, when their lives and merit are at an end. How can he himself be 
slain? How can the lord of the rdksasas of his own free will approach him 
from whom the three worlds always flee, afflicted with terror? How can he 
who is the creator and who apportions the fruits of good and evil deeds, he 
by whom the triple world was conquered, be vanquished? And what other 
means will he devise to accomplish this? Having become quite curious, I 
too shall proceed to Yama’s abode.’ ” 


Sarga 21 
[1-3] “When Narada, the foremost of brahmans, had reflected in this 
fashion, he went swiftly to Yama’s abode in order to report what had 
transpired. There he saw the god Yama, who, attended by Agni, was dealing 
out appropriate fates to living beings. When Yama saw that the great seer 
Narada had arrived, he offered him, in keeping with righteousness, a 
comfortable seat and the guest-offering. He then said: 

[4—7] “ ‘I trust that all is well, divine seer, and I trust that righteousness 
has not been violated. What, O you upon whom the gods and the 
gandharvas attend, is the purpose of your coming?’ Then the holy seer 
Narada spoke these words: “Listen! I will tell you. Then you must take the 
necessary steps. O king of the ancestors, the night-roaming raksasa known 
as ten-necked Ravana is coming here in order to subjugate—through his 
valor—you, who are impossible to vanquish. It is for this reason that I have 
come in haste, lord. What can he do this day to you whose weapon is the 
rod?’ 

[8—11] “At that very moment, Narada spied the divine flying palace of 
the raksasa approaching from afar. It resembled the rising, many-rayed sun. 


The immensely powerful raksasa drew near, dispelling the darkness of the 
whole region through the radiance of the Puspaka. On every side, the great- 
armed, ten-necked Ravana saw living beings experiencing the consequences 
of their good and evil deeds. Then, through his valor, mighty Ravana 
forcibly freed those who were being tormented because of their own evil 
deeds. 

[12—15] “As the departed spirits were being liberated by the immensely 
powerful rdksasa, their guards were enraged and attacked the lord of the 
rdksasas. In their hundreds of thousands, those heroes sent a hail of darts, 
iron beams, lances, war hammers, javelins, and iron cudgels against the 
Puspaka. Swarming like bees, they swiftly battered the seats, terraces, 
raised platforms, and gateways of the Puspaka. But since the Puspaka flying 
palace was an abode of divinity, it remained indestructible through the 
blazing splendor of Brahma, even as it was being battered in battle. 

[16-19] “Then Ravana’s mighty counselors fought with all their will and 
all their strength, as did the ten-faced king himself. Their bodies smeared 
with blood, wounded by every sort of weapon, the counselors of the 
raksasa lord fought a great battle. And those illustrious warriors—Yama’s 
great host and the raksasa’s counselors—struck at one another with their 
weapons in battle. But turning away from the rdksasa’s counselors, those 
exceedingly mighty warriors assailed ten-faced Ravana himself with a hail 
of lances. 

[20—23] “Then, grievously wounded with weapons, his body smeared 
with blood, the foremost of the rdksasas in his flying palace resembled an 
asoka tree in bloom. However, as he was a master of divine weapon-spells, 
that mighty warrior released lances, maces, darts, javelins, iron cudgels, 
arrows, cudgels, boulders, and trees. But having repulsed them all and 
rendered futile his divine weapon-spell, they, in their hundreds and 
thousands, belabored the fearsome rdksasa, who was alone. They all 
surrounded him as a mass of clouds might a mountain, and, with their short 
javelins and lances, they knocked the wind out of him. 

[24-27] “Drenched with gouts of blood, his armor gone, he left the 
Puspaka in a rage and took his stand on the ground. Then, after a moment, 
the enraged overlord of the rdksasas cleared his mind and, armed with his 
bow and arrows, took up his stand on the ground like Yama, the ender of all 
things. Nocking to his bow an arrow charged with the divine weapon-spell 


of Pasupati, he drew that bow, crying out to them, ‘Stand! Stand!’ 
Garlanded with flames and followed by flesh-eating beasts, that arrow, 
released in battle, sped along, reducing thickets and trees to ashes. 

[28-29] “Consumed by its blazing energy, the warriors of Vaivasvata fell 
in battle, like trees consumed by a forest fire. Then, together with his 
ministers, that raksasa of fearsome valor roared a mighty roar causing the 
earth to tremble, as it were.” 


Sarga 22 
[1-3] “Now, when Yama Vaivasvata heard ten-necked Ravana’s mighty 
roar, he realized that his enemy had been victorious and that his own army 
had been destroyed. Realizing that his warriors had been slain, his eyes wild 
with rage, he quickly said to his charioteer, ‘Bring up my chariot.’ His 
charioteer then brought up his divine, loudly rumbling chariot. Then he of 
immense blazing energy mounted that great chariot and took his stand. 

[4-6] “Standing before him, wielding a noose and a war hammer, was 
Mrtyu, who destroys the entire triple world with its fixed and moving 
contents. And beside him in the chariot stood Yama’s divine weapon, the 
rod of Kala, in human form, glowing, as it were, with its blazing energy. 
Then the three worlds and the gods, denizens of heaven, seeing that Kala, 
the terror of the three worlds, was enraged, were afraid and trembled. 

[7-8] “And when the ministers of that foremost of raksasas saw that 
fearsome chariot—terrifying to all the worlds—with Mrtyu mounted upon 
it, they were stricken with fear. Their minds reeling because of their inferior 
strength, they cried, ‘We are unable to fight here!’ And they all fled. 

[9-13] “But even when the rdksasa saw such a chariot, a terror to the 
worlds, he was not disturbed, nor did he suffer any anxiety. Now, having 
confronted Ravana, Yama, in a towering rage, hurled javelins and war 
hammers, piercing the raksasa’s vital points. But Ravana remained 
uninjured and unleashed a hail of arrows on Vaivasvata’s chariot, as might a 
storm cloud a torrent of rain. Then, because of the hundreds of huge 
javelins that cascaded down upon his great chest, the rdksasa, afflicted by 
those sharp weapons, was unable to retaliate. Although Yama, the tormentor 
of his foes, gave battle in this fashion with all manner of weapons for seven 
nights, Ravana was neither broken nor vanquished. 


[14—16] “Then there broke out a renewed battle between Yama and the 
raksasa, both eager for victory and never turning back in battle. The gods, 
along with the gandharvas, the perfected beings, and the supreme seers, 
placing Prajapati at their head, gazed upon that battlefield. While those two 
—the chief of the raksasas and the lord of the departed—were engaged in 
battle, it was like the dissolution of the universe. 

[17-19] “Then the lord of the rdksasas, enraged, drew his bow in battle 
and released arrows, seeming to fill the sky with them. He wounded Mrtyu 
with four arrows and the charioteer with seven. Then he swiftly struck 
Yama in his vital points with a thousand arrows. But suddenly there issued 
forth from the mouth of the enraged Yama an exhalation wreathed in 
flames, a veritable fire of wrath. 

[20-25] “Then the gods, danavas, and rdksasas witnessed a miraculous 
thing: that blazing fire born of Yama’s wrath that was eager to burn up the 
army of his foe. Now Mrtyu, in a towering rage, addressed Vaivasvata: 
‘Give me leave at once, lord, and I will slay your enemy in battle. Naraka, 
Sambara, Vrtra, Sambhu, the mighty Kartasvara, Namuci, Virocana, and the 
pair Madhu and Kaitabha—all these and many other mighty and 
unassailable heroes—were slain the moment I saw them, so why worry 
about this night-roaming raksasa? Give me leave straightaway, knower of 
righteousness, so that I may kill him. For no one upon whom I gaze can 
survive even for an instant. Nor is this any power of mine. Rather, it is the 
law fixed by nature. For no one touched by me can survive, that is certain.’ 

[26-30] “When the valorous king of righteousness heard these words, he 
said to Mrtyu, ‘I will kill him myself.’ Then, his eyes reddened, the enraged 
lord Vaivasvata hefted the unfailing rod of Kala. On every side of it, 
standing crowded closely together, were the nooses of Kala. And standing 
there too, in human form, was his war hammer, the very touch of which was 
like fire, the purifier. Merely upon being seen, that rod cuts off the lives of 
living beings. How much more so would it take the lives of embodied 
beings through a blow or through its crushing weight? Touched by the hand 
of that mighty divinity, that angry and very fearsome rod was wreathed in 
flames, as if to consume the night-roaming raksasa. 

[31-38] “Then all creatures fled the battlefield, while the gods, seeing 
Yama with the upraised rod of Kala, became agitated. But just as Yama, 
eager to strike Ravana, raised his rod, Grandfather Brahma himself 


appeared to him and said: ‘O great-armed Vaivasvata, you of incomparable 
valor! You must not strike this night-roaming rdksasa with your rod. For I 
gave him a boon, O bull among the thirty gods. You must not falsify the 
words that I have spoken. And it was I who long ago created this rod of 
Kala to be unfailing in the destruction of all creatures and in whose wake 
Mrtyu follows. Therefore, gentle sir, you must not let it fall upon the 
rdksasa’s head. For once it falls, no one can survive for even an instant. For 
once it falls, whether the radksasa ten-necked Ravana lives or dies, still in 
either case, there would be a falsehood. Therefore, you must now hold back 
from that lord of the raksasas this rod, held high for destruction. Have some 
regard for the worlds and make my words truthful.’ 

[39-41] “When righteous Yama had been addressed in this fashion, he 
replied: ‘The rod has been withdrawn, for you are our sovereign lord. But 
now what can I do here on the battlefield since I am unable to kill this 
raksasa, so arrogant by virtue of his boon? Therefore, I shall vanish from 
the sight of this raksasa.’ Having spoken in this fashion, he disappeared on 
the spot, along with his chariot and horses. 

[4243] “Having vanquished Yama, ten-necked Ravana, in great delight, 
loudly proclaimed his own name and then, in the Puspaka, departed from 
Yama’s abode. Then, delighted, Vaivasvata, together with the gods headed 
by Brahma, went to the highest heaven as did the great sage Narada.” 


Sarga 23 

[1-3] “Next, boastful of his victory after vanquishing Yama—the bull 
among the thirty gods—ten-faced Ravana spied his companions. Praising 
him with shouts of victory, Marica and the others all entered the Puspaka, 
where they were reassured by Ravana. Then, in delight, he proceeded 
toward Rasatala and plunged into the repository of water, the ocean, which 
was inhabited by daityas and great serpents and was protected by Varuna. 

[4-7] “Moving on to the city of Bhogavatt, ruled by Vasuki, he brought 
the great serpents under his power and, establishing them there, then 
proceeded to the city of Manimatt. The Nivatakavaca daitvas, who had 
obtained a boon, dwelt there. Encountering them, the raksasa challenged 
them to battle. Those sons of Diti there were all very valorous, endowed 
with strength and equipped with all kinds of weapons. They were 
intoxicated with battle and fought fiercely. While they were fighting, a full 


year went by, and yet in that time neither side was either victorious or 
vanquished. 

[8—11] “Then the imperishable god, Grandfather Brahma, the highest 
recourse of the triple world, came in haste, mounted on his splendid vehicle. 
Calling a halt to the fighting on the part of the Nivatakavacas, the eternal 
Grandfather Brahma spoke these words unambiguously: ‘Surely it is 
impossible for the gods and asuras to defeat Ravana in battle. Nor is it 
possible for the gods and asuras, together with Indra, to vanquish you 
gentlemen. An alliance between you and the rdksasa would find favor with 
me. For all good things are shared equally among friends, of this there is no 
doubt.’ 

[12-15] “And so then and there Ravana concluded an alliance— 
witnessed by Agni—with the Nivatakavacas. And he was greatly pleased. 
Duly honored by them, ten-faced Ravana dwelt there happily for a year, and 
he received as much homage as he did in his own city. And with a 
disciplined mind, he acquired the ninety-nine powers of illusion. Then he 
wandered throughout Rasatala in search of the city of Varuna, lord of the 
waters. Then, having in a short time conquered the city called ASmanagara, 
which was protected by the Kalakeyas, he slew four hundred daityas. 

[16-19] “At length the lord of the rdksasas spied the heavenly abode of 
Varuna. It resembled a white cloud and was established as firmly as Mount 
Kailasa. And he saw standing there the cow Surabhi, who was constantly 
pouring forth milk and from whose flow of milk the ocean called the Ocean 
of Milk comes into being. It is out of that ocean that the cool-rayed moon, 
beneficial to all creatures, arises and resorting to which the supreme seers 
subsist by drinking its foam. It is there that the nectar of immortality was 
produced, as well as the wine of the gods, those drinkers of wine. And when 
Ravana had reverently circumambulated that supremely wonderful cow, 
whom people in the world refer to by the name Surabhi, he entered that 
extremely formidable city guarded by troops of many kinds. 

[20—22] “There he spied the eternally happy and most excellent abode of 
Varuna, which was filled with hundreds of rushing streams and resembled 
an autumnal cloud. Belabored by the leaders of the troops, he then struck 
them down in battle and said: ‘Where has your king gone? Immediately 
announce to him: “Ravana has come seeking battle. Please offer combat to 


him.” Otherwise, with your hands cupped in reverence, you must declare, “I 
am vanquished,” and you shall then have nothing to fear.’ 

[23-26] “At that moment, the enraged sons and grandsons of great 
Varuna marched forth as did Go and Puskara. Endowed with might and with 
every virtue and surrounded by their own troops, they yoked their chariots, 
which were steered by their owners’ will and the radiance of which was like 
that of the rising sun, bringer of light. Then there took place a terrifying and 
hair-raising battle between the rdksasa Ravana and the sons of the lord of 
the waters. But the immensely powerful ministers of the raksasa ten-necked 
Ravana instantly cut down that entire army of Varuna. 

[27-30] “When Varuna’s sons saw their own forces cut down, they 
withdrew from combat, harried by a hail of arrows. They had been on the 
ground, but when they spied Ravana in the Puspaka, they quickly flew up 
into the sky on their swift-moving chariots. Now that they had reached the 
same elevation, there broke out between them a great and tumultuous aerial 
battle like that between the gods and the danavas. Then, with arrows like 
purifying fire, they forced Ravana to turn his back in battle, and, in great 
delight, they roared out various shouts of victory. 

[31-33] “Seeing the king assaulted, the heroic Mahodara was furious, 
and, abandoning all fear of death, he glanced about him, eager for battle. 
With his mace Mahodara struck down their horses—as swift as the wind 
and steered by their owners’ will—so that they crashed to the ground. When 
he had struck down the soldiers and horses of Varuna’s sons, he quickly 
released a loud roar upon seeing them stripped of their chariots. 

[34—36] “Struck down by Mahodara, their chariots and horses, together 
with their excellent charioteers, fell to the surface of the earth. But although 
they were bereft of their chariots, the heroic sons of great Varuna were not 
shaken, and, through their innate power, they remained in the sky. Stringing 
their bows and piercing Mahodara, they all together charged at Ravana in 
their rage. 

[37-41] “Then, enraged, ten-necked Ravana, standing there like the fire 
of universal destruction, let fall upon their vital spots an immensely 
powerful hail of arrows. Standing firm and unassailable, he sent crashing 
down upon them various kinds of clubs, hundreds of crescent-headed 
arrows, Spears, javelins, hundred-slayers, and iron cudgels as well. Then, 
wounded, the heroic foot soldiers fled. Releasing a mighty roar, the raksasa 


battered the sons of Varuna with all kinds of fearsome weapons, as might a 
thundercloud with torrents of rain. Then, turning away, they all fell to the 
ground, and their attendants quickly took them from the battlefield to their 
homes. 

[4244] “The raksasa then told them, ‘Let Varuna be informed.’ And 
Varuna’s counselor, Prabhasa by name, said to Ravana: ‘The lord of the 
waters, Varuna of immense blazing energy, whom you are challenging to 
battle, has gone to Brahma’s world to hear a musical recital. Therefore, 
hero, since the king is away, why do you exhaust yourself to no purpose? 
You have already defeated the heroic princes who are here.’ 

[45—46] “When he heard this, the lord of the rdksasas loudly proclaimed 
his own name. Releasing a roar in his delight, he set forth from Varuna’s 
realm. Returning by the path on which he had come, the raksasa, rising into 
the sky, turned his face toward Lanka and proceeded on his way.” 

[Interpolated Passage I follows sarga 23; see PVR 7: 1285-1304] 


Sarga 24 
[1-3] “As he was returning, evil-minded Ravana, in great delight, abducted 
along the way the daughters of kings, seers, gods, and gandharvas. After 
killing her kinsmen, the rdksasa forced any beautiful woman he saw, 
married or unmarried, to enter his flying palace. And so, along the way, 
Ravana seized the daughters of the great serpents, yaksas, men, rdksasas, 
daityas, and danavas. 

[4-6] “They had long tresses and exquisite limbs, and their faces were 
like the full moon. All of those young women, bent down by the weight of 
their breasts, were overwhelmed with grief. Trembling and afflicted with 
sorrow, they shed copious tears, which, born of fear and the fire of grief, 
were like flames of fire. Inflamed by the sighs of those sighing women, the 
Puspaka resembled a sacrificial firepit with a fire contained within it. 

[7-12] “One of them, deeply afflicted with sorrow, brooded, ‘Is he going 
to kill me?’ Utterly overwhelmed with grief and sorrow, all of those women 
lamented together when they remembered their mothers, fathers, brothers, 
sons, and fathers-in-law: ‘Oh, what will my son do without me, what of my 
mother, what of my brother, all of them drowning in a sea of grief? Alas, 
what shall I do without my husband, who is a god to me? Be merciful, 
Mrtyu, I beg you. Carry me away to the abode of Yama. What evil deed 


must I have done long ago in another birth, such that I have been assaulted 
by him and have fallen into a sea of grief? Indeed, now I cannot see any end 
to this sorrow of mine in this world. How pathetic are men! Indeed, nothing 
is more abject, since my feeble kinsmen were obliterated by mighty Ravana 
as are the stars by the risen sun. 

[13-15] “ ‘Oh! This immensely powerful raksasa delights in the ways of 
slaughter. Alas, he does not realize himself what an evil nature he has. By 
all means, the valor of this evil-minded creature is quite appropriate. But 
the act that is unbecoming to him is the molestation of other men’s wives. 
Since this evil-minded Ravana is enamored of women who belong to 
others, he shall therefore meet his death on account of a woman.’ 

[16—17] “Then, after he was cursed by those virtuous women, who were 
devoted to their husbands and who were firmly fixed on the path of virtue, 
he was drained of his blazing energy and robbed of his luster. As the 
women continued to lament in this fashion, Ravana, the lord of the 
rdaksasas, being honored by the night-roaming rdksasas, entered the city of 
Lanka. 

[18-19] “Then the sister of the raksasa king, in great sorrow, threw 
herself at his feet and began to speak. Raising up his sister and consoling 
her, Ravana said, ‘What is this, auspicious lady? Please tell me quickly.’ 

[20—24] “Her eyes occluded with tears, the raksasa woman spoke these 
words: ‘I am ruined! For you, in your might, have made me a widow, your 
majesty. Your majesty, you, in your might, slaughtered in battle those 
daityas of immense strength and valor known as the Kalakeyas. And in that 
battle my beloved husband, dearer to me than life itself, was slain by you, a 
brother no different than an enemy. Since, your majesty, I have been ruined 
by you yourself, who are my kinsman, I shall now have to endure the 
painful epithet “widow,” which you have inflicted upon me. Should not 
your son-in-law, surely, have been protected by you even in battle? Yet, 
having slain him in battle yourself, your majesty, you feel no sense of 
shame.’ 

[25-27] “Addressed in this fashion by his wailing sister, the raksasa 
comforted her and spoke these conciliatory words: ‘Enough of this 
despondency, dear child! You shall have nothing to fear in any way. For I 
shall always gratify you with special honors and gifts. Intoxicated in battle 
and distracted, I was shooting arrows in my desire for victory, so I did not, 


lovely lady, distinguish in battle my friends from my enemies. And it is 
thus, sister, that I slew your husband in battle. 

[28-32] “ ‘Whatever beneficial thing might be accomplished at this time, 
I will do for you. You should stay with our brother Khara, who lives in 
lordly splendor. And your brother will be the lord of fourteen thousand 
immensely powerful raksasas, commanding and supporting them. There 
your brother, Lord Khara, the son of your mother’s sister, will always dwell, 
carrying out whatever words you yourself shall utter. So let that hero go 
quickly to protect the Dandakas. Immensely powerful Ditisana shall be the 
chief of his army. For that forest tract was cursed long ago by the enraged 
Usanas, who said, “This shall be the dwelling place of raksasas, without a 
doubt.” 

[33-35] “When ten-necked Ravana had spoken in this fashion, he 
assigned to him an army of fourteen thousand raksasas, who could take on 
any form at will. And so, surrounded by all of those fearsome-looking 
raksasas, the utterly fearless Khara proceeded swiftly to the Dandakas. And 
there he ruled a kingdom in which all obstacles had been eliminated. And 
Sirpanakha too, delighted, dwelt in the Dandaka forest.” 


Sarga 25 

[1-4] “When ten-necked Ravana had granted that fearsome forest to Khara 
and had consoled his sister, he was delighted and greatly satisfied. Then, 
together with his retinue, the great lord of the raksasas entered Lanka’s vast 
woodland known as Nikumbhila. There he saw that a sacrifice was taking 
place, blazing, as it were, with splendor. It was replete with hundreds of 
sacrificial posts and was made more beautiful by the presence of a splendid 
shrine. And then he saw there, wearing a black antelope skin and bearing 
the waterpot, tuft, and staff of an ascetic, his own son Meghanada, the tamer 
of his foes. 

[S—6] “Approaching, the lord of the rdksasas embraced him with his 
arms and said, ‘What is this that 1s taking place, my child? Tell me that.’ 
But on that occasion, it was that foremost of brahmans, their guru Usanas of 
great austerities who, for the success of the sacrifice, addressed Ravana, the 
foremost of raksasas: 

[7-13] “ ‘I shall tell you everything, your majesty. Please listen. Your 
son has completed seven extremely elaborate sacrifices. They were the 


agnistoma, the asvamedha, and the sacrifice called bahusuvarnaka, as well 
as the rdjasuya sacrifice, the gomedha, and the vaisnava. And when the 
mahesvara sacrifice, so difficult for men to perform, was completed, your 
son received here boons from Pasupati himself. These were a heavenly and 
virtually indestructible chariot that moved at its owner’s will and could 
travel through the sky and the power of illusion called the tamasi, which 
creates darkness. It is said that by means of this power of illusion, O lord of 
the rdaksasas, it is impossible for even the gods or the asuras to discern a 
watrior’s movements in battle. And, dear boy, he also received two 
inexhaustible quivers, along with arrows and an invincible bow, as well as a 
mighty, divine weapon-spell that annihilates one’s enemies in battle. Now, 
at the conclusion of the sacrifice, having received these boons, ten-faced 
Ravana, this son of yours, is expecting you, as am I.’ 

[14—15] “Then ten-necked Ravana said: ‘This was not well done, since 
our enemies, headed by Indra, have been worshiped with material gifts. But 
come now, for it is impossible to undo what has already been done. So 
come, dear boy, let us go back to our own home.’ 

[16—20] “Then, when ten-necked Ravana had returned with his son and 
Vibhisana, he made all those women, who were overwhelmed with tears, 
descend from the Puspaka. They were the foremost women of the gods, 
danavas, and raksasas. They were endowed with every auspicious mark. 
They were adorned with all kinds of ornaments, and they shone with their 
own blazing splendor. Now, when righteous Vibhisana saw those women, 
who were overwhelmed with grief, and realized his brother’s intentions 
toward them, he spoke these words: ‘In assaulting living beings with such 
behavior that is so destructive to your reputation, your interests, and your 
clan, you are behaving willfully. In fact, while you were carrying off these 
splendid women, after having assaulted their kinsmen, your majesty, Madhu 
has transgressed against you and carried off Kumbhinast.’ 

[21—25] “Then Ravana spoke these words: ‘I don’t understand. What is 
this? And who is this person called Madhu that you mentioned?’ And 
Vibhisana, greatly angered, said these words to his brother: ‘Now listen to 
the fruit of this evil action, which has now come to pass. The elder brother 
of our maternal great-uncle Suméalin is the wise and elderly night-roaming 
rdksasa known as Malyavan. And he is our mother’s father’s elder and so 
our venerable grandfather. The daughter of his daughter is called 


Kumbhinasi. And that daughter born of our maternal aunt Anala is, 
according to proper custom, the sister of us brothers. 

[26-28] “ ‘It is she whom the immensely powerful raksasa Madhu 
carried off, your majesty, while your son was performing his sacrifices and I 
was dwelling underwater. Striking down the foremost of the raksasas and 
assaulting your respected ministers, your majesty, he carried her off, 
although she was guarded in your inner apartments. Still, although we came 
to know of this, great king, we let it pass, and he was not killed, since a 
maiden must, of necessity, be given away to a husband by those who are 
authorized to do so. And, as you must realize, you have now suffered the 
consequences in this very world.’ 

[29-32] “Then ten-necked Ravana, his eyes reddened in his rage, said: 
‘Get my chariot ready at once, and let my heroic warriors prepare 
themselves. And let my brother Kumbhakarna and those who are foremost 
among the night-roaming raksasas, armed with all kinds of weapons, mount 
their vehicles. This very day I shall first kill in battle this Madhu, who has 
no fear of Ravana, and then, surrounded by my companions and eager for 
battle, I shall proceed to Indra’s world. Once I have conquered the highest 
heaven and subjugated Indra, smasher of citadels, then, contented and 
adored with the lordship of the triple world, I shall enjoy myself.’ 

[33-37] “At once, four thousand fearsome armies of raksasas marched 
forth bearing all kinds of weapons and eager for battle. Taking command of 
the troops, Indrajit went ahead of the army. Valorous Ravana was in the 
middle, while Kumbhakarna brought up the rear. But as for righteous 
Vibhisana, he practiced righteousness in Lanka, while all those illustrious 
warriors marched off to Madhu’s city. Filling the entire sky, all the raksasas 
went forth mounted on chariots, elephants, donkeys, camels, horses, and 
great fiery serpents. Seeing Ravana advancing, the daityas, who cherished 
enmity for the gods, followed behind him in their hundreds. 

[38-42] “Once ten-faced Ravana reached Madhu’s city, he entered it. He 
saw his sister there, but not Madhu. Terrified of the king of the raksasas, his 
sister Kumbhinasi humbly cupped her hands in reverence and bowed her 
head down to his feet. Raising her up and saying, ‘You have nothing to 
fear,’ Ravana, foremost of the rdksasas, said, ‘What may I do for you?’ She 
said: ‘If you are kindly disposed toward me, immensely powerful king, then 
please do not kill my husband today, bestower of honor. Great-armed 


warrior, you yourself said, “You have nothing to fear.” Now be true to your 
word. Foremost of kings, please have some consideration for me, I am 
begging you.’ 

[43-47] “Delighted, Ravana said to his sister, who stood there: ‘Where, 
indeed, is your husband? Please inform me at once. Together with him I 
shall surely go on to the world of the gods for victory. Because of my 
compassion and affection for you, I shall not kill Madhu.’ Addressed in this 
fashion, the radksasa woman, as if transported with joy, roused her 
extremely wise husband, the night-roaming raksasa, who had been 
sleeping, and said: ‘My brother, the night-roaming raksasa ten-necked 
Ravana, eager to conquer the world of the gods, has chosen you to assist 
him. You must go to assist him, raksasa, together with your kinsmen. For it 
is only proper to accomplish the purpose of one who 1s affectionate and 
devoted.’ 

[48-50] “When he had heard these words of hers, Madhu uttered the 
words, ‘So be it!’ He then received the foremost of the rdksasas with all 
due courtesy. He honored Ravana, the lord of the raksasas, in keeping with 
righteousness. Having received this honor, the mighty ten-necked Ravana 
spent the night there in Madhu’s abode and then prepared to depart. When 
the lord of the raksasas, who resembled great Indra, had reached Mount 
Kailasa, the abode of Vaisravana, he had his army make camp.” 


Sarga 26 

[1-4] “As the sun, maker of day, had set, mighty ten-necked Ravana chose 
to camp there with his army. And when the bright moon rose, equal in 
splendor to the mountain itself, he gazed at the beauty of the scene, now 
still further enhanced by the moonlight. And it was yet further enhanced by 
heavenly karnikara groves, dense thickets of kadamba, lotus ponds in 
blossom, and the waters of the Mandakini River. And there in the abode of 
Kubera, the giver of wealth, could be heard, like the sound of bells, the 
sweet sounds of the troupes of apsarases singing. 

[S—8] “Shaken by the breeze, the trees, fragrant with the sweetness of 
their nectar, released showers of blossoms, perfuming, as it were, the 
mountain. The pleasant breeze, mingled with nectar and the pollen of the 
blossoms, took on their powerful scent and blew, kindling Ravana’s desire. 
As the night wore on, through the singing, the abundance of blossoms, the 


coolness of the breeze, and the beauties of the mountain, immensely 
powerful Ravana fell under the sway of Kama’s arrows. Sighing again and 
again, he gazed at the hare-marked moon. 

[9-11] “Now at this juncture, Rambha, the foremost of all the apsarases, 
adorned with heavenly blossoms, her face like the full moon, happened to 
pass that way. With moist unguents applied as well as fragrant powders 
made from the flowers of all six seasons, she was draped in a dark blue 
garment that resembled a rain-charged cloud. As she, whose face was like 
the hare-marked moon, whose lovely brows were like two bows, whose 
thighs were as shapely as elephant trunks, and whose hands were as soft as 
tender sprouts, passed through the army, Ravana spied her. 

[12-19] “Leaping up, the lord of the raksasas, tormented by the force of 
Kama’s arrows, seized her hand as she passed by and, smiling, said: ‘Where 
are you going, fair-hipped lady? What consummation of delight will you 
bestow? Whose moment of good fortune is this in that he is about to enjoy 
you? Who, this very night, will sate himself on the nectar of your mouth, as 
fragrant as the red or blue lotus and which is like the very essence of divine 
nectar? Against whose chest will these breasts, like golden jars, so full, so 
lovely, and so closely pressed, crush, timid lady? And who will, this night, 
ascend to that very heaven in the form of your broad hips, which, adorned 
with golden girdle-strings, resemble a circle of gold? What other person— 
whether Sakra, Visnu, or the ASvins—is more distinguished than I so that, 
on his account, you pass me by? It is not right. So rest here, broad-hipped 
woman, on this lovely stone surface, for there is no lord in the triple world 
who is my equal. It is I, ten-faced Ravana, who humbly entreats you with 
hands cupped in supplication, and I am the lord and master of the triple 
world. Please love me.’ 

[20—22] “Addressed in this fashion, Rambha, trembling and cupping her 
hands in supplication, said: ‘Be merciful. You ought not speak to me in this 
fashion, for you are like a father to me. Indeed, you are the one who should 
protect me, should I be assaulted by others. For by rights, I am your 
daughter-in-law. This is the truth I am telling you.’ But as she stood there 
with her eyes lowered to her feet, ten-necked Ravana said to her, ‘Only if 
you were my son’s wife would you be my daughter-in-law.’ 

[23-29] “Rambha replied to Ravana: ‘It is just so. For by rights, bull 
among raksasas, | am the wife of your son. He is the son of your brother 


Kubera Vaisravana and dearer to him than life itself. He is famed 
throughout the three worlds as Nalaktibara. He is a brahman in respect to 
righteousness and a kshatriya in respect to valor. He is Agni in his wrath 
and like the earth itself, bearer of wealth, in forbearance. It is with the son 
of that world guardian that I have made an assignation. It is for his sake that 
I have put on all this adornment. For it is he and none other who loves me, 
your majesty. By the force of that truth you must release me, tamer of your 
foes. Right now that righteous man awaits, anxiously longing for me. So 
you ought not create an obstacle for your son here. Release me! You should 
follow the path trodden by the virtuous, bull among rdksasas. You are to be 
respected by me, and by the same token, I should be cherished by you.’ 

[30] “But even as Rambha was uttering this speech, which was in accord 
with righteousness and proper conduct, the powerful raksasa, cutting her 
off, in his infatuation seized her forcibly, and, inflamed with lust and 
infatuation, he began to rape her. 

[31-33] “Then, once she was released, her garlands and ornaments 
broken, Rambha was as disheveled as a river churned up by the sporting of 
a great bull elephant. Trembling in her shame, terrified, and cupping her 
hands in supplication, she ran to Nalakibara and fell at his feet. And when 
great Nalakubara saw her in such a state, he said, ‘What is this, auspicious 
lady, that you have fallen at my feet?’ 

[34-39] “But she, sighing and trembling, with her hands cupped in 
supplication, then began to tell him everything, just as it had happened. ‘My 
lord, ten-necked Ravana came here on his way to Indra’s heaven, 
Trivistapa, and he passed the night here together with his army. As I was 
coming to meet you, tamer of your foes, he spied me. Seizing me, that 
raksasa asked, “To whom do you belong?” And although I told him the 
whole truth, he, his mind overwhelmed with lust and delusion, would not 
heed my words. My lord, I pleaded with him, saying, “Your majesty, I am 
your daughter-in-law.” But brushing all that aside, he forcibly raped me. 
Thus, you should please forgive my transgression, gentle bestower of pride. 
For the strength of a woman is not equal to that of a man.’ 

[40-44] “Then, when the son of Vaisravana had heard about this, he was 
furious. After hearing about that egregious assault, he entered into 
meditation. Then, when, after a moment, he had confirmed Ravana’s 
actions, Vaisravana’s son, his eyes red with rage, took water in his hand. 


When he had taken that heavenly water and sipped it according to precept, 
he then pronounced a terrible curse on the lord of the rdksasas: ‘Since, 
auspicious woman, he forcibly assaulted you, who were unwilling, he shall 
never force himself upon another unwilling young woman again. And if 
ever, afflicted by lust, he should assault an unwilling woman, then his head 
shall burst into seven pieces.’ 

[45-47] “The moment that curse, equal in radiance to a blazing fire, was 
uttered, the war drums of the gods thundered and a shower of blossoms fell 
from the sky. When all the gods, headed by Prajapati, came to know of the 
overall state of the world and of the impending doom of the rdksasa, they 
were delighted. But when ten-necked Ravana heard about that hair-raising 
curse, he lost his desire to make love to unwilling women.” 


Sarga 27 

[1-4] “Then, passing beyond Mount Kailasa, ten-necked Ravana, the night- 
roaming rdksasa of immense blazing energy, along with his rdaksasas, 
reached Indra’s world. As the raksasa army approached on every side, its 
din, like the roar of the ocean being shattered, reached the world of the 
gods. Upon hearing that Ravana had come, Indra trembled on his throne. He 
addressed all the gods who were assembled there—the Adityas, along with 
the Vasus, the Rudras, the Visvas, the sadhyas, and the hosts of the Maruts 
—saying, ‘Make ready for battle with evil-minded Ravana.’ 

[5-6] “Addressed in this fashion by Sakra, the immensely powerful 
gods, who were equal to Sakra in battle and confident in combat, girded 
themselves for battle. But great Indra was dejected, for he was fearful of 
Ravana. Approaching Visnu, he spoke these words: 

[7-12] “ ‘O Visnu, you who are endowed with immense power and 
valor, what shall we do? For this mighty raksasa has come, seeking battle. 
He is powerful because of the granting of that boon and for no other reason. 
But, O God, those words of Prajapati, must be rendered true. Please do as 
you did before when, relying upon your counsel, I burned up Namuci, 
Vrtra, Bali, Naraka, and Sambara. For, mighty God among gods, you are 
the Supreme Spirit. There is no one other than you, who is our protector and 
recourse in times of calamity. You are the eternal and majestic lotus-naveled 
Narayana. And it is you alone who have established me in the everlasting 
kingship of the gods. Therefore, please tell me, truthfully, god of gods. Will 


you, with the aid of your sword and discus, fight the enemy in battle 
yourself?’ 

[13-19] “Addressed in this fashion by Sakra, the god, Lord Narayana, 
said: ‘You need have no fear. Moreover, listen to me. For the time being, 
this evil creature, invincible through the gift of his boon, is impossible to 
kill even if encountered in battle by the gods and the danavas. By all 
means, this raksasa, arrogant in his might and assisted by his son, is going 
to perform mighty feats. I know this through my inherent knowledge. And 
as for what you asked me, Sakra—‘“Will you fight him in battle?”—1 shall 
by no means fight Ravana, the lord of the raksasas. For Visnu never turns 
back without having killed his enemy. And at this time what you desire with 
regard to that raksasa is not feasible, as he has acquired that boon. But 
standing right before you, O lord of the gods, Indra of the hundred 
sacrifices, I promise you that I myself shall be the cause of this raksasa’s 
death. When I recognize that the time is at hand, I shall kill Ravana, 
together with his son, in battle and so gratify the gods.’ 

[20-21] “At that moment, just at daybreak, a roar was heard on every 
side coming from Ravana’s army, which always fought fiercely. Then, with 
a tumultuous din, a fearsome battle involving all sorts of weapons broke out 
between the gods and the rdksasas. 

[22—26] “At this juncture, the heroic raksasa ministers, fearsome to look 
upon, ran forward to battle at Ravana’s command. There were Ma§rica, 
Prahasta, Mahaparsva, Mahodara, Akampana, Nikumbha, Suka, Sarana, 
Samhradi, Dhtmaketu, Mahadamstra, Mahamukha, Jambumiéalin, 
Mahaméalin, and the rdksasa Virtipaksa. Surrounded by all those immensely 
powerful warriors, that bull among rdksasas Sumalin, Ravana’s 
grandfather, plunged into the enemy hosts. Together with those night- 
roaming rdksasas, he scattered in his rage all the hosts of the gods with all 
manner of sharp weapons. 

[27-30] “At this juncture, the heroic Vasu named SAvitra, eighth among 
the Vasus, plunged into that great battle. Now there arose a battle between 
the gods—who were furious at the rdksasas’ boasting of never turning back 
in battle—and the raksasas. Then, as the gods stood before them in battle, 
the heroic raksasas slaughtered them by the hundreds and thousands with 
all sorts of fearsome weapons. But in that battle, through their own blazing 


energy, the gods, with their various weapons, sent those fearsome and 
immensely powerful rdksasas to the abode of Yama. 

[31-33] “At this juncture, the heroic raksasa named Sumalin, enraged, 
entered the fray with all sorts of weapons. Enraged, he scattered the entire 
army of the gods with all sorts of sharp weapons, just as the wind might 
rain clouds. Pelted with lances, fearsome darts, and hails of huge arrows, all 
the gods, who had assembled, could not stand their ground. 

[34-36] “Then, even though the thirty gods were being scattered by 
Sumalin, the god Savitra, eighth among the Vasus, stood his ground. But 
even as that night-roaming rdksasa attacked, that warrior of immense 
blazing energy, surrounded by his own troops, warded him off in battle 
through his valor. Then there was a duel, extremely terrifying to the world, 
between the two frenzied warriors—Sumalin and the Vasu—neither of 
whom ever turned back in battle. 

[37-40] “Then, with huge arrows, the very great Vasu instantly brought 
down Sumalin’s great serpent-chariot. And having thus destroyed Sumalin’s 
chariot in battle with hundreds of sharp arrows, the Vasu seized a mace with 
his hand in order to kill him. Quickly seizing that splendid, blazing mace, 
which resembled the rod of Kala, Savitra brought it down upon Sumalin’s 
head. And then, as it fell on Sumalin’s head, that mace, which resembled a 
blazing meteor, looked like a mighty thunderbolt hurled at a mountain by 
thousand-eyed Indra. 

[41-42] “Once he was struck down in battle and reduced to ashes by that 
mace, his body—neither flesh nor bone—could be seen. When the raksasas 
saw that Sumalin had been struck down in battle, they all fled en masse in 
all directions, wailing loudly.” 


Sarga 28 

[1-4] “Then, seeing that Sumalin had been slain and reduced to ashes by 
the Vasu and observing that his own army, harried by arrows, had fled, 
Ravana’s mighty son Meghanada, enraged, turned back all the raksasas 
toward battle and took his stand. Mounted in his chariot, which shone like 
fire and moved at its owner’s will, the great chariot-warrior raced toward 
the army of the gods like a blazing fire toward a woodland. Bearing various 
weapons, he plunged into that army, and the gods fled in all directions at the 
mere sight of him. 


[S—6] “Although he wished to fight, not one of them took a stand there. 
Then, seeing that they were all terrified, Sakra, rallying them, cried: ‘Have 
no fear! Do not flee! You must return to the fight. For my son, who has 
never been defeated, is going forth to battle.’ 

[7-9] “Then Sakra’s son, the god known as Jayanta, rushed into battle in 
a chariot of marvelous construction. All the thirty gods surrounded Saci’s 
son and, confronting Ravana’s son in battle, they took their stand. On behalf 
of great Indra’s son and the son of the rdksasa lord, a tremendous battle 
took place, befitting the gods and the raksasas. 

[10-16] “But then the son of the rdksasa rained down arrows adorned 
with gold upon Jayanta’s charioteer Gomukha, Matali’s son. But in the 
same way Saci’s son, Jayanta, in a rage, pierced Ravani, as well as his 
charioteer, on the battlefield. But Ravani, that raksasa of immense blazing 
energy, his eyes wide in his rage, pelted the son of Sakra with a hail of 
arrows. Seizing great and powerful weapons, Ravani let fly hundred- 
Slayers, iron cudgels, darts, maces, swords, battle-axes, and enormous 
mountain peaks. As Ravana’s son was striking down his enemies, the 
worlds were terrified and a great darkness arose. Then the army of the gods, 
which had been surrounding Saci’s son, was afflicted in every way and ran 
helter-skelter. Neither the gods nor their enemies could recognize one 
another. Scattered on every side, they ran helter-skelter. 

[17-20] “At this juncture, the valorous hero Puloman, son of Diti, 
appeared. He caught up Saci’s son and carried him away. Taking his 
grandson Jayanta, his maternal grandfather Puloman—who had fathered 
Sact Paulomi—entered the vast ocean. When the gods saw the extremely 
frightening disappearance of Jayanta, they were terrified and dejected, and 
they fled in all directions. But Ravani was excited, and, surrounded by his 
own troops, he charged at the gods and released a mighty roar. 

[21—26] “When the lord of the gods saw the disappearance of his son and 
the valor of Ravani, he said to Matali, ‘Have my chariot brought up.’ Then, 
driven by Matali, that divine and extremely fearsome chariot, swift as 
thought and ready for battle, drew near. Once Indra had mounted the 
chariot, thundering clouds laced with lightning went before it, rambling and 
driven by the wind. All sorts of musical instruments were played, and 
hymns of praise were sung. And the troupes of apsarases danced all 
together as Vasava went forth to battle. Surrounded by the Rudras, the 


Vasus, the Adityas, and the sadhyas, together with the hosts of the Maruts, 
all of them bearing all sorts of weapons, the overlord of the thirty gods went 
forth. But even as Sakra went forth, the wind blew harshly and the sun, 
bringer of light, grew dim, while huge, blazing meteors appeared. 

[27-30] “At this juncture, the heroic and glorious ten-necked Ravana 
mounted his divine chariot, which had been fashioned by Visvakarman. It 
was encircled by enormous, horrifying serpents, the wind from whose 
exhalations seemed to scorch the very battlefield. Surrounded by heroic 
daityas and night-roaming rdksasas, his divine chariot turned toward the 
battlefield and rushed straight at great Indra. Waving off his son, he took his 
stand himself, so that Ravani withdrew from the battle and stood aside. 

[31-34] “Then there commenced a battle between the gods and the 
raksasas. In that battle, there was a fearsome hail of weapons, as if from 
storm clouds. And as for evil-minded Kumbhakarna, he, armed with all 
sorts of weapons, fought anyone at all in that battle without even knowing 
who they were. In a total frenzy, he assailed the gods with anything he 
could—fangs, arms, feet, javelins, iron cudgels, and arrows. Then, in that 
battle with the illustrious Rudras, together with the Adityas, that fierce 
warrior, the night-roaming raksasa, was slashed everywhere with weapons. 

[35-38] “In that battle, with all sorts of sharp weapons, the thirty gods, 
together with the hosts of the Maruts, put to flight the entire raksasa army. 
Struck down with weapons, some of them writhed on the ground, while 
others remained fixed to their mounts in the battle. Some of those night- 
roaming rdksasas, unable to move, remained clinging with both arms to 
their chariots, elephants, donkeys, camels, serpents, horses, dolphins, boars, 
and creatures with the faces of pisdcas, while others, grievously wounded 
with weapons by the gods, died. 

[39-40] “With the slain and stupefied rdksasas scattered across the 
ground, the wreckage of battle looked like a painting. In the forefront of the 
battle, there flowed a river streaming with blood in place of water. It was 
thronged with adjutant storks and vultures and had weapons in place of 
crocodiles. 

[41-46] “At this juncture, valorous ten-necked Ravana, in a rage at 
seeing his entire army struck down by the gods, plunged quickly into the 
huge ocean of their army and, striking down the thirty gods in battle, raced 
straight toward Sakra. Then Sakra twanged his mighty bow with a 


tremendous roar, so that the ten directions reverberated with the thunder of 
its twanging. Drawing that mighty bow, Indra let fall on Ravana’s head 
arrows with the brilliance of fire or the sun. And in the same fashion, great- 
armed ten-necked Ravana, standing his ground, pelted Sakra with hails of 
arrows loosed from his bow. Then, as those two battled fiercely with hails 
of arrows on every side, nothing at all could be discerned, for everything 
was shrouded in darkness.” 


Sarga 29 

[1-4] “Then, although that darkness had come on, the rdksasas, intoxicated 
with their own strength, and the gods fought on, slaughtering one another. 
But by that point, the army of the gods had left standing only a tenth part of 
the vast host of the raksasas. The remainder had been led to the abode of 
Yama. Since everything was cloaked in darkness, the gods and raksasas 
could not recognize one another and so went on fighting among themselves. 
And while everything was shrouded in a mass of darkness, only three— 
Indra, Ravana, and immensely powerful Ravani—did not succumb to 
delusion. 

[S—11] “Now, when Ravana saw that his entire army had been struck 
down in battle, he flew into a towering rage and released a tremendous roar. 
In his rage, that unassailable warrior addressed his charioteer, who was in 
the chariot: ‘Take me through the midst of the enemy army, right through to 
the end. This very day, fighting from the sky with all sorts of immensely 
powerful weapons, I myself shall destroy all the thirty gods through my 
valor. I shall kill Indra, Varuna, Kubera, bestower of wealth, and Yama. 
After I have quickly slain the thirty gods, I myself shall reign over all. And 
you must not give way to despair but drive my chariot swiftly. Now I tell 
you a second time, take me right through to the end. This place where we 
are now is the region of the Nandana garden. Now you must take me to 
where Mount Udaya stands.” And when his charioteer had heard those 
words of his, he directed his horses, which were as swift as thought, right 
through the middle of their enemies. 

[12-16] “Now, when Sakra, lord of the gods, who was standing in his 
chariot, realized his intention, he spoke these words to the gods, who were 
engaged in battle: ‘Listen, you gods, to my words regarding what I would 
like. The raksasa ten-necked Ravana is to be taken alive, straightaway. Just 


like an ocean with towering waves on the full-moon day, this exceedingly 
powerful warrior is going to crash through our ranks with his chariot, which 
has the force of a gale. For it is not possible to kill him just now, as he is 
utterly fearless through the gift of a boon. Therefore, we must capture the 
rdksasa. You must be vigilant in battle! I have enjoyed the lordship of the 
triple world only after imprisoning Bali. I would now like to imprison this 
evildoer in the same way.’ 

[17-20] “Then Sakra, of immense blazing energy, leaving Ravana, took 
a stand in another area where he fought on, annihilating the raksasas in 
battle. But ten-necked Ravana, never retreating, plunged into the army from 
the north, while Indra of the hundred sacrifices plunged in by the southern 
flank. The lord of the raksasas then penetrated the entire army of the gods 
to a distance of a hundred leagues and pelted it with hails of arrows. 
Although Sakra saw that his own army had been penetrated, he remained 
calm, and, cutting off ten-faced Ravana, he stopped his advance. 

[21—23] “At this juncture, when the ddnavas and the rdksasas saw that 
Ravana had been checked by Sakra, they cried out, ‘Alas! We are lost!’ 
Then Ravani, beside himself with rage, mounted his chariot and, in a 
towering rage, plunged into that extremely fearsome army. Resorting to the 
supernatural power that had been given to him long ago by Siva, lord of 
cattle, he became invisible to all beings and pelted that army. 

[2427] “Then, leaving aside the gods, he made straight for Sakra. But 
great Indra of immense blazing energy could not see that son of his enemy. 
After striking Matali and his horses with splendid arrows, he, shooting 
rapidly, pelted great Indra with a hail of arrows. Then Sakra, abandoning his 
chariot and dismissing Matali, mounted Airavata and went in search of 
Ravani. But through his supernatural power of illusion, the raksasa could 
not be seen in battle even as he pelted great Indra of immeasurable might 
with torrents of arrows. 

[28—29] “When Ravani reckoned that Indra was exhausted, he bound 
him through his supernatural power and led him toward his own army. 
When all the immortal gods saw great Indra forcibly carried off in that 
battle by that supernatural power, they cried, ‘How can this be? For Ravani, 
who, through his supernatural power, is leading Indra—himself a master of 
spells—away, is nowhere to be seen.’ 


[30-31] “And at this juncture, all the hosts of the gods, in a towering 
rage, assaulted Ravana with hails of weapons. For having encountered the 
Vasus, Adityas, and the hosts of the Maruts, Ravana, battered by weapons, 
could neither make a stand in battle nor fight on. 

[32-35] “But when Ravani saw that his father was exhausted and that his 
luster was dimmed by weapons, he, still invisible, said this to him in the 
midst of battle: ‘Come, Father, let us go. For the work of battle is done. Sir, 
you have been victorious, as you must know. Therefore, you should be easy 
in your mind and free from anxiety. For I have captured Sakra, who is the 
lord of the army of the gods and of the entire triple world. And I have 
broken the pride of the gods. Having captured your enemy through your 
might, you should enjoy the triple world as you please. Why should you 
exert yourself in vain, since further battle would yield no benefit?’ 

[36—40] “When ten-faced Ravana had heard those words of Ravani, his 
mind was put at ease, and he withdrew from the army of the gods and from 
the work of battle. Then the mighty lord of the night-roaming rdksasas, 
having attained victory, was free from his anxiety concerning the battle. 
Delighted, he prepared to depart from there to his palace, and, turning to his 
son, he said these words: ‘O you whose valor is equal to that of the 
immortal gods, through your feats of valor befitting the greatest of warriors 
you have increased the pride of my lineage in that you have defeated the 
lord of the thirty gods and the thirty gods as well. So bring Vasava quickly 
and, surrounded by the army, proceed from here to the city. And as you 
proceed I will quickly follow behind you together with my ministers.’ Then, 
surrounded by his forces and together with his mounts, the raksasa Ravan, 
his mind delighted, took the lord of the thirty gods and, reaching his own 
palace, dismissed the rdksasas.” 


Sarga 30 

[1-2] “Now, when that immensely powerful god, great Indra, had been 
defeated by Ravana’s son, the gods placed Prajapati before them and 
proceeded to Lanka. Approaching Ravana, who was surrounded by his sons 
and brothers, Prajapati, hovering in the sky, addressed him in a conciliatory 
fashion: 

[3-7] “ ‘Ravana, my child, I am pleased with your son’s feats in battle. 
Oh, the magnificence of his valor! He is your equal or even your superior. 


You, sir, have conquered the entire triple world through your own blazing 
energy, and your vow has borne fruit. And I am indeed pleased with your 
son. And, Ravana, this exceedingly mighty son of yours, Ravani, shall now 
be famed throughout the world as Indrajit, “Conqueror of Indra.” Indeed, 
your majesty, this raksasa, relying on whom you brought the thirty gods 
under your control, will be a mighty conqueror of his enemies. Therefore, 
great-armed warrior, please release great Indra, the chastiser of Paka. 
Moreover, what must the gods, denizens of heaven, offer you for his 
release?’ 

[8—9] “Then Indrajit, of immense blazing energy and victorious in battle, 
said, ‘For his release, I now choose immortality, O God.’ But the lotus-born 
god Brahma said to Ravani, “There is no such thing as absolute immortality 
for any living beings on earth.’ 

[10-13] “Then Indrajit addressed lotus-born Brahma, who hovered 
before him: ‘In that case, you must hear about the supernatural power that I 
demand for the release of Indra of the hundred sacrifices. My abiding 
desire, O God, is that whenever I strive to conquer my enemies, I should 
enter battle only after having worshiped Agni, the purifier, with oblations. 
But, O God, let my death occur in battle only if I should fight before that 
rite is completed, with its mantras and oblations to Agni, the shining god of 
fire. Moreover, every other man solicits immortality through asceticism. 
But I shall secure immortality through valor.’ 

[14-15] “The god Prajapati said to him, “Let it be so!’ So Indrajit 
released Sakra, and the gods returned to the highest heaven. At this 
juncture, Rama, Sakra, despondent and with his garments and garlands in 
disarray, gave way to brooding, his mind overwhelmed with gloomy 
thoughts. 

[16-18] “When the god Prajapati saw him in such a state, he said: ‘O 
Indra of the hundred sacrifices, why are you so sorrowful? You must 
remember your evil deed. O lord, foremost of the immortal gods, long ago I 
created many people. They were all of a single type. They all had the same 
speech, and they all looked the same in every respect. There was absolutely 
no difference among them, either in their appearance or in _ their 
characteristics. Therefore, with my mind focused, I began to ponder over 
these people. 


[19-22] “ ‘Then, in order to create some distinction among them, I 
selected from those people whatever was most excellent in each and every 
limb and fashioned a woman. With those qualities of beauty, I fashioned a 
woman devoid of all imperfection. And so I gave her the name Ahalya, 
“Devoid of Imperfection.” But once that woman had been fashioned, O lord 
of the gods, I became concerned as to whom she should belong, bull among 
gods. But because of your exalted station, you, Lord Sakra, smasher of 
citadels, reckoned in your mind, “She must be my wife.” 

[23-27] “ ‘I placed her under the guardianship of great Gautama, and 
when she had been in his care for many years, he returned her. Then, once I 
had made certain of the self-control of that great sage and had recognized 
his perfection in asceticism, I gave her to him to be his wife. That righteous 
great sage then made love with her. But since she had been given to 
Gautama, the gods lost all hope. You, however, were infuriated, and, 
consumed with lust, you went to that sage’s ashram. Then you spied that 
woman, who was like a shining flame of fire. Overwhelmed with lust and 
filled with rage, Sakra, you raped her. And you were seen in the ashram by 
that supreme seer. 

[28—33] “ ‘Then, O lord of the gods, you experienced a reversal of your 
condition. For the enraged seer of supreme blazing energy cursed you as 
follows: “Since, Vasava, showing no fear, you raped my wife, therefore, 
your majesty, you shall fall into the hands of your enemies in battle. And 
this tendency, evil-minded wretch, that you have established in the world, 
will now be common to all men as well. Of this there is no doubt. And as 
for that great and very grievous violation that will arise, half of it will be 
ascribed to him who perpetrates it, while half will be ascribed to you. Nor, 
smasher of citadels, will your position be permanent because of your 
association with this violation that you have established in the world. And 
whosoever may become lord of the gods, he shall be so only temporarily. 
Such is the curse that I have pronounced.” That is what Gautama said to 
you at that time. 

[34-36] “ ‘Then that sage of great austerities addressed his wife, reviling 
her: “Unchaste woman, become invisible within the confines of my ashram. 
Since, endowed with beauty and youth, you were unfaithful, you shall no 
longer be the only beautiful woman in the world. That beauty of yours, once 


so hard to obtain and on account of which this infatuation came about, shall 
henceforth belong to all people.” 

[37-40] “ ‘And so from that time onward, many people have been 
endowed with beauty. It is because of the sage’s unleashing of that curse 
that all this has come to pass. Now, great-armed Vasava, you must 
remember the evil deed that you did on account of which, and for no other 
reason, you were captured by your enemy. Now you must immediately 
perform the vaisnava sacrifice with your mind fully focused. Only then, 
purified by that sacrifice, shall you return to the highest heaven. Nor, lord of 
the gods, was your son slain in the great battle. He was taken by his 
grandfather and kept in the ocean, the great receptacle of waters.’ 

[41-42] “When he had heard this, great Indra performed the vaisnava 
sacrifice and returned once more to highest heaven and ruled the gods. 
Such, Rama, was the might of Indrajit, which I have told you about. He 
conquered the lord of the gods. What then of other living beings?” 


Sarga 31 

[1-3] Then Rama of immense blazing energy, in his amazement, once more 
bowing deferentially, addressed these words to that foremost of seers, 
Agastya: “Holy one, foremost of the twice-born, were people so dispirited 
then that Ravana, lord of the rdaksasas, did not meet with effective 
opposition? Or, since so many kings were conquered, is it that those lords 
of the earth were devoid of might and deprived of splendid, divine weapon- 
spells?” 

[4] When the holy seer Agastya had heard Rama Raghava’s words, he 
smiled and addressed him, as Grandfather Brahma might the Lord. 

[5—7] “In this fashion, Rama, O lord of the earth and bull among kings, 
Ravana wandered the earth, harrying its kings. At length he reached the city 
called Mahismati, which, in its close proximity to Agni of the golden seed, 
was as resplendent as the city of heaven. In his blazing splendor, its king, 
whose name was Arjuna, was the equal of Agni of the golden seed. For 
Agni constantly dwelt in his firepit, which was strewn with kusa grass. 

[8—11] “Now on that very day that mighty king Arjuna, overlord of the 
Haihayas, had gone to the Narmada River to take his pleasure with his 
womenfolk. But Ravana, lord of the raksasas, asked Arjuna’s ministers: 
‘Where is Arjuna, your king, today? Please tell me at once. I am Ravana 


and have come eager to do battle with that foremost of men. Now you must 
calmly inform him of my arrival.’ Addressed in this fashion by Ravana, 
those extremely wise ministers told the lord of the raksasas that the lord of 
the earth was away. 

[12—16] “When the son of Visravas had heard from the townsfolk that 
Arjuna was gone, he departed and came to the Vindhya mountains, which 
resembled the Himalayas. Ravana gazed upon the Vindhya range. It seemed 
to burst forth from the earth, to pierce the clouds and scrape the sky. It had a 
thousand peaks, and its caves were haunted by lions. With the icy waters 
plunging from its precipices, it seemed to be laughing shrilly. It was 
immensely high, and, with the gods, danavas, and gandharvas sporting 
with their womenfolk, together with the kinnaras and troupes of apsarases, 
it was truly heaven. As it loomed there, with its streams pouring forth— 
through its fissures—water as bright as the sky, it seemed to be flashing 
forth flickering tongues. 

[17-19] “Gazing at the Vindhya range, which, with its caves and 
flickering flames, resembled the Himalayas, Ravana proceeded to the 
Narmada River. It was a holy river flowing to the western ocean, its waters 
rushing over stones. Its pools were churned up by buffalo, gaur, lions, 
tigers, bears, and great elephants—all of them oppressed by heat and thirst. 
It was always thronged with cakravakas and karandas, as well as hamsas, 
jalakukkutas, and sarasa cranes—all of them impassioned and warbling 
constantly. 

[20-23] “The ten-faced bull among raksasas descended quickly from the 
Puspaka. Then, just as one might enter the embrace of a lovely and beloved 
woman, he immersed himself in the Narmada, the foremost of rivers, which 
had blossoming trees for a chaplet, a pair of cakravdkas for breasts, broad 
banks for hips, a line of hamsas for a lovely girdle, a body smeared with 
pollen, the foam of the water for a white mantle, a plunge into its waters for 
an embrace, and blooming lotuses for lovely eyes. Afterward, seated on its 
charming bank, which was adorned with all kinds of flowers, the lord of the 
raksasas, together with his ministers, took pleasure in the sight of the 
Narmada. 

[24—27] “Then Ravana, lord of the raksasas, smiling playfully, addressed 
his ministers there—Marica, Suka, and Sarana: ‘The scorching sun, maker 
of day, now at the zenith, seems, with his thousand rays, to turn the world to 


gold. Yet, realizing that I am sitting here, the sun seems more like the moon. 
Cooled by the waters of the Narmada, the fragrant breeze blows gently out 
of fear of me, dispelling my fatigue. And even this best of rivers, the 
Narmada, the increaser of delight, concealing her fish, birds, and waves, 
stands like a timid and beautiful woman. 

[28-31] “ “You gentlemen have been wounded with weapons in battle by 
kings who were equal to Indra, and you are smeared with blood like the 
ointment of sandalwood. You should therefore immerse yourselves in the 
Narmada, which gives happiness to men, just as the great rutting elephants, 
headed by Mahapadma, plunge into the Ganges. For once you have bathed 
in this mighty river, you will rid yourselves of all evils. But as for me, I 
shall calmly make a floral offering to Siva, Uma’s lord, here on this bank, 
whose luster is like that of the autumnal moon.’ 

[32-35] “Addressed in this fashion by Ravana, Marica, Suka, and 
Sarana, along with Mahodara and Dhimraksa, immersed themselves in the 
Narmada. The Narmada River was as agitated by those elephants among the 
raksasa lords as is the Ganges by those mighty elephants, Vamana, Afyana, 
Padma, and the rest. Then, when the raksasas had bathed in the lovely 
waters of the Narmada, they came out and gathered flowers for Ravana’s 
offering. And there on Narmada’s lovely bank, whose luster was like that of 
a white cloud, the raksasa lords in a short time heaped up a veritable 
mountain of flowers. 

[36-37] “Once the flowers had been gathered, Ravana, lord of the 
raksasas, went down to the river to bathe, just as might a mighty elephant 
to the Ganges. And when Ravana had bathed there according to the ritual 
prescriptions and had quietly intoned an unsurpassed mantra, he emerged 
from the waters of the Narmada. 

[38-40] “Seven raksasas followed Ravana as he proceeded, his hands 
cupped in reverence. And wherever Ravana, the overlord of the rdksasas, 
went, they carried a lJinga made of jambunada gold. After installing that 
linga on an altar of sand, Ravana worshiped it with fragrant articles and 
flowers with the fragrance of nectar. And then, when the night-roaming 
raksasa had worshiped Hara, the dispeller of the afflictions of the virtuous 
and the supreme granter of boons who was adorned with the rays of the 
moon, he sang and, stretching out his long arms, danced.” 


Sarga 32 
[1-3] “Now, not far from where Ravana, the lord of the raksasas, was 
making his floral offering on the bank of the Narmada, Arjuna, foremost of 
conquerors and the lord and master of Mahismati, was sporting with his 
women in the Narmada’s waters. In their midst, King Arjuna was then as 
resplendent as a bull elephant in the midst of a thousand elephant cows. 

[4-6] “Eager to discover the ultimate strength of his thousand arms, 
Arjuna then obstructed the Narmada’s current with them. When the clear 
water reached the dam made by Kartavirya’s arms, it flowed rapidly 
upstream, crumbling the riverbanks. Carrying along fish, crocodiles, 
dolphins, flowers, and mats of Ausa grass, the current of the Narmada’s 
waters looked just as it would in the rainy season. 

[7-10] “As if directed by Ka@rtavirya, the current of water swept away 
Ravana’s entire floral offering. And Ravana, abandoning his half-completed 
rite, glared at his beloved Narmada as if at a cherished wife who had 
become disobedient. But when Ravana saw the current of the water flowing 
from the west and swelling like a tidal wave, he moved eastward and then 
saw the river—whose appearance was like that of an obedient woman and 
whose waterfowl were unruffled—in its splendid natural state. 

[11-16] “And then, with a finger of his right hand accompanied by a 
brief word, ten-faced Ravana directed Suka and Sarana to seek the source of 
that surge. Commanded by Ravana, the two heroic brothers, Suka and 
Sarana, set out, flying through the sky and heading west. But when they had 
gone a mere half a league, the two night-roaming rdksasas spied a man and 
many women playing in the water. With his hair disordered by the water, he 
resembled a huge sd/a tree. The corners of his eyes were red with passion, 
and in splendor he was the likeness of Madana, the god of love. That 
crusher of his foes was obstructing the river with his thousand arms as a 
mountain might obstruct the land with its thousand foothills. He was 
completely surrounded by a thousand young and exquisite women, just as a 
bull elephant might be by a thousand impassioned elephant cows. 

[17—20] “Now, when the two raksasas Suka and Sarana had seen that 
most amazing man, they turned back and, approaching Ravana, addressed 
him: ‘Lord of the raksasas, someone who resembles a huge sd/a tree has 
blocked up the Narmada like a dam and 1s having his womenfolk play. And 
the river, its waters obstructed by him with his thousand arms, is sending 


forth again and again floods that resemble tidal waves.’ Having listened 
while Suka and Sarana were speaking in this fashion, Ravana said, ‘It is 
Arjuna!’ and leapt to his feet, eager for battle. 

[21—24] “The moment the lord of the rdksasas set out toward Arjuna, the 
clouds released a thunderclap accompanied by showers of blood. 
Nonetheless, the lord of the raksasas, surrounded by Mahodara, 
Mahaparsva, Dhimraksa, Suka, and Sarana, proceeded to where Arjuna 
was. Then, in a short time, the mighty rdksasa, as black as collyrium, 
reached that fearsome pool in the Narmada. There the king of the raksasas 
spied Arjuna, the lord of men, surrounded by women as a bull elephant 
might be by impassioned elephant cows. 

[25-26] “His eyes red with rage, the lord of the rdksasas, arrogant in his 
might, in a deep voice, addressed Arjuna’s ministers thus: ‘Ministers! 
Inform the Haihaya king at once that he who goes by the name of Ravana 
has arrived for the purpose of battle.’ 

[27-30] “And when Arjuna’s counselors had heard Ravana’s words, they 
sprang up with their weapons and addressed these words to him: ‘Well 
done, Ravana! You really know the time for a battle, since, just as a tiger 
might attack a rutting bull elephant in the midst of his cows, you wish to 
fight with our king while he is impassioned and surrounded by women. Be 
patient for today, Dasagriva, please stay here for the night. If you still wish 
to fight, dear fellow, you can meet Arjuna in battle tomorrow. If, on the 
other hand, you are in such haste in your thirst for battle, you must first 
strike us down and only then join battle with Arjuna.’ 

[31-35] “The famished ministers of Ravana then slaughtered those 
ministers of the king and devoured them. Then, on the bank of the 
Narmada, there arose a tumultuous noise from the followers of Arjuna and 
the counselors of Ravana. Arjuna’s troops rushed up from every side, 
assailing Ravana and his ministers with arrows, iron cudgels, and lances 
that were like thunderbolts, together with nooses. The onset of the warriors 
of the Haihaya overlord was extremely fierce, like the roar of the ocean 
filled with sharks, fish, and crocodiles. But Ravana’s ministers—Prahasta, 
Suka, and Sarana, whose blazing energy was that of fire—burned up 
Kartavirya’s army in their rage. 

[36-40] “Then the men who guarded his gateway informed Arjuna, as he 
was sporting, of that feat of Ravana and his counselors. After telling his 


womenfolk, ‘Have no fear!’ Arjuna then came up out of the water, as might 
Afyjana from the waters of the Ganges. Then, his eyes clouded with rage, 
the immensely fearsome fire that was Arjuna blazed forth like the fire that 
ends a cosmic era. Wearing armlets of splendid gold, he swiftly seized his 
mace and drove off the rdksasas, as does the sun, maker of day, the 
darkness. Raising that great mace, which was whirled about by the force of 
his arms, Arjuna charged with the swiftness of Garuda. 

[41-43] “But blocking his path, as did the Vindhya mountain that of the 
sun, and armed with a cudgel, stood Prahasta, as immovable as the Vindhya 
itself. Puffed up with pride, Prahasta hurled that fearsome cudgel bound 
with iron and then roared like a thundercloud in his rage. At the tip of that 
cudgel as it left Prahasta’s hand there appeared a fire that resembled a 
chaplet of asoka blossoms and that seemed to be blazing. 

[44-47] “But Arjuna Kartavirya, who was armed with his mace and 
whose strength was that of an elephant, skillfully evaded that cudgel as it 
sped toward him. Then the lord of the Haihayas charged at Prahasta, 
whirling that massive mace, which was held aloft by five hundred of his 
arms. Then, struck violently by him with that mace, Prahasta was stunned 
and fell like a mountain struck by the vajra of Indra, wielder of the vajra. 
When Marica, Suka, and Sarana, along with Mahodara and Dhiimraksa, 
saw that Prahasta had fallen, they fled the battlefield. 

[48—52] “Now that his counselors had run away and Prahasta had been 
felled, Ravana swiftly charged at Arjuna, the foremost of kings. Then there 
commenced a fearsome and hair-raising battle between the thousand-armed 
king and the twenty-armed raksasa. The raksasa and Arjuna belabored each 
other powerfully with their maces, like two roiling seas, like two moving 
mountains, like two suns filled with blazing energy, like two burning fires, 
like two bull elephants arrogant in their might, like two bulls fighting over 
an impassioned cow, like two roaring thunderclouds, like two lions haughty 
in their might, or like Rudra and Kala filled with rage. 

[53-56] “But the two, man and rdksasa, withstood those mace blows, 
just as mountains might withstand the fearsome blows of a thunderbolt. Just 
as an echo inevitably arises from claps of thunder, so did all the directions 
resonate with the blows of their maces. As Arjuna’s mace fell on the chest 
of his enemy, it lent a golden glow to the heavens, as might a flashing bolt 
of lightning. And by the same token, the mace, which Ravana brought down 


again and again on Arjuna’s chest, resembled a blazing meteor falling on a 
mighty mountain. 

[57-60] “Neither Arjuna nor the lord of the raksasa hosts experienced 
any fatigue. Indeed, the battle between them was just like the one long ago 
between Bali and Indra. The foremost of men and the foremost of rdksasas 
belabored each other as might two great bulls with their horns or two bull 
elephants with their tusks. But then, in that great battle, Arjuna, enraged, let 
fly his mace with all his might right at the middle of Ravana’s chest. But 
because of the protection afforded by the grant of his boon, that mace, 
striking Ravana’s chest, broke in two and fell to the ground like a feeble 
army. 

[61-65] “However, because of that mace blow delivered by Arjuna, 
Ravana staggered back a bow’s length and collapsed, moaning softly. Then, 
perceiving that ten-necked Ravana was stunned, Arjuna swiftly seized him, 
just as Garuda might a great serpent. And having forcibly seized ten-faced 
Ravana with his thousand arms, the mighty king bound him as Narayana 
did Bali. As ten-necked Ravana was being bound, the perfected beings, 
celestial bards, and the gods cried out, ‘Well done!’ and scattered flowers 
on Arjuna’s head. Seizing him as a tiger might a deer or as the king of lions 
might an elephant, the Haihaya king, in his delight, roared again and again 
like a thundercloud. 

[66-68] “But now, having regained consciousness and seeing that ten- 
faced Ravana was bound, Prahasta, in a rage, together with the rdksasas, 
charged at the king. The onset of those night-roaming raksasas as they 
rushed to the attack was like the wondrous rise of the seas at the waning of 
summer. Crying, “Release him! Release him! Stop! Stop!’ again and again, 
they then loosed cudgels and lances at Arjuna. 

[69-72] “But Arjuna, the destroyer of his enemies, was unfazed. He 
quickly caught those weapons of the foes of the immortal gods before they 
reached him. Then, with those very same excellent and irresistible weapons, 
he wounded the raksasas and drove them off as the wind might clouds. And 
having thus frightened off the raksasas, Arjuna Kartavirya, surrounded by 
his friends and taking Ravana along, entered the city. Then, as the twice- 
born brahmans, together with the townsfolk, showered him with masses of 
blossoms and unhusked rice, Arjuna, who resembled Indra, invoked by 


many, entered that city, just as did thousand-eyed Indra when he had 
captured Bali.” 


Sarga 33 

[1-3] “Now the seer Pulastya happened to hear about the capture of Ravana 
—which was like capturing the wind—as it was related in heaven by the 
gods. Then that great seer, despite his extraordinary self-control, was moved 
by affection for his grandson, and he went to see the lord of Mahismatt. 
Taking to the path of the winds, that twice-born brahman, whose pace was 
equal to that of the wind and who strode with the speed of thought, reached 
the city of Mahismatt. 

[4-5] “He entered the city, which resembled Amaravati and which was 
filled with happy and prosperous people, as Brahma might enter Indra’s 
Amaravati. As he approached he was as hard to look upon as would be 
Aditya, the sun god, if he were approaching on foot. But then, recognizing 
him, the people informed Arjuna. 

[6-8] “Upon hearing the words ‘It is Pulastya,’ the lord of the Haihayas, 
raising his cupped hands to his forehead, went forth to meet that foremost 
of twice-born brahmans. And his purohita, taking the guest-offering and 
madhuparka offering of milk and honey, went before the king, as Brhaspati 
would before Indra. Then, when he spied the seer approaching like the 
rising sun, bringer of light, Arjuna worshiped him who had come, as Indra 
might the Lord. 

[9-12] “And after he had seen to it that he had been given the 
madhuparka, water to wash his feet, and the guest-offering, the lord of 
kings addressed Pulastya in a voice breaking with joy: “Today, Mahismatt 
has been rendered the equal of Amaravati since, lord among the lords of 
twice-born brahmans, I am seeing you, who are so hard to see. Today I have 
achieved felicity, O lord. Today my lineage is exalted in that I may worship 
your feet, which are worshiped by the hosts of the gods. This kingdom, my 
sons, my wives, and I are yours. O brahman, what may we do? What must 
we do? Please command us, sir.’ 

[13-16] “Now, after having inquired of the king concerning the proper 
state of righteousness, the sacred fires, and his dependents, Pulastya then 
addressed Arjuna, king of the Haihayas: ‘Lord of kings—you whose eyes 
are like shining lotuses and whose face is like the full moon—your strength, 


by which you vanquished ten-necked Ravana, is unequaled. My invincible 
grandson, for fear of whom the ocean and wind stand motionless, has been 
bound by you today. Thus, you have increased your fame, my son, and 
spread your name. Now, dear boy, entreated by my words, please release 
ten-faced Ravana.’ 

[17-20] “Accepting Pulastya’s command without a word, Arjuna, the 
lord among the lords of kings, happily released the lord of the raksasas. 
When he had released that foe of the thirty gods, he honored him with 
heavenly ornaments, garlands, and garments. Then, after forging with him a 
pact of nonaggression witnessed by Agni, Arjuna prostrated himself before 
the son of Brahma and returned to his home. After having met with 
Pulastya as well, the valorous lord of the raksasas, given hospitality with an 
embrace, was dismissed, much abashed. Once Pulastya, the foremost of 
sages and son of Grandfather Brahma, had brought about the release of ten- 
necked Ravana, he proceeded to Brahma’s world. 

[21—23] “And that was how Ravana was overpowered by Kartavirya and 
how he obtained his freedom once again through the words of Pulastya. 
Thus, O delight of the Raghavas, there are those who are mightier even than 
the mighty. Therefore, he who desires his own well-being should not hold 
his enemy in contempt. After the king of the flesh-eating raksasas had 
formed an alliance with thousand-armed Arjuna, he once more roamed the 
entire earth in his arrogance, slaughtering men.” 


Sarga 34 
[1-2] “Once released by Arjuna, Ravana, the lord of the raksasas, no longer 
despondent, roamed the entire earth. And whomever he heard of as having 
great strength—whether raksasa or human—Ravana encountered him and, 
in his arrogance, challenged him to battle. 

[3-9] “Then, one day, he came to the city of Kiskindha, protected by 
Valin, and challenged golden-garlanded Valin to battle. Then Lord Tara, a 
minister of the monkey and the paternal uncle of Tara, addressed these 
words to Ravana, who had come, eager for battle: “Valin, who would be 
your equal in strength, O lord of the radksasas, is gone, and there is none 
other among the leaping monkeys capable of standing before you. Valin 
will return momentarily, after he has performed his sandhya ritual in all 
four oceans, Ravana. So just wait a moment. Look at these heaps of bones, 


as white as conch shells. They belonged to those who came seeking battle, 
your majesty, and who were then slain by the blazing energy of the monkey 
lord. And even if you were to drink the nectar of immortality, Ravana, 
nonetheless, were you to encounter Valin, that would be the end of your 
life, raksasa. On the other hand, if you are in a hurry to die, you should go 
to the southern ocean. There you will see Valin, who is like the sun, bringer 
of light, come to earth.’ 

[10-12] “But reviling Tara, Ravana, lord of the raksasas, mounted the 
Puspaka and proceeded to the southern ocean. There, he spied Valin, who— 
resembling a golden mountain and with a face like the rising sun—was 
absorbed in the performance of his sandhya rites. Ravana, who resembled 
collyrium, descended from the Puspaka and advanced swiftly with silent 
footsteps in order to seize him. 

[13-16] “But Ravana, whose intention was evil, was spotted by Valin, 
who by chance had opened his eyes. Still, Valin was not perturbed. Just as a 
lion might a hare, or Garuda a serpent, Valin, spying evil-intentioned 
Ravana, did not take him seriously, thinking: ‘This evil-minded Ravana 
wishes to capture me. But today, hanging him from my armpit, I shall travel 
to the mighty oceans. Everyone will see my enemy, ten-necked Ravana, 
hanging at my side, his thighs, hands, and garments dangling like a serpent 
hanging from Garuda.’ 

[17-21] “Having formed this resolution, Valin, pricking up his ears, 
went on intoning vedic mantras as he stood there like the king of the 
mountains. The two kings—the one of the tawny monkeys, the other of the 
raksasas—each eager to seize the other and arrogant in his might, strove 
mightily toward that end. Even though his back was turned, Valin, judging 
from the sound of his footsteps that Ravana was within arm’s reach, seized 
him, as the egg-born Garuda might a serpent. Seizing the lord of the 
raksasas, who had been eager to seize him, the tawny monkey swiftly leapt 
up into the sky dangling him from his armpit. Although Ravana gouged him 
repeatedly with his nails, Valin, crushing him tightly, carried him off, as the 
wind might a cloud. 

[22—25] “Then, as ten-faced Ravana was being carried off, the fearsome 
ministers of the raksasa, wishing to free him, ran after him, crying out. 
Followed by them, Valin, moving through the middle of the sky, was as 
radiant as the many-rayed sun high in the sky being followed by banks of 


clouds. But those foremost among the rdksasas were unable to keep up with 
Valin, and, exhausted by the speed generated by his arms and haunches, 
they collapsed. For as Valin was proceeding, even the lords of the 
mountains got out of his way. 

[26-30] “The immensely swift lord of the monkeys, whose flight was 
impossible even for flocks of birds, performed his worship at the time of 
sandhya at each of the oceans, one after another. Moving through the sky, 
the tawny monkey Valin, honored by the creatures that move through the 
sky, came to the western ocean, still clutching Ravana. After performing the 
sandhya rite there and having bathed and intoned the mantras, the monkey 
proceeded to the northern ocean, still carrying ten-faced Ravana. When he 
had performed the sandhya rite at the northern ocean, Valin proceeded to 
the great eastern receptacle of waters. When he had performed the sandhya 
ritual there, Vasavi, lord of the tawny monkeys, headed back to Kiskindha, 
still clutching Ravana. 

[31-32] “And thus, having performed the sandhya ritual at all four 
oceans, the monkey, fatigued from carrying Ravana, landed in a parkland of 
Kiskindha. The foremost of monkeys released Ravana from his armpit and, 
laughing at him, said, ‘Where did you come from?’ 

[33-39] “Greatly astonished, his eyes rolling from exhaustion, the lord 
of the rdksasas said these words to the lord of the tawny monkeys: ‘I am 
Ravana, lord of the raksasas, O lord of monkeys—you who resemble great 
Indra. I came here eager for battle, and now you have overpowered me. Oh, 
what might! Oh, what power! Oh, what composure you have! For you have 
captured me as if I were some dumb beast and whirled me around the four 
oceans. O heroic monkey! What other hero, carrying me, could stride so 
swiftly in this fashion, without tiring? Indeed, other than you, leaping 
monkey, only three things possess such speed: thought, the wind, and 
Suparna. Of this, there is no doubt. Having witnessed your might, bull 
among tawny monkeys, I desire an enduring and affectionate alliance with 
you, one concluded in the presence of Agni, the purifier. Our wives, our 
sons, our cities, our kingdoms, our possessions, our garments, and our food 
—we shall share all these together, lord of the tawny monkeys.’ 

[40-42] “Then, after kindling a fire, the two of them—the tawny 
monkey and the raksasa—embraced each other and became as brothers. 
Then, hand in hand, delighted, the two of them—the tawny monkey and the 


raksasa—entered Kiskindha, as two lions might a mountain cave. And so 
Ravana dwelt there for a month as if he were Sugriva, until he was taken 
away by his ministers, who had come and were eager to ravage the triple 
world. 

[43-44] “This took place in this fashion long ago, lord, when Ravana 
was first overpowered by Valin and then, in the presence of Agni, the 
purifier, was treated by him as his brother. Valin’s supreme might was 
unequaled, and yet, Rama, you burned him as well, as might a fire, a moth.” 


Sarga 35 

[1-7] Then Rama once more questioned the sage who dwelt in the southern 
region. Cupping his hands in reverence, he humbly uttered these 
appropriate words: “The might of those two, Valin and Ravana, was 
unequaled, but, in my opinion, they were not equal in heroic deeds to 
Hanuman. Heroism, skill, strength, steadfastness, wisdom, mastery of 
policy, valor, and power all reside in Hanuman. Back then, when he saw the 
ocean and the monkey army in despair, he reassured the monkeys once 
again and leapt one hundred leagues. After assaulting the citadel of Lanka 
and exploring Ravana’s inner apartments, he spoke with Sita and gained her 
confidence. And there Hanuman single-handedly slaughtered the generals 
of the army, the sons of the counselors, the servants, and R&avana’s own son. 
And when he was once more free from his bonds, he conversed with ten- 
faced Ravana and then reduced Lanka to ashes, as a great purifying fire 
might the earth. 

[8—13] “Those feats of Hanuman in battle are unheard of on the part of 
Kala, Sakra, Visnu, or Kubera, the guardian of wealth. For it was through 
the strength of his arms that I gained Lanka and victory and recovered Sita, 
Laksmana, my kingdom, my friends, and my kinsmen. If I had not had 
Hanuman, the companion of the monkey lord, who would have been able to 
find out any word of Janak1? Why then is it that when hostility broke out, 
he did not, out of a desire to serve Sugriva, burn up Valin, as if he were a 
mere creeper? Since he merely watched as the lord of the monkeys, as dear 
to him as life itself, was suffering, I guess that Hanuman did not know his 
own strength. Great and holy sage, you who are honored by the immortal 
gods, please tell me truthfully and in detail everything concerning 
Hanuman.” 


[14-18] Then, when the seer had heard Raghava’s reasonable words, he 
addressed to him these words, there in the presence of Hanuman: “What 
you say about Hanuman is true, foremost of the Raghus. There is none other 
who is his equal in might, speed, or intelligence. Long ago, some seers, 
whose curses never fail to take effect, cursed him such that, even though 
that crusher of his foes was mighty, he would not know his own strength. 
Because of its extreme childishness, I really ought not tell you, immensely 
powerful Rama, what he did in his infancy. If, however, it is your intention 
to hear it, Rama Raghava, then concentrate your mind and listen as I tell 
you. 

[19-21] “There is a mountain named Mount Sumeru, which is golden as 
the result of a boon granted by Stirya. And it is there that Hanuman’s father, 
Kesarin, ruled his kingdom. He had a beloved wife well known as Afyjana, 
and it was on her that Vayu fathered an excellent son. Then that forest- 
roaming monkey Afjana gave birth to a son, whose complexion was like 
that of rice awn. And one day she went out wishing to fetch some fruit. 

[22—24] “As he was separated from his mother and greatly afflicted by 
hunger, the child cried loudly like a young king of the Sarabhas. Then he 
saw Vivasvant, the rising sun, which resembled a cluster of japa blossoms, 
and, in his longing for fruit, he leapt up toward it. Facing the rising sun, the 
child, who was himself like the rising sun incarnate, leapt up into the 
middle of the sky, wishing to seize the rising sun. 

[25—27] “As the infant Hanuman was leaping up, the gods, danavas, and 
perfected beings experienced tremendous astonishment. They said: ‘Not 
even Vayu, Garuda, or thought is as swift as this son of Vayu, who is 
leaping across the highest heaven. If his speed and valor, even as a child, 
are such, what then will be his speed once he gains the strength of his 
prime?’ 

[28-30] “Now, as his son was leaping upward, Vayu, as cold as a mass 
of snow, leapt after him, protecting him from the danger of being scorched 
by the sun. Through his father’s power and in his own childishness, he then 
flew along many thousands of leagues into the sky, drawing near to the sun, 
bringer of light. However, the sun, maker of day, refrained from burning 
him, thinking, ‘He is only a child, who doesn’t know that this is wrong. 
Moreover, a great task will depend on him.’ 


[31-35] “Now on the very day on which he leapt up to seize the sun, 
bringer of light, Rahu too desired to seize the sun, maker of day. But, O 
Rama, when he was right over Surya’s chariot, Rahu, tormentor of the 
moon and sun, was mauled by Hanuman and he fled, terrified. Furious, 
Rahu, Simhika’s son, went to Indra’s palace, and, knitting his brows, he 
addressed the god, who was surrounded by the hosts of gods: ‘Having given 
me the moon and the sun to allay my hunger, Vasava, how is it that you 
have now given it to another, O slayer of Bala and Vrtra? Today, as it was 
the time for an eclipse, I went to the sun to seize it, but suddenly, another 
Rahu assaulted me and seized it.’ 

[36-38] “Upon hearing the words of Rahu, Vasava, in great agitation, 
left his throne and leapt up still wearing his golden garland. Then Indra 
mounted the four-tusked lord of elephants, which resembled a peak of 
Mount Kailasa. It was streaming rut fluid, bearing ornaments, lofty, and 
loud with the sound of its golden bells. And placing Rahu before him, he 
proceeded to the place where Stirya and Hanuman were. 

[39-41] “But leaving Vasava behind, Rahu went on ahead with 
tremendous speed. And Hanuman spied him as he raced toward him like a 
mountain peak. Seeing Rahu like that, Hanuman then left the sun behind 
and once more leapt into the sky to seize Simhika’s son. And, Rama, seeing 
that the leaping monkey had left the sun behind and was racing toward him, 
Rahu, who consists only of a head, turned around and took flight. 

[42-43] “Hoping that Indra would protect him, the son of Simhika, in his 
terror, cried out again and again, ‘Indra! Indra!’ Hearing the voice of Rahu, 
who was crying out, and recognizing it even before seeing him, Indra said: 
‘Do not fear! I will slay him.’ 

[44-46] “Now, when Maruti saw Airavata, he thought, ‘This one is a 
really big fruit!’ and he rushed toward that king of elephants. Then, as he 
rushed onward in his desire to seize Airavata, his appearance became 
momentarily fearsome and as radiant as that of Indra or Agni. As he was 
rushing onward in this fashion, Saci’s lord, only slightly angered, struck 
him with his vajra, which he loosed from the tips of his fingers. 

[47-49] “Struck by Indra’s vajra, he fell on a mountain. And as he fell, 
his jaw [hanu] was broken on the left side. But when that child had fallen, 
stunned by the blow of the vajra, Pavana was enraged at Indra, who had 
injured his son. Closing off the organs of defecation and urination, the lord 


who moves within all creatures blocked up all beings, as Vasava might the 
rains. 

[50-52] “Because of Vayu’s wrath, beings were completely deprived of 
breath, and, bursting at the seams, they became like blocks of wood. 
Deprived of the cries of ‘svadha’ and ‘vasat,’ devoid of all ritual 
performance, and, indeed, stripped of all righteous practices through the 
wrath of Vayu, the triple world seemed to be in hell. Then, afflicted with 
misery, all creatures, including the gandharvas, the gods, the asuras, and 
humans, ran to Prajapati, seeking relief. 

[53-56] “Cupping their hands in supplication, the gods, whose bellies 
were as bulbous as conch shells, said: ‘Blessed lord of creatures, you 
created the four types of beings. Foremost of beings, you gave us Pavana to 
be the lord of our lives. Why then, since he is the lord of life, has he 
blocked us up, causing us pain as if we were women in the inner 
apartments? Therefore, stricken by Vayu, we have come to you, O lord, for 
refuge. Please, slayer of your enemies, take away this suffering of ours 
caused by the blockage of wind.’ 

[57-63] “When Prajapati, the lord of creatures, had heard these words of 
the creatures, he said to them, ‘This has happened for a reason.’ And then 
once more he addressed those creatures: ‘Listen, O creatures, to the reason 
for which Vayu grew angry and blocked you up. You must patiently hear all 
this for yourselves. His son was struck down today by King Indra, lord of 
the immortal gods, who acted on the words of Rahu, and so Anila, the wind 
god, grew angry at you. Bodiless, Vayu moves within all bodies, protecting 
them; for, without Vayu, the body becomes nothing but dust. Vayu is the 
breath of life. Vayu is happiness. This whole world is Vayu. Abandoned by 
Vayu, the world can find no happiness. And today the world has been 
abandoned by Vayu, the life of the world. Today all these creatures, 
deprived of their breath, stand here motionless like logs or walls. So then let 
us go to where Maruta, the cause of your affliction, is staying. Let us not 
court destruction by failing to propitiate the son of Aditi.’ 

[64-65] “Then Prajapati, along with the creatures and together with the 
gods, gandharvas, great serpents, and guhyakas, went to where Maruta was 
staying, after he had taken his son, who had been struck down by the lord of 
the gods. There on the lap of ever-moving Vayu lay his son, as radiant as 
the sun, Agni Vaisvanara, or gold. When four-faced Brahma, together with 


the gods, perfected beings, seers, great serpents, and the raksasas, saw him, 
he was filled with pity.” 


Sarga 36 

[1-4] “When Vayu, who was distressed at the injury to his son, saw 
Grandfather Brahma, he stood up before the Creator, holding his infant son. 
After rising, with his dangling earrings, garland, diadem, and ornaments of 
burnished gold, Vayu prostrated himself three times at the Creator’s feet. 
The primordial knower of the vedas caused Vayu to rise, and he stroked his 
infant son with a hand that was adorned with hanging ornaments. And no 
sooner had he been touched as if in play by lotus-born Brahma than he once 
more revived, as might crops sprinkled with water. 

[S—6] “Perceiving with delight that Hanuman had revived, Vayu, bearer 
of scents and the breath of life, began to circulate among all beings, where 
there had previously been obstruction. Released from the affliction of wind, 
creatures were as delighted as might be lotus ponds in bloom freed from 
freezing winds. 

[7-9] “Then Brahma of the three pairs, foremost of the three, who has 
three abodes and is worshiped by the thirty gods, addressed the gods out of 
a desire to do a kindness to Maruta: ‘O great Indra! O Agni! O Varuna! O 
Kubera, lord of wealth! O Mahesvara! Please listen. Although you know all 
this, I shall tell it, as it is beneficial. This infant will have to accomplish a 
mission of yours. So you must all grant Maruta boons in order to gratify 
him.’ 

[10-15] “Then thousand-eyed Indra, moved by affection and with a 
benign expression, took off his garland of lotuses and said this: ‘In that his 
jaw [hanu] was broken by the vajra loosed from my hand, this tiger among 
monkeys shall be known by the name of Hanuman, “He of the Powerful 
Jaw.” And I will grant him the greatest and most excellent boon. 
Henceforward, he shall be invulnerable to my vajra.’ Then the blessed 
Surya Martanda, dispeller of darkness, said: ‘I shall give him a hundredth 
portion of my blazing energy. And when he is able to study the sastras, I 
shall grant him mastery of that sastra by means of which he shall become 
eloquent.’ Next Varuna gave him a boon: ‘His death shall never come about 
through my noose or through water, even after a million years.’ 


[16-21] “And Yama, being pleased, ordained for him invulnerability to 
his rod, perpetual freedom from disease, and the boon of never losing heart 
in battle. Then Kubera Ekaksipingala, who was a granter of boons, spoke 
thus: ‘This mace of mine shall never kill him in battles.’ And Safkara 
granted him the greatest boon, saying, ‘His death shall never come from me 
or from my weapons.’ Next Brahma said these words: ‘He will be a great 
being, long-lived, and immune to all chastisements on the part of 
brahmans.’ Then very wise Visvakarman, foremost of artisans, gazing at 
that infant, who resembled the rising sun, uttered a boon for him: ‘And he 
will be invulnerable at the time of battle to whatever weapons of the gods I 
have fashioned here.’ 

[22-24] “Then, seeing Hanuman adorned with the boons of the gods, 
four-faced Brahma, guru of the world, with a satisfied expression, said to 
Vayu: ‘O Maruta, your son here, Maruti, shall bring fear to his enemies and 
freedom from fear to his friends. He shall be invincible. And he shall 
perform hair-raising feats in battle for the destruction of Ravana and the 
delight of Rama.’ 

[25—26] “When all of those gods had spoken in this fashion and had 
taken leave of Maruta, they placed Grandfather Brahma before them, and, 
along with the other immortals, they all departed just as they had come. But 
as for Vayu, the bearer of scents, he took his son and brought him home. 
Then, after telling Afjana about the boons that had been granted, he 
departed. 

[27-31] “Now, Rama, when Hanuman had acquired these boons, he was 
filled with strength from their having been granted, and, with his native 
strength, he swelled up like the ocean. Indeed, filled with strength, that bull 
among monkeys fearlessly committed offenses in the ashrams of the great 
seers. He broke the sacrificial ladles, smashed the ritual vessels, and 
scattered the agnihotra fire and the piles of barkcloth garments belonging to 
those tranquil sages. Knowing that Brahma had granted him immunity from 
all chastisements on the part of the brahmans, the seers continued to tolerate 
this. Even when Kesarin and Vayu, together with Anjana, tried to restrain 
him, the monkey continued to transgress all bounds. 

[32-34] “Then, foremost among the Raghus, those great seers, born in 
the lineage of the Bhrgus and the Angirasas, were annoyed, but not 
excessively wrathful or impatient. Still they cursed him: ‘Befuddled by our 


curse, leaping monkey, you shall for a very long time be unaware of your 
strength, relying on which you have been annoying us.’ As he was thus 
forced to forget his power and blazing energy through the force of the great 
seers’ words, he took on a gentle nature, roaming the ashrams without 
violating them. 

[35—37] “At that time, the father of Valin and Sugriva, named Rksarajas, 
was the king of all the monkeys, and he was like the sun, bringer of light, in 
his blazing energy. After that lord of the tawny monkeys, whose name was 
Rksarajas, had ruled over the monkeys for a long time, he succumbed to the 
rule of time. When he had passed away, the counselors, who were expert in 
counsel, set Valin as king in his father’s place and Sugriva in that of Valin. 

[38—40] “And between Hanuman and Sugriva there was an unbreakable 
friendship, indivisible, and free from any breach, just as there is between 
wind and fire. But because of the force of the curse, Rama, when the 
hostility arose between Valin and Sugriva, Hanuman did not realize his own 
strength. And, Rama, even when Sugriva was being driven out by Valin, he 
did not remind him. Nor did Maruti know his own strength. 

[41-42] “Who in this world excels Hanuman in valor, energy, 
intelligence, prowess, morality, kindness, political sense, dignity, 
cleverness, great strength, and fortitude? Long ago this foremost of 
monkeys, immeasurable and eager to learn grammar, faced the sun and, 
following it, walked from the eastern to the western mountain and so 
mastered that great subject. 

[43-44] “Who will stand before Hanuman, who, like the ocean, is eager 
to inundate the world, like Agni, the purifier, eager to consume all the 
worlds, and like Yama, the ender of all things, at the times of universal 
destruction? He himself as well as these other great monkey lords, Sugriva, 
Mainda, Dvivida, Nila, Tara, Tara’s son, Nala, and Rambha, were created 
by the gods on your behalf, Rama. 

[45-46] “Thus, I have now told you everything about which you asked 
me. I have told you about the deeds of Hanuman in his childhood. Having 
seen and conversed with you, Rama, we must now depart.” Having spoken 
in this fashion, all the seers departed as they had come. 

[Interpolated Passage II follows sarga 36; see PVR 7: 1305-18] 


Sarga 37 


[1-4] After this, Rama first caressed and then embraced his fearless friend 
Pratardana, the lord of Kasi, and said this: “You, sir, have demonstrated the 
greatest affection and the highest friendship. And, your majesty, Bharata 
made great preparations in tandem with you. So, this very day, sir, you must 
go to the city you protect, that beautiful city in the country of Kasi, 
Varanasi, with its splendid palisades and lovely gateways.” When he had 
said this much, righteous Kakutstha rose from his splendid throne and held 
him closely to his chest. 

[S—10] After he had dismissed his friend, Raghava, smiling, addressed 
this sweet-syllabled speech to the lords of the earth, who had come 
willingly: “Through your strength of character, you gentlemen have 
maintained your unshakable affection for me. Your righteousness is ever 
unwavering, and you are always true. And it was through the might and 
blazing energy of you great kings that the evil and evil-minded lord of the 
rdksasas was slain. It was through the blazing energy of you gentlemen that 
Ravana, together with his hosts, his sons, and his kinsmen, was slain in 
battle. I was merely the proximate cause of that. It was great Bharata who 
assembled you gentlemen upon hearing that Janaka’s daughter had been 
abducted in the wilderness. A very long time passed while all you great 
kings were here making preparations. Now you must resolve to depart.” 

[11-14] Filled with the greatest delight, the kings replied to him: “Thank 
heavens you have been victorious, Rama, and your reign has been 
established! Thank heavens Sita has been recovered! Thank heavens your 
enemy has been vanquished! This was our greatest desire, and this is our 
greatest glory, in that we see you, Rama, victorious, after having slain your 
enemies. And how like you, Kakutstha, that you praise us. For only those 
worthy of praise know how to utter praise such as this. Let us now take our 
leave and depart. But you, sir, will always remain in our hearts. And, great 
king, may your affection for us endure forever.” 


Sarga 38 
[1—2] Shaking the earth, those great and heroic kings delightedly departed 
in all directions for their own cities. And so all of them who had come for 
Raghava’s sake returned home in delight, accompanied by many thousands 
of armies. 


[3-6] But those protectors of the earth, filled with the pride of their 
might, said: “We never got to see Ravana standing before us in battle. 
Bharata assembled us belatedly and to no purpose. For otherwise, we kings 
would have doubtless slain the rdksasas there. For protected by the might of 
Rama’s arm and Laksmana’s too, we would have happily fought without a 
care on the far shore of the sea.” Discussing these and thousands of other 
matters, those kings, great chariot-warriors, entered their own kingdoms. 

[7-10] Once they had gone each to their own city, those kings, acting on 
their desire to please Rama, presented as gifts for him various precious 
things, as well as horses, jewels, garments, rutting elephants, heavenly 
sandalwood, and heavenly ornaments. Taking those precious things, 
Bharata, Laksmana, and the great chariot-warrior Satrughna returned to 
Ayodhya. And when those bulls among men returned to the charming city 
of Ayodhya, they gave all those precious things to great Raghava. 

[11-14] Raghava, filled with delight, accepted all of that and then gave 
everything to the great Sugriva. And he also made gifts to Vibhisana. As for 
those other heroic apes and monkeys, starting with Hanuman, as well as the 
immensely powerful raksasas, all of them, immensely powerful and with 
delighted hearts, placed Rama’s gifts on their heads and arms. And they 
drank various fragrant honey-wines and feasted on fruits and well-dressed 
meats. 

[15-17] While they were dwelling there, a month and more went by, but, 
because of their devotion to Rama, it all seemed to pass in a moment. As for 
Rama, he delighted in the company of the monkeys, who could take on any 
form at will, the immensely powerful kings, and the immensely mighty 
raksasas. In this way, the second month of the cold season passed 
pleasantly for all those delighted monkeys and rdksasas. 


Sarga 39 
[1-7] While the apes, monkeys, and rdksasas were living there in this 
manner, Raghava, of immense blazing energy, said this to Sugriva: “My 
dear friend, you must go now to Kiskindha, which is unassailable even by 
the gods and asuras. For together with your ministers, you must guard your 
sovereignty, the threats to which have been eliminated. And, great-armed 
watrior, as you look upon Angada, as well as Hanuman and the immensely 
powerful Nala, you must be filled with the greatest affection. Similarly, you 


must look with affection upon your father-in-law, the hero Susena, Tara 
foremost among the mighty, unassailable Kumuda, immensely powerful 
Nila, the hero Satabali, Mainda, Dvivida, Gaja, Gavaksa, Gavaya, 
immensely powerful Sarabha, the immensely powerful and unassailable 
king of the apes Jambavan, and Gandhamadana as well. And as for those 
other very great monkeys who were ready to lay down their lives for my 
sake, you must also look upon them with affection, and you must do 
nothing to offend them.” 

[8—11] When Rama had addressed Sugriva in this fashion and praised 
him again and again, he addressed Vibhisana in a sweet voice: “You must 
rule Lanka righteously, O king, for you are held in high esteem by the 
raksasas of that city and by your brother Vaisravana. And you must not in 
any way set your mind on unrighteousness; for wise kings rule securely. 
And, your majesty, may you always remember Sugriva and me with the 
greatest affection. You may go now, free from any anxiety.” 

[12-13] When the apes, monkeys, and rdksasas had heard Rama’s 
speech, they cried, “Wonderful! Wonderful!” and praised Kakutstha again 
and again. “O great-armed Rama, your intelligence, amazing valor, and 
extreme sweetness are always just like those of self-existent Brahma.” 

[14-16] While the monkeys and the raksasas were speaking in this 
fashion, Hanuman, prostrating himself, spoke these words to Raghava: 
“May my highest love, your majesty, always be fixed on you. And, hero, 
may my devotion be constant. May this affection never attach itself to 
anyone else. And, O hero, may my life breaths undoubtedly remain in my 
body as long as I shall hear on earth the tale of Rama.” 

[17-19] Then, even as Hanuman was speaking in this fashion, that best 
of kings rose from his throne and, embracing him, spoke these words: “All 
of this shall come to pass, best of monkeys, of this there is no doubt. As 
long as the worlds shall endure, so shall my tale. As long as this tale of 
mine shall circulate throughout the worlds, so long will the breaths of life 
remain in your body. Of this there is no doubt.” 

[20-21] Then, removing from his neck his pearl necklace, which with its 
central gem of lapis lazuli shone like the moon, Raghava lovingly fastened 
it on Hanuman. With the pearl necklace fastened on his chest, that great 
monkey was as resplendent as the golden lord of mountains with the moon 
rising over its peak. 


[22—24] And when those immensely powerful monkeys had heard 
Raghava’s speech, they rose one after the other, and, after prostrating 
themselves with their heads at his feet, they departed. After this, Rama 
embraced great-armed Sugriva, and then he pressed righteous Vibhisana 
close to his chest. All of them had their throats choked with tears and their 
eyes too were filled with tears. Distracted, as if fainting with grief, they 
then left Raghava. 


Sarga 40 

[1-4] Once the joyous, great-armed Rama had dismissed the apes, 
monkeys, and raksasas, he rejoiced happily together with his brothers. In 
the afternoon Raghava, together with his brothers, heard sweet words that 
were spoken from the sky: “Gentle Rama, please look upon me with a 
gentle countenance. Know, O lord, that I am the Puspaka, who has come 
from the summit of Mount Kailasa. After receiving your command, I went 
back to Kubera, the bestower of wealth. And he, O best of men, told me to 
wait upon you, saying: 

[S—9] “ “You were won by the great Raghava, the lord of men, after he 
had slain in battle Ravana, the unassailable lord of the rdksasas. And I too, 
gentle one, experienced the greatest delight when the evil-minded Ravana 
was slain, along with his hosts, his sons, his ministers, and his kinsmen. 
You were won in Lanka by Rama, who is the Supreme Spirit. And thus, I 
command you, “Gentle one, you must carry him.” It is my greatest desire 
that you should carry the delight of the Raghus on his journeys through the 
world. So go, free from any anxiety.’ Having received that command of 
great Kubera, the bestower of wealth, I have returned once again to your 
side. Therefore, please accept me.” 

[10-11] And saying, “So be it!” Kakutstha worshiped the Puspaka with 
parched grain, unhusked rice, flowers, and extremely fragrant perfumes, 
saying: “Now you may depart as you wish. But you must return whenever I 
call you to mind.” Then, having said, “May it be so!” the Puspaka was 
dismissed once again by Rama. Adorned with flowers, the Puspaka 
departed in the direction of its choice. 

[12-17] When the varicolored Puspaka had vanished in this fashion, 
Bharata, cupping his hands in reverence, spoke these words to the delight of 
the Raghus: “Extraordinary things are seen when you are ruling the 


kingdom. Again and again nonhuman creatures are speaking. More than a 
month has passed since there was any illness among the people, and death 
has not befallen even the aged creatures, Raghava. Women are giving birth 
to sons, and men have splendid bodies. Joy abounds among the people who 
dwell in the city. At the proper time, Vasava sends down rain that is like the 
nectar of immortality. And the winds blow softly to the touch, giving 
pleasure. And, lord of men, the people in the city and the folk in the 
countryside say, ‘May such a king be ours forever.’ ” 

[18] When Rama had heard those extremely sweet words that Bharata 
had uttered, he was filled with delight, and, joyous, he rejoiced happily. 


Sarga 41 

[1-6] Once great-armed Rama had dismissed the golden Puspaka, he 
entered the asoka grove. It was adorned on every side with sandalwood 
trees, aloe trees, mangoes, tungas, kaleyakas, and stands of devadarus. It 
was filled with kurabaka shrubs, as well as with priyangu, kadamba, jambi, 
patali, and kovidara trees. It was always adorned with delightful blossoms 
and charming fruit trees, which were filled with beautiful buds and 
blossoms and swarming with intoxicated black bees. And it was also 
adomed with kokilas and hundreds of bumblebees and many-colored birds, 
which served as the variegated ornaments of the mango trees. Some of the 
trees there shone like gold, some resembled flames of fire, while others 
were as dark as black collyrium. 

[7-10] And there were pools of various shapes, filled with crystalline 
water. Their steps were made of precious gems and their floors were inlaid 
with crystal. They had dense clusters of blooming red and blue lotuses, and 
they were adorned with cakravakas. They were also adorned with 
enclosures of various shapes and with stone benches. Here and there, in the 
forested areas, they were richly endowed with glades that resembled 
emeralds, and they were surrounded by flowering trees. The appearance of 
Rama’s grove, which he had created, was just like that of Indra’s Nandana 
garden and like that of Kubera’s Caitraratha garden, which Brahma had 
created. 

[11-16] The delight of the Raghus entered that luxuriant asoka grove, 
which was endowed with many seats and dwellings and was filled with 
bowers of creepers. And he sat down on a beautifully formed seat, adorned 


with bunches of flowers and furnished with a covering of carpets. Taking 
Sita in his arms, Kakutstha gave her excellent, sweet maireya wine to drink, 
just as Indra might give the nectar of immortality to Saci. Servants then 
quickly brought various meats and different fruits for Rama’s meal. And 
beautiful, inebriated young women, skilled in dancing and singing, danced 
before the king. In this fashion, filled with joy, Rama, like a god, delighted 
Sita, the lovely princess of Videha, day after day. 

[17-20] While great Raghava, foremost of men, was enjoying himself in 
this fashion, the pleasant winter season passed. After that knower of 
righteousness had righteously discharged his duties to the people of the city 
in the morning, he would spend the remaining half of the day in the inner 
apartments. And as for Sita, after discharging her morning obligations to the 
gods, she would stand, cupping her hands in reverence without distinction, 
before all of her mothers-in-law. After that, adorned with exquisite and 
abundant jewelry, she would go to Rama, just as Saci might go to thousand- 
eyed Indra when he is seated in his heaven Trivistapa. 

[21-22] Now one day, seeing that his wife was endowed with an 
auspicious glow, Raghava experienced unparalleled delight, and he cried: 
“Wonderful! Wonderful! The acquisition of a child is at hand for me, 
Vaidehi. So what do you desire? Tell me, what desire of yours must be 
fulfilled?” 

[23-25] Smiling, Vaidehi then said these words to Rama: “Heroic 
Raghava, I should like to see the holy penance groves that are located on 
the bank of the Ganges so that I may spend some time at the feet of the 
seers of holy deeds, who live on fruits and roots. It is my greatest desire, 
Kakutstha, that I might spend even a single night among those holy sages, 
who subsist on roots and fruits.” 

[26-27] And saying, “So be it!” Rama, tireless in action, promised, 
“Rest assured, Vaidehi, tomorrow you shall go without a doubt.” When 
Rama Kakutstha had spoken in this fashion to Janaka’s daughter Maithili, 
he went off to another inner chamber, surrounded by his friends. 


Sarga 42 
[1—3] Once the king was seated there, amusing conversationalists, skillful in 
many types of discourse, attended him on every side. Vijaya, Madhumatta, 
Kasyapa, Pingala, Kusa, Suraji, Kaliya, Bhadra, Dantavakra, Samagadha— 


all in high spirits—jokingly told great Raghava many different kinds of 
stories. 

[4-6] Then, during one story, Raghava said: “Bhadra, what are people 
talking about in the city and provinces? What are the people of the city and 
the countryside saying about me? And what about Sita and Bharata, and 
what indeed of Laksmana? And what about Satrughna and my mother 
Kaikeyi? For at the beginning of a reign, the royalty must certainly be 
talked about.” 

[7-8] When Rama had spoken in this fashion, Bhadra replied, his hands 
cupped in reverence: “The comments of the residents of the city are 
consistently favorable, your majesty. But, gentle sir, it is the victory in 
connection with the slaying of ten-necked Ravana that is mostly talked 
about in your city, bull among men.” 

[9-11] Addressed in this fashion by Bhadra, Raghava spoke these words: 
“You must tell me everything, truthfully, leaving out nothing. Once I hear 
what the residents of the city say 1s good and what is bad, I will continue 
the good and not perpetuate the bad. You must tell me confidently, without 
fear and without anxiety, just what the people of the city and folk in the 
countryside are saying.” 

[12-13] Addressed in this fashion by Raghava, Bhadra, his mind 
composed, cupping his hands in reverence, replied to great-armed Rama in 
these well-chosen words: “Listen, your majesty, to what the people are 
saying—at the crossroads, in the markets, on the highways, and in the parks 
and woodlands—about what is good and what is bad. They say: 

[14-20] “ ‘Rama accomplished the all-but-impossible bridging of the 
ocean, which no one—not even the gods and danavas together—had ever 
done before. Thus, he slew unassailable Ravana, along with his troops and 
his mounts, and brought the monkeys and apes, along with the rdksasas, 
under his sway. But then, after having slain Ravana in battle and having 
recovered Sita, Raghava put his anger behind him and brought her back 
once more into his own house. What sort of pleasure could be produced in 
his heart through the enjoyment of Sita, since earlier Ravana, clutching her 
to his side, had forcibly carried her off to Lanka? And how can Rama not 
despise her who was taken to Lanka and, what is more, placed in the asoka 
grove under the control of the raksasas? Now we shall have to put up with 
this from our own wives as well. For people always follow what the king 


does.’ And that, your majesty, is what—in many different ways—the city 
residents are saying in all the cities and provinces.” 

[21-23] When Raghava had heard this speech of his, he was deeply 
pained, and he addressed all his friends, saying, “What about this? You 
must tell me.” And they all saluted him, bowing with their heads to the 
ground, and replied to the despondent Raghava, “This is how it is, there is 
no doubt.” When Kakutstha had heard the words that all of them had 
spoken, that slayer of his foes then dismissed them all. 


Sarga 43 
[1-2] And once Raghava had dismissed the circle of his friends, he took a 
resolution in his mind and then spoke these words to the doorkeeper who 
sat nearby: “Quickly bring Laksmana Saumitri of auspicious marks, as well 
as great-armed Bharata and invincible Satrughna.” 

[3-5] When the doorkeeper, his hands cupped reverentially at his head, 
had heard Rama’s words, he went to Laksmana’s dwelling and entered 
unhindered. And then, after glorifying Laksmana, he spoke these words, 
with his hands cupped in reverence: “The king wishes to see you. You must 
go there without delay.” Upon hearing Raghava’s command, Saumitri 
mounted his chariot with the words, “So be it!” and hastened to Raghava’s 
residence. 

[6-7] When the doorkeeper had seen Laksmana departing, he went into 
the presence of Bharata and, cupping his hands in reverence, spoke these 
words: “The king wishes to see you.”” Now, when Bharata had heard from 
the doorkeeper the words that Rama had uttered, he swiftly leapt up from 
his seat and departed from there on foot. 

[8—10] When the doorkeeper had seen Bharata departing, he went swiftly 
to Satrughna’s mansion, his hands cupped in reverence. He then said these 
words: “Come! Come along, best of the Raghus! The king wishes to see 
you. For Laksmana has already gone and so has illustrious Bharata.” When 
Satrughna had heard the doorkeeper’s words, he acknowledged Rama’s 
command by bowing his head to the ground, and then he went to where 
Raghava was. 

[11-13] Upon hearing that the princes had arrived, Rama, his senses 
disordered through constant brooding, his head sunk, and his mind 
distressed, said these words to the doorkeeper: “You must quickly have the 


princes enter my presence. For my life depends on them. They are indeed 
my life breaths outside my body.” And when they were thus commanded by 
the lord of men, the princes, clad in white garments, bowing and cupping 
their hands in reverence, entered together. 

[14-16] They saw that wise Rama’s face was like the hare-marked moon 
dimmed by an eclipse and that it was as devoid of its radiance as is the sun 
at twilight. They saw that his eyes were filled with tears and they observed 
that his face was like a lotus robbed of its splendor. Then, after immediately 
and reverently honoring Rama’s feet with their heads, they all stood there 
together, while Rama continued to shed tears. 

[17-19] Embracing them with his arms, great-armed Rama had them 
rise, and, telling them, “Please take your seats,” he then said these words: 
“You gentlemen are everything to me. You gentlemen are my life. Lords of 
men, you have created the kingdom that I rule. You gentlemen are well 
grounded in the meaning of the sdstras, and you are highly advanced in 
intelligence. Lords of men, there is a concern of mine that, upon reflection, 
must be considered.” 


Sarga 44 

[1-5] As they all sat there, their minds distressed, Kakutstha, his mouth 
gone dry, spoke these words: “Bless you, you must all hear the sort of talk 
that is circulating among the people of the city regarding Sita and me and 
do not think of objecting to it. There is severe criticism on the part of the 
people of the city as well as of the countryside. There is disgust directed 
toward me, and it pierces me to the vitals. I have, as is well known, been 
born into the House of the great Iksvakus. How then could I have brought 
Sita, whose conduct has been sinful, back into the city? For you know, 
gentle brother, how Sita was abducted by Ravana in the deserted Dandaka 
wilderness and how he was slain by me. 

[6-9] “Right before your eyes, Saumitri, and those of the gods, Agni, 
bearer of oblations, as well as Vayu, who moves through the sky, declared 
Maithill to be innocent. And back then, in the presence of the gods and all 
the seers, the moon and the sun extolled Janaka’s daughter as innocent. And 
thus, on the island of Lanka, in the presence of the gods and gandharvas, 
that woman of blameless conduct was handed over to me by great Indra. 


And in my heart of hearts I knew that illustrious Sita was pure. So then, 
taking Vaidehi, I came to Ayodhya. 

[10-12] “But now there is this grave allegation against me, and there is 
sorrow in my heart. There is severe criticism on the part of the people of the 
city as well as of the countryside. Any person whose infamy is bruited 
about among the people falls into the lowest hells so long as that gossip is 
repeated. For infamy is condemned by the gods, while fame is honored 
among them. And every undertaking of the great is made for the sake of 
fame. 

[13-14] “Moreover, alarmed by the fear of criticism, I would abandon 
my life itself, or even you, bulls among men. what to say of Janaka’s 
daughter. That is why you gentlemen have been forced to see me fallen into 
an ocean of sorrow. Moreover, I cannot imagine any agony greater than this. 

[15-17] “Tomorrow at daybreak, Saumitri, you must mount a carriage 
driven by Sumantra, and, after helping Sita to get in, you are to abandon her 
at the border of the realm. On the far side of the Ganges lies the ashram of 
the very great Valmiki. It is heavenly in its appearance, and it is situated on 
the banks of the Tamasa River. And once you have abandoned her there, O 
delight of the Raghus, in a desolate wood, you must quickly return. 
Saumitri, you must carry out my instructions. 

[18—22] “Nor must I be contradicted in any way with regard to Sita. For 
if I were to be opposed, it would give rise to my most extreme displeasure. I 
bind you to an oath, swearing by my arms and my life, you who might 
speak in the midst of my words in an effort somehow to conciliate me. If 
you gentlemen are obedient to my commands, then you must respect me. 
This very day Sita must be taken away from here. You must carry out my 
instructions. Earlier she told me, ‘I should like to see the great ashrams on 
the banks of the Ganges.’ So now let her wish be fulfilled.” When righteous 
Kakutstha, his eyes filled with tears, had spoken in this fashion, surrounded 
by his brothers, he went inside. 


Sarga 45 
[1-3] Then, when the night had given way to dawn, Laksmana, his mind 
distressed and his mouth gone dry, spoke these words to Sumantra: 
“Charioteer, quickly yoke horses to a fine carriage and bring a beautiful, 
well-covered seat from the king’s palace for Sita. For I am to take Sita from 


the king’s palace to the ashram of the great seers of holy deeds. So bring the 
carriage quickly.” 

[4-7] Saying, “So be it!” Sumantra brought an exquisitely beautiful 
carriage, well furnished with comfortable seating and yoked with splendid 
horses, and he said to Saumitri, the increaser of his friends’ joy, “The 
carriage is here, please do what you must do, lord.” Addressed in this 
fashion by Sumantra, Laksmana, that bull among men, entered the king’s 
residence and, approaching Sita, said: “On the orders of our king, my lady, I 
am to go quickly to the bank of the Ganges and take you to the lovely 
ashram of the sages.” 

[8-10] Addressed in this fashion by great Laksmana, Vaidehi 
experienced unequaled joy, for she was delighted to go. Gathering costly 
garments and various precious things, Vaidehi prepared to depart, saying, “I 
shall give these ornaments to the sages’ wives.” And saying, “So be it!” 
Saumitri had Maithili mount the carriage, and he then set forth with swift 
horses, keeping Rama’s command in mind. 

[11-16] Then Sita said to Laksmana, the increaser of prosperity: “Today, 
delight of the Raghus, I see many inauspicious signs. Today my eye is 
throbbing and a trembling has arisen in my limbs. Also, Saumitri, my heart 
seems ill at ease. I feel the greatest anxiety and a great faintheartedness 
seizes me. And, wide-eyed prince, I see the earth as if it were desolate. May 
all be well with your brother, together with his brothers, and also with all 
my mothers-in-law without distinction, heroic prince. And may all be well 
with all the living things in the city and countryside.” Thus did Sita pray to 
the gods, her hands folded in reverence. But Laksmana, aware of the real 
state of affairs, bowed his head to Maithili and, feigning happiness, though 
his heart was deeply pained, said, “All is well.” 

[17-20] Then, after reaching a place to stay in an ashram on the banks of 
the Gomati, Saumitri once again arose in the morning and addressed the 
charioteer, “Yoke the carriage quickly! For today, I would place the waters 
of the Bhagirathi on my head, just as did three-eyed Siva on the mountain.” 
After he had quickly exercised the horses, which were as swift as thought, 
and yoked them to the carriage, the charioteer, cupping his hands in 
reverence, said to Vaidehi, “Please mount.” And on his instructions, Sita 
mounted that splendid carriage together with Saumitri and the wise 
charioteer Sumantra. 


[21-27] After traveling for half a day, Laksmana spied the waters of the 
Bhagirathi and, deeply despondent, wept loudly. And Sita, deeply 
concerned, seeing that Laksmana was suffering, spoke these words: 
“Knower of righteousness, what is it? Why are you crying? Now that we 
have reached the banks of the Jahnavi, which I have longed for all this time, 
why, at the moment of my joy, are you making me sad? You always abide at 
Rama’s feet, bull among men. Is it that you are sorrowful at being separated 
from him for two nights? Rama is as dear as life itself to me as well, 
Laksmana, but I am not grieving in this way. Please do not be so childish. 
Take me across the Ganges and let me see the ascetics. Then I shall 
distribute the wealth, garments, and ornaments. Then, once we have made 
our respectful salutations to the great seers according to their merit, we will 
spend one night there and then return to the city.” 

[28] When Laksmana had heard those words of hers, he wiped his lovely 
eyes and, intent on crossing the Ganges, had a lovely boat brought up. 


Sarga 46 
[1-2] After first helping Maithili board the very large and fully rigged boat 
of the Nisadas, the younger brother of Raghava boarded himself. Laksmana 
told Sumantra, who had the carriage with him, “Please remain here,” and 
then, tormented with grief, he told the boatman, “Cast off.” 

[3-6] When they had reached the farther bank of the Bhagiratht, 
Laksmana, cupping his hands in reverence, spoke these words to Maithili, 
his voice choked with tears: “Vaidehi, it is as if there were a massive dart 
through my heart in that my wise and noble brother has in this matter made 
me an object of censure for the world. Death would be better for me today, 
or what would be still better than death would be if I were not to be 
enjoined to such a task that is condemned by all the world. Forgive me and 
please do not be angry with me, woman of excellent vows.” Having said 
this, Laksmana cupped his hands in reverence and fell to the ground. 

[7-9] Now, when Maithilt saw Laksmana weeping with his hands 
cupped in reverence and wishing for his own death, she was greatly alarmed 
and said these words to him: “What is this? I do not understand. Tell me 
truthfully, Laksmana. I see that you are distraught. Is all well with the lord 
of the earth? You must have been compelled to take an oath by the lord of 
men. Tell me, here and now, about this anguish of yours. I command you.” 


[10-13] Prodded by Vaidehi, Laksmana, his mind distressed, his face 
downcast, and his throat choked with tears, spoke these words: “Daughter 
of Janaka, in the middle of his assembly the king heard vile rumors about 
you that are current in the city and the countryside. I cannot repeat those 
things before you, my lady, those things that the king has lodged in his 
heart. All anger has been set aside. Although you were shown to be 
innocent in my presence, you have been abandoned by the lord of men, who 
is fearful of the criticism of the people. You should not understand it in any 
other way, my lady. 

[14-18] “And so, taking cognizance of the king’s command as well as 
your reported pregnancy-longing in this regard, I will have to abandon you 
on the outskirts of the ashram. Here, on the bank of the Jahnavi, is the 
ascetic grove of the brahman-seers. It is holy and beautiful, so you should 
not be despondent, lovely lady. Valmiki, that extremely illustrious brahman 
and bull among sages, was the greatest friend of my father, Dasaratha. 
Resorting to the shade of the feet of that great sage, you must dwell here 
happily, daughter of Janaka, devoted to fasting, your mind composed. 
Living the life of a completely devoted wife and holding Rama always in 
your heart—conducting yourself in this way—you will attain the greatest 
happiness, my lady.” 


Sarga 47 
[1-2] When Janaka’s daughter Vaidehit had heard those terrible words of 
Laksmana, she was devastated and she collapsed. Unconscious for a short 
while, Janaka’s daughter, her eyes filled with tears, addressed Laksmana 
with sorrowful words: 

[3—7] “Surely, Laksmana, this body of mine, which is now seen to be a 
veritable incarnation of suffering, must have been created by the creator for 
suffering alone. What sin did I commit previously, or whom did I separate 
from his wife, that I—a virtuous wife of blameless conduct—have been 
abandoned by the lord of the earth? Earlier I dwelt in an ashram following 
Rama’s footsteps, and, Saumitri, living with that hardship, I endured it. 
How, dear boy, am I to live in an ashram cut off from everyone? And to 
whom, given over as I am to sorrow, am I to tell my sorrows? And what 
will I say to the sages when they ask what wrong I have done to the king 
and for what reason great Raghava has abandoned me? 


[8—10] “And by no means, Saumitri, can I abandon my life this very day 
in the waters of the Jahnavi, for then my husband’s royal lineage would be 
cut off. You must do as you are ordered, Saumitri. Leave me, whose lot is 
misery. You must abide by the instructions of the king. But hear my words. 
First, with your hands extended and cupped in reverence, and your head 
affectionately bowed to the feet of my mothers-in-law without distinction, 
you must inquire after the well-being of the king, saying: 

[11-12] “ “You must always act toward the people just as you do toward 
your brothers. For this would be the greatest righteousness and this would 
be your unsurpassed glory. I do not grieve for my own body, bull among 
men. But, your majesty, you must act righteously toward the people in such 
a way that you avoid their criticism, O delight of the Raghus.’ ” 

[13-16] As Sita was speaking in this fashion, Laksmana, his mind 
distressed, bowed his head to the ground and was unable to speak. Then, 
after making a respectful circumambulation, he once more boarded the 
boat, and, weeping loudly, he urged on the boatman. Crushed under a great 
burden of grief, he reached the northern bank and quickly mounted the 
carriage, almost unconscious in his misery. Laksmana then set forth, turning 
around again and again to gaze at Sita, who, like a woman without a 
protector, was clutching herself on the farther bank. 

[17-18] She gazed again and again at the distant carriage and at 
Laksmana, and as she watched, terrified, grief overwhelmed her. Bowed 
down under the burden of her suffering, the virtuous and illustrious woman, 
not seeing anyone to protect her, now wretched and given over to her 
suffering, wept loudly in the woods, which resounded with the cries of 
peacocks. 


Sarga 48 
[1-4] Seeing Sita crying, the sages’ sons, who were nearby, ran to where 
the holy Valmiki of profound intellect was staying. After reverently 
honoring the sage’s feet, the sons of the sages all informed that great seer 
about the sound of her weeping. “Holy one, a woman such as we have 
never seen before, who looks like Sri herself, perhaps the wife of some 
great man, 1s weeping with strangled cries in her bewilderment. You should 
see her straightaway, holy one. She looks like some goddess fallen from the 


heavens. For we do not think she is a mortal, and we should welcome her 
fittingly.” 

[5—6] When that knower of righteousness had heard those words of 
theirs, he, who had obtained special insight through asceticism, reached 
certainty in his mind and hastened to where Maithili was. When he had 
almost reached that spot on foot, the great sage, carrying a splendid guest- 
offering, stood on the bank of the Jahnavi and saw Raghava’s beloved wife, 
Sita, who was like a woman without a protector. 

[7-12] Valmiki, bull among sages, addressed Sita, who was crushed 
under the weight of her grief, with gentle words, gladdening her with his 
ebullient spirit: “You are Dasaratha’s daughter-in-law, R&ma’s virtuous 
chief queen, and the daughter of King Janaka. Welcome to you, O you who 
are devoted to your husband. Through my pious meditation, I recognized 
you, even as you were coming, and, in my heart, I determined the entire 
reason. I know through the vision I have obtained through austerities that 
you are without sin, Sita. As you are of a pure nature, Vaidehi, you shall 
now dwell with me. Not far from my ashram there are some ascetic women 
engaged in austerities. They will always care for you, my child, as they 
would their own child. Please accept this guest-offering, trusting and free 
from anxiety. You should be no more despondent than if you were returning 
home.” 

[13-14] When Sita had heard the sage’s extremely wonderful speech, 
she bowed her head to his feet and, cupping her hands in reverence, said, 
“So be it.” As the sage was departing, Sita followed behind him, her hands 
cupped in reverence. She followed him to where the ascetic women, 
composed and constantly engaged in righteousness, dwelt. 

[15-16] And they, seeing the sage approaching followed by Vaidehti, 
then came forward, filled with joy, and said these words: “Welcome to you, 
foremost of sages. It has been a long time since you have come, lord. We all 
greet you reverentially. Now please tell us what we are to do.” 

[17—20] When Valmiki had heard those words of theirs, he said this: 
“This is Sita who has come, the wife of wise Rama. She is the daughter-in- 
law of DaSaratha and the virtuous daughter of Janaka. Although she is 
without sin, she has been abandoned by her husband. I must care for her 
always. You venerable ladies should regard her with the greatest affection, 
and she is to be especially honored by you because of the respect owing to 


my words.” And then, after comforting Vaidehi again and again, the great 
and illustrious ascetic, surrounded by his disciples, returned to his own 
ashram. 


Sarga 49 

[1-8] But as for Laksmana, his mind distressed, he felt terrible anguish as 
he watched Sita Maithili being taken into the ashram. And that prince of 
immense blazing energy said to his counselor and charioteer, Sumantra: 
“Just imagine wise Rama’s suffering on account of Sita’s pain. What greater 
suffering than this could there possibly be for Raghava after he has sent 
away Janaka’s daughter, a wife of blameless conduct? I think it is clear, 
charioteer, that Raghava’s separation from Vaidehi has been caused by fate, 
and that fate is impossible to avert. For even Raghava, who, when angered, 
could slay the gods, along with the gandharvas and the asuras together with 
the raksasas, must submit to fate. Earlier, because of my father’s words, he 
dwelt in the very fearsome and deserted Dandaka wilderness for nine years 
and five. Still, much more painful than that is his banishment of Sita after 
hearing the criticism of the townsfolk. It seems cruel to me. Moreover, 
charioteer, what practice of righteousness has been accomplished in 
subjecting Maithili to this act—so destructive to one’s reputation—at the 
instigation of the townsfolk with their baseless allegations?” 

[9-11] When Sumantra had heard these various words that Laksmana 
had uttered, he cupped his hands in reverence and uttered this speech: “You 
should not suffer such anguish with regard to Maithili, Saumitri. For, 
Laksmana, all this was foretold long ago by the brahmans in the presence of 
your father. It is certain that Rama will be unhappy for the most part and 
will experience little happiness. And after a long time, that great and 
righteous man will abandon you and Maithili as well as Satrughna and 
Bharata. 

[12—17] “And, Saumitri, I really should not tell either you or Bharata 
those words uttered by Durvasas, which the king himself did not tell you. 
The seer uttered these words, bull among men, in my presence and that of 
the great king as well as in the presence of Vasistha. When that bull among 
men had heard the words of the seer, he said to me, ‘Charioteer, you must 
never divulge this to anyone.’ Mindful of that, it was my intention, gentle 
prince, that I would never prove false to the words of the guardian of the 


people. However, by no means should I leave this unsaid in your presence, 
gentle prince. And if you really want to hear it, then listen, delight of the 
Raghus. Although at that time the lord of men told me this as a secret, even 
so, I will tell it to you, for fate is impossible to avert.” 

[18] When Saumitri had heard those important words of his, filled as 
they were with profound meaning, he then said these words to the 
charioteer, “Tell me the truth.” 


Sarga 50 
[1-3] Encouraged by great Laksmana in this fashion, the charioteer began 
to relate the words that the seer had uttered: “A long time ago, Atri’s son, 
the great sage named Durvasas, passed the rainy season in the holy ashram 
of Vasistha. And your greatly illustrious father of immense blazing energy 
came in person to that ashram, eager to see his great purohita. 

[4-6] “Upon seeing the great sage, who blazed with energy like the sun, 
seated to the left of Vasistha, he humbly saluted those two sages, who were 
foremost among ascetics. Honored by them with words of welcome, a seat, 
water for washing his feet, and fruits and roots, he stayed with the sages. 
Around midday, the great seers held various delightful conversations as 
they sat there. 

[7-9] “Then, during one such conversation, the king, with his hands 
extended and cupped in reverence, addressed Atri’s great son, so rich in 
austerities: ‘Holy one, how long will my lineage endure? How long will my 
Rama live? How long will my other sons live? And how long will whatever 
sons Rama may have live? In keeping with my desire, holy one, please tell 
me. What does the future hold for my lineage?’ 

[10-14] “When Durvasas, of truly immense blazing energy, had heard 
the words that were spoken by King Dasaratha, he began to speak: ‘Rama 
will be the lord of Ayodhya for a long time, and his younger brothers will 
be happy and prosperous. And it is said that after a long time, that righteous 
man will be separated from you and illustrious Maithill for a certain reason. 
When he has ruled the kingdom for eleven thousand years, Rama will go to 
the Brahmaloka. After Kakutstha, conqueror of enemy citadels, has 
performed opulent asvamedhas, he will establish many royal lineages.’ 

[15-16] “When that sage of immense blazing energy and tremendous 
radiance had related everything about the lineage of the king, both past and 


future, he fell silent. Then, when the sage had fallen silent, King Dasaratha 
respectfully saluted those two great sages and returned once more to his 
splendid city. 

[17-18] “These were the words spoken by the sage long ago that I heard 
there and that I have kept in my heart. All this will not prove otherwise. 
Such being the case, you must not be tormented, Raghava, on account of 
either Sita or Raghava. You must be strong, best of men.” 

[19-20] When Laksmana had heard those truly extraordinary words that 
had been spoken by the charioteer, he experienced unequaled delight and 
cried, “Excellent! Excellent!” And as the two of them, the charioteer and 
Laksmana, were conversing in this fashion on the road, the sun set and they 
camped beside the Gomatt. 


Sarga 51 
[1-2] Having spent the night there beside the Gomati, Laksmana, the 
delight of the Raghus, arose in the morning and continued on his way. At 
midday, the great chariot-warrior entered Ayodhya, which was filled with 
precious things and thronged with happy and prosperous people. 

[3-7] But the exceedingly wise Saumitri became extremely dejected, 
thinking, “Once I get there and approach Rama’s feet, what shall I say?” 
And as he was brooding in this fashion, Rama’s extremely splendid palace, 
as radiant as the moon, appeared before him. Getting down at the gate of 
the king’s palace, the foremost of men, his face downcast, his mind 
distressed, entered unhindered. Through eyes filled with tears, he saw 
before him his elder brother Raghava, who sat dejected on his splendid 
throne. His mind distressed, Laksmana grasped Rama’s feet, and then, 
composing himself, he cupped his hands in reverence and spoke in a 
dejected voice: 

[8—13] “Honoring my noble brother’s command, I have abandoned 
Janaka’s daughter, as was specified, at the beautiful ashram of Valmiki on 
the banks of the Ganges. Now I have returned again, hero, to serve at your 
feet. You must not grieve, tiger among men, for such is the course of fate. 
For men like you, strong and wise, never grieve. All accumulations end in 
loss, all elevations in falls, all unions end in separation, and all life ends in 
death. Through your mind alone, you are able to conquer yourself by 
yourself and even all the worlds, Kakutstha. What then to say about 


suffering such as this? Bulls among men such as you, your majesty, are not 
confused over such matters as that for which Maithill was abandoned out of 
fear of malicious rumors. So, tiger among men, with your mind composed 
through fortitude, you must abandon this feeble mental state. You must not 
torment yourself.” 

[14-16] And addressed in this fashion by great Laksmana, Kakutstha 
spoke with the greatest pleasure to Saumitri, who was so loving to his 
friends: “It is just as you say, Laksmana, best of men. I am content, hero, 
with regard to my command as to what had to be done. You have brought 
me happiness, gentle brother, and banished my torment. I have been 
comforted by your very sweet words, Laksmana.” 


>Sarga 51—1* = Appendix I, Number 8, Lines 1-48 
[1—3 = ll. 1-6] When Rama had heard those extremely wonderful words of 
Laksmana, he was greatly pleased, and he spoke these words: “It is hard to 
find such a kinsman as you, especially in these days, wide-eyed and highly 
intelligent Laksmana. Now listen to what is in my heart, gentle brother of 
auspicious marks. Then, once you have heard it, you must act upon my 
words. 

[4—6 = Il. 7-12] “Four days have passed, gentle brother, during which I 
have not issued any instructions as to what needs to be done. This pierces 
me to the vitals, Saumitri. Summon the officials, purohitas, ministers, and 
the men and women who would petition me about something they would 
have me do, bull among men. For a king who does not carry out the 
people’s business day after day will, after death, be hurled into a terrible 
hell. Of this there is no doubt. 

[7-8 = ll. 13-16] “I have heard that long ago there was a king named 
Nrga, who was a great chariot-warrior. He was a protector of the earth on 
the earth, reverential toward brahmans, a speaker of truth, and virtuous. 
Now, on one occasion at Puskara that foremost of kings gave to the 
brahmans ten million cows, adorned with gold, together with their calves. 

[9-10 = Il. 17-20] “At that time, there was a poor brahman, a keeper of 
the sacred fires, who lived by gleaning. His cow, a good milker, wandered 
off, together with her calf, through mingling with other cows. Afflicted with 
hunger, he searched for his lost cow here and there, but he could not find 
her in any kingdom, even after many, many years. 


[11-14 = Il. 21-28] “Then, having come to Kanakhala, he saw in the 
house of a brahman his own cow, which was in good health and whose calf 
had grown up. Then the twice-born brahman addressed her by her own 
name, saying, ‘Come, Sabala!’ And the cow heard his voice. Recognizing 
the voice of that twice-born brahman, who was afflicted by hunger, the cow 
followed behind him as he, who was like fire, was departing. And as that 
twice-born brahman went along, he said to the seer, ‘This is my cow. She 
was given to me by that lion among kings, Nrga, during a donation.’ 

[15-17 = Il. 29-34] “Then a great dispute arose between those two 
learned brahmans. Still arguing with each other, they approached the donor. 
Remaining at the gateway of the king’s palace for many days and nights, 
and yet not receiving an audience with Nrga, they became furious. And 
those two great and outstanding twice-born brahmans, furious and greatly 
distressed, uttered these terrible words: 

[18—21 = Il. 35-42] “ ‘Since you do not grant an audience to those who 
are petitioners for the resolution of a matter, you shall become a lizard, 
invisible to all beings. For a long time—many thousands of years and many 
hundreds of years—having become a lizard, you will live in a burrow. 
Visnu shall be born in this world in a human form, as the increaser of the 
glory of the Yadus. He shall be known as Vasudeva. Your majesty, he shall 
liberate you from this curse uttered by the twice-born brahmans. And by 
that time, your redemption will be effected.’ 

[22—24 = Il. 43-48] “When those two brahmans had unleashed that curse 
in this fashion, they were freed from their cares, and they gave that old and 
feeble cow to some other brahman. And thus did the king suffer that very 
terrible curse. For among those petitioning for something they want done, 
conflict results in harm to kings. So, therefore, you must quickly have those 
who are seeking redress approach me for an audience. For does not a king 
obtain the fruit of an affair that is well transacted?” 


°Sarga 51—2* = Appendix I, Number 8, Lines 49-82 
[1-3 = Il. 49-54] Upon hearing Rama’s words, Laksmana, who grasped 
their essential meaning, cupped his hands in reverence and said to Raghava 
of brightly blazing energy: “For a very minor offense, Kakutstha, those two 
brahmans pronounced upon the royal seer Nrga a very grave curse, which 
was like a second rod of Yama. When he heard that he had committed an 


offense, what did that bull among men, King Nrga, say to those two twice- 
born brahmans, who were so filled with rage?” 

[4—6 = Il. 55—60] Addressed in this fashion by Laksmana, Raghava said: 
“Listen, gentle brother, to how that king, who was afflicted by the curse, 
acted long ago. Now, when Nrga realized that the two brahmans had gone 
on their way, he summoned all his ministers and the townsfolk, along with 
his purohita. Then the king, completely overcome with misery, addressed 
all of his subjects, saying: “Listen to me attentively! 

[7-11 = ll. 61—70] “ ‘Now two blameless brahmans, Narada and Parvata, 
having alerted me to the great danger facing me, went off to the highest 
heaven, having become as the wind. You must consecrate the prince named 
Vasu here and now. And let a comfortable burrow, approved by the artisans, 
be fashioned. Rather, let the artisans fashion one burrow that is proof 
against the rainy season, a second that is proof against the cold season, and 
yet one more that is comfortable during the summer. And let many different 
kinds of fruit trees, bearing many different kinds of flavors, as well as 
flowering creepers, be planted thickly around them. And let there always be 
wonderfully fragrant flowers for a distance of one and a half leagues around 
my burrows.’ 

[12-15 = ll. 71-78] “Once he had made this arrangement, he then 
installed Vasu, saying: ‘Constant in righteousness, you must protect the 
people according to the code of the kshatriyas, my son. Best of men, you 
have witnessed how this curse was made to fall upon me by two angry 
twice-born brahmans for even such a minor offense. But you must not 
suffer on my account, bull among men. For destiny, which has brought me 
to this misfortune, is all powerful, son. Everyone receives what he must 
receive, whether pleasure or pain, according to his deeds in a previous birth, 
my child. Therefore, do not be despondent.’ 

[16-17 = Il. 79-82] “When he had spoken in this fashion there to his 
son, that bull among men, the very illustrious King Nrga, went off to live in 
his well-crafted burrow. And thus, having entered a burrow, which was well 
adorned within, Nrga adhered to the command of the twice-born brahmans 
for many tens of thousands of years.” 


dSarga 51—3* = Appendix I, Number 8, Lines 83-123 


[1-3 = ll. 83-88] “I have thus told you a detailed account of Nrga’s curse. 
But if you desire to hear more, then listen to yet another tale.” Addressed in 
this fashion by Rama, Saumitri once more said, “I never get my fill of such 
marvelous tales, your majesty.” Addressed in this fashion by Laksmana, 
Rama, the delight of the Iksvakus, began to tell a tale that was exemplary of 
righteousness. 

[4—6 = Il. 89-94] “There was a king named Nimi. Heroic and established 
in righteousness, he was the twelfth son of the extremely great Iksvaku. At 
that time, near the ashram of Gautama, that king, who was endowed with 
might, founded a city similar to the city of the gods. He himself aptly 
named the city ‘Vaijayanta.’ And that was where the illustrious royal seer 
Nimi made his dwelling. 

[7-10 = Il. 95-102] “After he had founded that very great city, this 
thought struck him: ‘I will perform a long sacrificial session.’ This 
delighted his father’s heart. Then that royal seer Nimi, foremost of the 
Iksvakus, after taking leave of his father, Iksvaku, the son of Manu, chose 
Atri, Angiras, and that treasure-store of austerities Bhrgu, as well as that 
bull among twice-born brahmans Vasistha, who was the first to be born of 
Brahma. But Vasistha said to Nimi, the delight of royal seers, ‘I was 
previously chosen by Indra. Please wait until after that.’ 

[11-13 = ll. 103-107] “Then the brahman Gautama took his place. As 
for Vasistha of immense blazing energy, he performed Indra’s sacrifice. And 
King Nimi, the lord of men, assembled those brahmans and sacrificed in the 
vicinity of his own city, not far from the Himalayas. The king entered a 
state of consecration for five thousand years. 

[14—16 = Il. 108-113] “However, at the conclusion of Indra’s sacrifice, 
the holy seer, blameless Vasistha, approached the king in order to perform 
the duties of the hotr priest. But when Vasistha, the foremost of brahmans, 
saw that that sacrifice had been completed by Gautama, he was seized with 
a towering rage. Expecting to see the king, he sat waiting for a while. But as 
for the king, he had gone happily to sleep on that day. 

[17-18 = ll. 114-117] “Then, because he could not see the royal seer, 
anger flared up in great Vasistha, and he began to speak, ‘Since, O king, 
having treated me with contempt, you chose someone else, your body shall 
be devoid of consciousness.’ 


[19-21 = ll. 118-123] “Then, upon waking, the royal seer heard about 
the curse that had been uttered, and, beside himself with rage, the king said 
this to the one born of Brahma: ‘While I was sleeping unawares, you, 
perverted by anger, unleashed upon me the fire of your curse, which was 
like a second rod of Yama. Therefore, brahman-seer, your body too, with its 
radiant splendor shall, no doubt, be rendered devoid of consciousness.’ ” 


°Sarga 51—4* = Appendix I, Number 8, Lines 124-171 
[1—2 = Il. 124-127] When Laksmana, the slayer of enemy heroes, had heard 
Rama’s words, he cupped his hands in reverence and said to Raghava of 
brightly blazing energy, “Once they had left their bodies, Kakutstha, how 
did those two—the twice-born brahman and the king—who were honored 
by the gods, come to be embodied once again?” 

[3—4 = ll. 128-131] Addressed in this fashion by Laksmana, Rama, the 
delight of the Iksvakus, who was possessed of immense blazing energy, 
replied to that bull among men, “When those two righteous men—the king 
and the brahman-seer—had abandoned their bodies because of their mutual 
curses, both of them, so rich in austerities, became as the wind. 

[S—7 = ll. 132-137] “Lacking a body, the great sage Vasistha, of 
immense blazing energy, went to his father, Brahma, for the sake of another 
body. Then, after reverently honoring the feet of the wise god of gods, he, 
who had become as air, spoke these words to Grandfather Brahma: “Blessed 
lord, I have been rendered bodiless by Nimi’s curse. Please show your grace 
with regard to the creation of another body.’ 

[8—10 = Il. 138-143] “Then the self-existent Brahma of immeasurable 
splendor said to him: ‘You, who are greatly illustrious, must first enter the 
semen released by Mitra and Varuna. And so you will not be born from a 
womb, foremost of the twice-born, but, endowed with great righteousness, 
you Shall, once more, come under my control.’ Addressed in this fashion by 
the god, he made a reverential salutation and, after respectfully 
circumambulating Grandfather Brahma, he went quickly to Varuna’s abode. 

[11-12 = ll. 144-147] “Now at that very time, Mitra was sharing 
Varuna’s rule. He had come there and, together with that lord of the milk 
ocean, was being honored by the lords of the gods. And at the same time, 
Urvasi, the foremost of the apsarases, surrounded by her companions, 
happened to come to that place. 


[13-15 = Il. 148-153] “When Varuna saw Urvasi, who was endowed 
with such beauty, playing in his own abode, he was overcome with 
tremendous lust for her. Varuna then asked that foremost of apsarases— 
whose eyes were like lotus petals and whose face was like the full moon— 
to make love with him. But cupping her hands in reverence, she replied to 
Varuna, ‘O lord of the gods, I have already been asked by Mitra personally.’ 

[16-20 = Il. 154-163] “Then Varuna, tormented by the arrows of 
Kandarpa, said these words: ‘I will release my semen into this pot fashioned 
by the god. Since you do not wish to make love with me, fair lady of lovely 
hips, I shall satisfy my desire for you and obtain release in this way.’ Then, 
when Urvasi had heard that eloquent speech of the world guardian Varuna, 
she was extremely pleased, and she said these words: ‘Let this be as you 
wish. My heart belongs to you. My love for you is greater; nevertheless, my 
body belongs to Mitra, O lord.’ When he was addressed in this fashion by 
Urvasi, he discharged into that pot his great and wondrous semen, which 
was as radiant as a blazing fire. 

[21-24 = ll. 164-171] “But as for Urvast, she went to where the god 
Mitra was. Mitra, however, in a towering rage, said these words to Urvasi: 
‘Having been first solicited by me, why did you not reject him? Why did 
you choose another with your heart, slut? Because of this wicked act, you, 
sullied by my wrath, shall descend to the world of mortals and dwell there 
for some time. Budha’s son, the royal seer Purtiravas, is the king of Kasi. 
You must go to him this very day, foolish woman. For he shall be your 
lord.’ ” 


fSarga 51—5* = Appendix I, Number 8, Lines 172-212 
[1—2 = Il. 172-175] When Laksmana had heard that divine story, which was 
so wonderful to contemplate, he was supremely delighted, and he said these 
words to Raghava: “Once they had left their bodies, Kakutsha, how did 
those two—the twice-born brahman and the king—who were honored by 
the gods, come to be embodied once again?” 

[3—8 = Il. 176-187] When truly valorous Rama had heard that speech of 
his, he told him the tale of great Vasistha. “Then, best of men, from that pot 
of the great god, which was filled with semen, those two brahmans, 
foremost among seers and filled with blazing energy, were born. The first to 
be born from it was the holy seer Agastya. Saying to Mitra, ‘I am not your 


son,’ he left him. For Mitra’s semen had first been deposited in Urvasi, and 
it came to be in the pot where the semen of Varuna already was. Then, after 
some time, that divinity of the Iksvakus, Vasistha, endowed with blazing 
energy, was born of Mitra and Varuna. And the moment Vasistha was born, 
Iksvaku, of immense blazing energy, chose that blameless sage as his 
purohita for the prosperity of our lineage, gentle brother. 

[9 = Il. 188-189] “Thus have I told you of the emergence of great 
Vasistha with his new body, gentle brother. Now hear about the birth of 
Nimi, just as 1t happened. 

[10-11 = ll. 190-193] “When the wise seers saw that the king was 
disembodied, they then all performed a sacrifice on his behalf for the 
duration of his consecration. And those foremost among the twice-born 
brahmans, along with the townsfolk and servants, preserved the body of the 
lord of men, worshiping it with fragrances and garlands. 

[12—13 = ll. 194-197] “So then, upon the completion of the sacrifice, 
Bhrgu, who was there, said this: ‘I shall make your consciousness return, as 
I am pleased with you, your majesty.’ Then all the gods, being greatly 
pleased, said this to Nimi’s consciousness: ‘Choose a boon, royal seer. 
Where shall your consciousness be manifested?’ 

[14-17 = Il. 198-204] “Addressed in this fashion by all the gods, Nimi’s 
consciousness then said, ‘I would dwell in the eyes of all beings, O 
foremost among the gods.’ The wise gods then said to Nimi’s 
consciousness: ‘Very well. Having become as the wind, you shall move 
about in the eyes of all beings. On your account, lord of the earth, eyes will 
blink again and again for the sake of rest, as you, who have become as air, 
move about in them.’ Having spoken in this fashion, all the wise gods 
departed as they had come. 

[18-21 = Il. 205—212] “But as for those great seers, so rich 1n austerities, 
they placed on Nimi’s body a fire stick. And those great seers then spun it 
back and forth vigorously to the accompaniment of mantras and oblations 
in order to produce a son for Nimi. As that fire stick was being spun back 
and forth there, a great ascetic came forth. Because of the spinning back and 
forth [mathana], they called him ‘Mithi.’ And because of such a birth 
[janana], he became Janaka. And since he was born of someone who was 
bodiless [videha], he was known as Vaideha. And thus was born Janaka, of 


immense blazing energy, the first king of Videha. He was called Mithi and, 
because of him, his lineage is known as Maithila.” 


&Sarga 51-6* = Appendix I, Number 8, Lines 213-258 

[1-3 = ll. 213-218] Now, as Rama was speaking in this fashion, Laksmana, 
the slayer of enemy heroes, addressed the great man, who seemed to shine 
with his blazing energy: “Tiger among kings, it was a great thing, 
astonishing and wonderful, that happened long ago to disembodied 
Vasistha, along with Nimi. But even though he was consecrated for 
sacrifice, King Nimi, who was a kshatriya hero, did not show any 
forbearance toward the great Vasistha.” 

[4—5 = ll. 219-222] As Laksmana was speaking in this fashion, Rama, 
the foremost of those who give delight, spoke once more to his heroic 
brother of brightly blazing energy: “Anger such as was borne patiently by 
Yayati, who relied on the quality of goodness, is hard to endure, Saumitri. 
Now listen to this carefully. 

[6-8 = I]. 223-228] “King Yayati, who caused his people to prosper, was 
the son of Nahusa. He had two wives, gentle brother, who were unmatched 
in beauty on earth. The one that was held in higher esteem by that royal 
seer, the son of Nahusa, was a daitva woman who was called Sarmistha, the 
daughter of Vrsaparvan. And, bull among men, fair-waisted Devayani, the 
daughter of Usanas, was also Yayati’s wife, but she was not beloved by the 
king. 

[9-10 = Il. 229-232] “Then they had two sons, who were handsome and 
steadfast. Sarmistha gave birth to Piru and Devayani to Yadu. But Ptru was 
the more beloved of the king because of his virtues and for his mother’s 
sake. Then, filled with unhappiness, Yadu said to his mother: 

[11-13 = Il. 233-238] “ ‘Although you are born in the lineage of godlike 
Bhargava, who is tireless in action, you must endure this heartfelt sorrow 
and this unbearable disrespect. So, my lady, let us together enter the fire, the 
eater of oblations, and let the king take his pleasure for many nights with 
that daughter of the daityas. But if this is to be endured by you, please grant 
me permission. You may tolerate this, but I will not. Without a doubt, I shall 
die.’ 

[14-17 = Il. 239-246] “Then, when Devayani had heard this speech of 
her son, who was weeping and sorely afflicted, she was in a towering rage, 


and she called to mind her father. Realizing his daughter’s intention, the 
Bhargava came swiftly to where Devayani was. Seeing that his daughter 
was not her usual self and that she was despondent and distracted, her father 
said these words: ‘What is this?’ In a towering rage, Devayani said these 
words to her father, the Bhargava of brightly blazing energy, who was 
questioning her again and again: 

[18-20 = Il. 247-252] “ ‘I can no longer live, foremost of sages. 
Therefore, I shall enter the fire or the water, or I shall consume virulent 
poison. You do not understand how miserable and disrespected I am. For 
when one mistreats a tree, those things that depend on the tree are destroyed 
as well. Having insulted a Bhargava through his contempt, the royal seer 
now shows his contempt for me, nor does he treat me with respect.’ 

[21—23 = I]. 253-258] “When USanas had heard those words of hers, he 
was overcome with anger, and he began to say this concerning the son of 
Nahusa: ‘Since, lacking self-control, the son of Nahusa has treated me with 
contempt, he shall attain decrepitude and become withered with extreme 
senescence.’ When he had spoken in this fashion and had comforted his 
daughter, the illustrious brahman-seer Bhargava returned to his own abode.” 


hSarga 51—7* = Appendix I, Number 8, Lines 259-302 

[1—3 = Il. 259-264] “When the son of Nahusa had heard that Usanas was 
enraged, he was afflicted by that curse. Then, having attained extreme old 
age, he said this to his son: ‘You are a knower of righteousness, Yadu. 
Therefore, for my sake, my illustrious son, you must accept this extreme old 
age, while I enjoy the pleasures of sex. For I have not thus far had my fill of 
sensual pleasures, bull among men. Once I have enjoyed them to my heart’s 
content, then only will I take back this old age.’ 

[4—5 = ll. 265-268] “But when Yadu had heard those words, he replied 
to the bull among men: ‘Let your beloved son Piru take on this old age. I 
have been excluded, O king, with regard to objects of value and even from 
your presence. So let those others with whom you have been enjoying the 
objects of pleasure take on your old age, your majesty.’ 

[6-9 = Il. 269-276] “When the king had heard those words of his, he 
said to Piru, ‘For my sake, great-armed prince, you must take on this old 
age.’ Addressed in this fashion by the son of Nahusa, Piru, his hands 
cupped in reverence, said, ‘I am fortunate. I am favored. I abide by your 


command.’ Acknowledging Ptru’s words with the greatest delight, the son 
of Nahusa attained unequaled joy, and he transferred his old age. Then the 
king, once more young, performed thousands of sacrifices and ruled the 
earth for many thousands of years. [269-76] 

[10-12 = ll. 277-282] “Now, after a long time, the king said to Puru: 
‘Give back that old age, my son. Return that deposit to me. My son, I 
transferred that old age to you as a trust. Therefore, I shall take it back. Do 
not be concerned. Great-armed prince, I am pleased with your acceptance of 
my command, and so, filled with affection, I shall consecrate you as the 
lord of men.’ 

[13-16 = Il. 283-290] “After King Yayati, son of Nahusa, had spoken to 
his son Piru in this fashion, he spoke these words in anger to Devayani’s 
son: ‘In you, I have given birth to an incorrigible raksasa in the form of a 
son. Since you disobeyed my command, you shall have no power over the 
people. Since you disregarded me, your father, who is your guru, you shall 
father fearsome rdksasas who are ydtudhanas. And, evil-minded prince, 
your lineage, arising from the Lunar Dynasty, will not endure. For your 
descendants will be as ill disciplined as you are.’ 

[17—20 = Il. 291-298] “Once he had addressed Yadu in this fashion, the 
royal seer honored Piru—who would enhance the kingdom—with royal 
consecration and then entered an ashram. Then, after a long time, he met his 
appointed end. And in this way, King Yayati, the son of Nahusa, went to the 
highest heaven. Meanwhile, the very illustrious king Piru ruled that 
kingdom with great righteousness in the foremost of cities, Pratisthana, in 
the kingdom of Kasi. But Yadu sired yatudhdnas by the thousands as well 
as an enduring lineage of kings in the inaccessible city of Krauficavana. 

[21-22 = Il. 299-302] “And thus, according to the code of the kshatriyas, 
Yayati tolerated the curse unleashed by USanas, as Nimi did not. I have now 
told you everything, gentle brother. Let us grant audiences to all those who 
have legitimate business so that there is no dereliction such as there was in 
the case of Nrga.” 

[Interpolated Passage III follows sarga 51—7*; see PVR 7: 1318-29] 


Sarga 52 
[1-2] Then Sumantra entered and said these words to Raghava: “Your 
majesty, some ascetics who dwell on the banks of the Yamuna—great seers 


who have placed the Bhargava Cyavana at their head—are being held at the 
gateway. Filled with affection, great king, they are in haste and request an 
audience with you, tiger among men.” 

[3-4] When Rama, who understood righteousness, had heard those 
words of his, he said, “Have those great twice-born brahmans, whose leader 
is the Bhargava, enter.” Honoring the king’s command, the doorkeeper, 
cupping his hands at his head in reverence, then had those many esteemed 
ascetics enter. 

[S—9] Then more than one hundred great ascetics, glowing with their 
own blazing energy, entered the king’s palace. Bearing holy water from all 
the sacred sites and fruits and roots in full vessels, those twice-born 
brahmans offered them in abundance to Rama. And Rama, moved by 
affection, accepted all of that—all the waters from sacred sites and the 
various fruits. And that great-armed hero said to all those great seers, 
“Please sit on these excellent seats, in due order.” When the great seers had 
heard R&ma’s speech, they all sat down on beautiful, gilded seats fit for 
ascetics. 

[10-12] Then Raghava, the conqueror of enemy citadels, self-controlled 
and cupping his hands in reverence, regarded the seers seated there and 
spoke these words: “What is the purpose of your visit? What shall I do, O 
you whose wealth consists of asceticism? I am at the command of the great 
seers and will happily fulfill all your wishes. This entire kingdom and the 
life residing in my breast—everything of mine exists only for the sake of 
the twice-born. This is the truth I am telling you.” 

[13-16] When they heard those words of his, there was a great cry of 
approbation on the part of those seers of fierce austerities who dwelt on the 
banks of the Yamuna. Filled with the greatest delight, those great sages 
said: “This is characteristic of you alone, best of men, and of no one else on 
earth. Many extremely powerful kings whom we approached, your majesty, 
without even hearing about the importance of the undertaking, were not 
inclined to give their assent. But you, on the other hand, because of your 
respect for brahmans, have given your assent without even looking into the 
matter. You must do this; for, without a doubt, you are the one to do it. You 
must save the seers from a terrible danger.” 


Sarga 53 


[1] Lauded by the seers who were speaking in this fashion, Kakutstha said 
these words: “Tell me what needs to be done for you. I will banish your 
fear.” 

[2-4] As Kakutstha was speaking in this fashion, Bhargava said these 
words: “Listen, lord of men, to the cause of our fear and that of our country. 
Long ago, Rama, in the Krta Yuga, there was a great asura named Madhu. 
That extremely powerful descendant of Diti was the eldest son of Lola. 
Devoted to brahmans, a source of refuge and perfect in intellect, his 
friendship with the lofty gods was unequaled. 

[S—6] “This Madhu was endowed with might and intent upon 
righteousness. Because of his high regard for him, Rudra gave him a 
marvelous boon. Then that great divinity, very pleased, extracting an 
extremely powerful and extremely radiant lance from his own lance, 
presented it. Then he said these words: 

[7-9] “ “You have performed this splendid and unequaled righteousness 
in order to propitiate me. Filled with the greatest affection, I give you this 
supreme weapon. So long as you do not oppose the gods or the brahmans, 
the lance will remain yours, great asura. Otherwise, it will vanish. This 
lance will reduce to ashes whoever might be so incautious as to challenge 
you in battle, and it will then return to your hand.’ 

[10-14] “When the great asura had obtained this boon from Rudra in 
this fashion, he then prostrated himself before Mahadeva and said these 
words: “Blessed one, may this unsurpassed lance always remain with my 
lineage. For you, O God, are the lord of the gods.’ Siva Mahadeva, the God 
and lord of all beings, replied to Madhu, who was speaking: ‘It shall not be 
so. But your excellent words, prompted by my grace, must not prove 
fruitless. The lance shall pass on to your son alone. As long as this lance 
shall remain in your son’s hand, he, lance in hand, will be invulnerable to 
all beings.’ 

[15-17] “And then, when Madhu had received that extremely marvelous 
boon from the God in this fashion, that foremost of the asuras had a 
resplendent palace built. His beloved and illustrious wife was the radiant 
Kumbhinasi, she who was the child of Visvavasu by Anala. She had an 
immensely powerful and fearsome son named Lavana. From childhood 
onward he was evil and did only wicked things. 


[18-20] “Seeing that his son was ill disciplined, Madhu was filled with 
sorrow. He gave way to grief, but he said nothing to him. He left this world 
and entered the ocean, the abode of Varuna, after bestowing the lance upon 
Lavana and informing him of the boon. Through the power of that lance 
and because of his own evil nature, he torments the three worlds and 
especially the ascetics. 

[21—23] “Such is the power of Lavana, and such is the nature of that 
lance. Having heard this, Kakutstha, you must be the one who decides. For 
you are our ultimate recourse. Up until now we seers, afflicted with fear, 
have begged many kings for safety, but, hero, we could find no one to 
protect us. Since we heard that Ravana was slain, along with his troops and 
mounts, we can find no other king on earth to protect us, Rama. And so, 
afflicted by the fear of Lavana, we seek protection.” 


Sarga 54 
[1—2] Once that had been related, Rama, his hands cupped in reverence, 
replied to the seers, ““What does Lavana eat? How does he conduct himself? 
And where does he live?” When the seers had heard the words of Raghava, 
they all informed him of how Lavana had thrived. 

[3-5] “His diet consists of all creatures, but especially ascetics. His 
conduct is that of perpetual ferocity, and he always lives in Madhuvana. He 
always makes his daily meal after killing tens of thousands of lions, tigers, 
deer, and elephants, as well as men. Then that immensely powerful creature, 
like Yama himself, the ender of all things, with his jaws gaping wide at the 
time of universal destruction, devours still other creatures.” 

[6-9] When Raghava had heard those words, he said to the great sages: 
“T will have that raksasa slain. Let your fear be gone.” When he had thus 
made this promise to those sages of fierce blazing energy, the delight of the 
Raghus addressed his brothers, who were all assembled, “Who is going to 
kill Lavana, heroes? Please determine which one—great-armed Bharata or, 
on the other hand, Satrughna—should deal with him.” Addressed in this 
fashion by Raghava, Bharata said these words: “I will kill him. Please let 
me deal with him.” 

[10-14] When Laksmana’s younger brother had heard Bharata’s words, 
which were so expressive of heroism and valor, he stood up, leaving his 
golden seat. Prostrating himself before the lord of men, Satrughna said 


these words: “The great-armed middlemost delight of the Raghus has 
already done his duty. My revered elder brother earlier guarded the deserted 
city of Ayodhya while suffering torment in his heart until the return of his 
revered elder brother. The great prince experienced many hardships, your 
majesty, as he lay on his painful beds in Nandigrama. He lived on fruits and 
roots and wore matted locks and barkcloth garments. Having experienced 
such pain, the delight of the Raghavas should not once again experience 
such suffering while I am here to be dispatched, your majesty.” 

[15-18] As Satrughna was speaking in this fashion, Raghava once again 
spoke: “So be it, Kakutstha. You must carry out my command. I shall 
consecrate you as king in Madhu’s lovely city. Let Bharata stay here, great- 
armed hero, if you are concerned about him. You are heroic, well trained, 
and capable of resettling that city, which was so beloved of Madhu, as well 
as its splendid countryside. For whoever uproots a lineage and then, upon 
the destruction of the king, fails to install another king, descends to hell. 

[19-21] “Once you have slain Madhu’s son, the evil-intentioned Lavana, 
you must rule that kingdom in accordance with righteousness, if you heed 
my words. And you must not raise any objection, hero, in connection with 
my words. A younger brother must obey the commands of his elder brother. 
Of this there is no doubt. You must accept the consecration I have 
undertaken, Kakutstha, one that is accompanied by rites and mantras 
performed by the brahmans headed by Vasistha.” 


Sarga 55 
i[1; 971*; 2a—d; 973*1-6; 2ef; 977*] But when he was addressed in this 
fashion by Rama, mighty Satrughna was extremely embarrassed, and he 
spoke hesitantly: “I feel that there is something wrong in this affair, 
Kakutstha, lord of men. How can the junior-most be consecrated when there 
are elder brothers living? It is true, bull among men, that an order must 
inevitably be carried out. And your command, illustrious prince, is 
especially inviolable. Since our middle brother had already made his vow, I 
should not have spoken after that. I spoke improperly in saying that I would 
slay the fearsome Lavana in battle. And, bull among men, this wrongful 
speech of mine will have dire consequences, for one should not speak 
further once an elder has spoken. It was filled with unrighteousness and 
would exclude one from heaven. I shall not speak after you a second time, 


Kakutstha. Your majesty, bull among men, I will carry out your wishes. 
Kakutstha, delight of the Raghus, please exonerate me from any 
wrongdoing with regard to what I have done.” 

[3-5] And when that hero, great Satrughna, had spoken in this fashion, 
Rama, delighted, addressed Laksmana and Bharata: “Carefully fetch the 
requisites for the consecration. I will consecrate this invincible tiger among 
men this very day. You two Kakutsthas, acting on my orders, must bring 
together the purohita, the vedic brahmans, the sacrificial priests, and all my 
counselors.” 

[6-8] Following the king’s command, those great chariot-warriors did 
so. Then, having placed at their head the purohita with all the requisites for 
the consecration, they entered the king’s palace, which was like the mansion 
of Indra, smasher of citadels. And then the majestic consecration of great 
Satrughna commenced, bringing joy to Raghava and to the city. Then, 
placing the consecrated Satrughna on his lap, Raghava spoke these sweet 
words, inciting his blazing martial energy: 

[9-13] “Here is a divine arrow for you. It is infallible and a conqueror of 
enemy citadels. With it, gentle delight of the Raghus, you shall kill Lavana. 
This arrow was created, Kakutstha, when the self-existent and invincible 
god, whom even the gods and asuras could not perceive, lay upon the vast 
ocean. For, O hero, although he was imperceptible to all beings, he was 
overcome with rage, and he created this greatest of arrows in order to kill 
the evil-minded Madhu and Kaitabha, who constituted an obstacle. And so, 
desiring to create the three worlds, he killed those two in battle with this 
foremost of arrows. Then he created the worlds. I did not release this arrow 
earlier when I wanted to kill Ravana, Satrughna, fearing that there might be 
a great panic among creatures. 

[14—20] “Moreover, the great lance that he has, that supreme weapon, 
was given by the great three-eyed Siva to Madhu for the destruction of his 
enemies. Leaving it in his palace, where it is continually worshiped, he 
searches all directions and so gets his food. And whenever anyone seeking 
battle challenges him, that raksasa seizes that lance and reduces him to 
ashes. So you, tiger among men, must stand outside the gateway before he 
enters the city while he is still without his weapon. Then, great-armed bull 
among men, you must challenge him to battle before he has entered his 
palace. Only then will you kill that raksasa. But if you act in any other way, 


he will be impossible to kill. If, however, you act in this fashion, hero, he 
will be destroyed. I have now told you everything, including the means of 
evading that lance. For the decree of majestic black-throated Siva is 
impossible to violate.” 


Sarga 56 

[1-6] When the delight of the Raghus had spoken in this fashion to 
Satrughna Kakutstha and had praised him again and again, he once more 
uttered excellent words: “Let these four thousand cavalry, two thousand 
chariots, and a hundred war-elephants accompany you, Satrughna, as well 
as actors and dancers and town shopkeepers carrying their various wares, 
bull among men. And take ten thousand gold and silver pieces and, 
Satrughna, bull among men, go with wagons sufficient for that treasure. 
For, heroic best of men, with words and gifts you must win over your 
unsurpassed army, which must be well maintained, happy, and well fed. 
For, Raghava, where your troop of retainers, who must be kept happy, will 
be stationed, they will be without provisions, wives, and kinsmen. 

[7-12] “Therefore, having dispatched your vast host, filled with 
contented troops, you, your bow in hand, must then proceed alone to 
Madhu’s woods. You must proceed unsuspected in such a way that Lavana, 
Madhu’s son, does not realize that you are coming, eager for battle. There is 
no other way for him to be killed, bull among men. For whoever comes 
within the range of Lavana’s sight will inevitably be slain by him. When the 
hot season is over and the rains are at hand, you must kill Lavana, gentle 
brother. For that is the proper time to deal with that evil-minded creature. 
Placing the great seers at their head, let your soldiers march forth, such that 
they may cross the waters of the Jahnavi during the remainder of the hot 
season. Then, swift-striding warrior, once you have encamped your entire 
army on the bank of the river, you must go on ahead determinedly with your 
bow.” 

[13-17] Addressed in this fashion by Rama, Satrughna assembled the 
immensely powerful captains of his army and spoke these words: “The 
various places at which you are to make camp are well known to you. You 
are to camp at them peacefully, in such a way that no one suffers any 
hardship.” When he had thus given them their orders and sent forth his 
great army, he made his respectful salutations to Kausalya, Sumitra, and 


Kaikeyi. After reverentially circumambulating Rama and bowing his head 
at his feet, Satrughna, scorcher of his foes, granted leave by Rama, bowed 
with hands cupped in reverence to Laksmana and Bharata. Then immensely 
powerful and self-controlled  Satrughna, after _reverentially 
circumambulating the purohita Vasistha, set forth. 


Sarga 57 

[1-4] After having sent forth his entire army, Satrughna stayed behind for a 
month. Then, hastening, he quickly set forth on the road all by himself. 
Camping for two nights on the way, the heroic delight of the Raghavas 
reached Valmiki’s holy ashram, which was an excellent place to stay. After 
reverentially saluting the great Valmiki, foremost of sages, he cupped his 
hands in reverence and said these words: “Holy one, I have come at the 
behest of my elder brother and would like to stay here overnight. I will 
depart tomorrow morming toward the west, the direction guarded by 
Varuna.” 

[5-6] When that bull among sages had heard Satrughna’s words, he 
smiled and replied to that great man: “Welcome, illustrious prince! Truly, 
gentle prince, this ashram belongs to the House of Raghava. So you should 
have no hesitation in accepting from me a seat, water to wash your feet, and 
the guest-offering.” 

[7-8] Then, after accepting this honor, Kakutstha ate some food—fruits 
and roots—and was quite satisfied. When he had eaten, the great-armed 
prince said this to the great seer: “To whom did all these sacrificial 
implements that are near the ashram once belong?” 

[9-12] When Valmiki had heard that speech of his, he spoke these 
words: “Listen, Satrughna, to whom this sacrificial ground once belonged. 
A mighty and highly righteous king named Mitrasaha, the son of great 
Sudasa, is an ancestor of yours. Although he was but a child, Mitrasaha 
Saudasa went out hunting, and that hero spied a pair of raksasas who were 
constantly roaming about. Fearsome and taking on the form of tigers, they 
were devouring many thousands of animals, and yet they were unsatisfied 
and could not get enough. 

[13—16] “And when he saw those two rdksasas and saw that the forest 
had been stripped of game, he was filled with a towering rage, and he killed 
one of them with a great arrow. But once that bull among men Saudasa had 


struck down that one, he was freed from his distress and anger, and he 
gazed at the slain raksasa. When the companion of that raksasa saw him 
staring, he was filled with a terrible anguish and said this to Saudasa: ‘Since 
you have killed my companion, who had done nothing wrong, I will pay 
you back, you evil wretch!’ 

[17-19] “Once he had addressed him in this fashion, the raksasa 
vanished on the spot. Now, in the course of time, Mitrasaha became king. 
Now, as king he performed a sacrifice, just near this ashram. And Vasistha 
oversaw that great sacrifice, the asvamedha. The sacrifice there was very 
grand and went on for many tens of thousands of years. Lavish and 
accompanied with the greatest splendor, it was equal to a sacrifice of the 
gods themselves. 

[20—23] “Now at the completion of the sacrifice, the raksasa, recalling 
his former enmity, took the form of Vasistha and addressed the king in this 
fashion: ‘Today, when the final rites are over, you must quickly give me 
some food, including meat. You must not hesitate in this regard.’ When the 
lord of the earth had heard those words uttered by the raksasa, who could 
take on any form at will, he said to one who was skilled in the preparation 
of food, ‘You must quickly prepare savory food with meat, fit for the 
sacrificial offering, so that my guru will be fully satisfied.’ 

[24—26] “Because of that order of the lord of kings, the cook’s mind was 
in a flurry of agitation, and so the rdksasa then took on the guise of the 
cook then and there. He then offered human flesh to the king, saying, ‘I 
have brought you this savory food with meat, fit for the sacrificial offering.’ 
And the king, together with his wife Madayantt, offered Vasistha that food, 
which the raksasa had brought, O tiger among men. 

[27-29] “Then the brahman, realizing that human flesh had been brought 
as his food, was seized with a towering rage, and he began to speak, ‘Since, 
your majesty, you wanted to give me this food, such food will be yours 
without a doubt.’ Then the king and his wife prostrated themselves again 
and again. And he then once more told Vasistha what the raksasa in the 
form of a brahman had said. 

[30-32] “When Vasistha had heard from the king about the abominable 
thing that the raksasa had done, he spoke once again to the king, that bull 
among men: ‘It is impossible to falsify these words that I spoke when I was 
overcome with anger. But I shall grant you a boon. The duration of this 


curse shall be twelve years. Then, through my grace, best of kings, you will 
not remember what will have transpired.’ 

[33-34] “And so the king, that crusher of his foes, experienced that curse 
and then regained his kingdom and once more protected his subjects. And 
this area near the ashram about which you were inquiring, Raghava, is the 
lovely sacrificial ground that belonged to Mitrasaha Kalmasapada.” 

[35] When Satrughna had heard the extremely dreadful tale of that best 
of kings Kalmasapada, he reverentially saluted the great seer Valmiki and 
then entered a leaf hut. 


Sarga 58 
[1-2] Now, the very night on which Satrughna entered the leaf hut, Sita 
gave birth to two sons. At midnight the young sons of the sages reported the 
good news of Sita’s auspicious childbirth to Valmiki: “O sage of great 
blazing energy, please prepare a protective amulet for them that will ward 
off malignant spirits.” 

[3-8] When the sage had heard those words of theirs, he was delighted, 
and he fashioned for each infant a protective amulet that would destroy 
malignant spirits and ward off raksasas. Taking up the cut tips of kusa grass 
as well as the remaining stalks, called /ava, the twice-born Valmiki handed 
over for each infant a protective amulet that would ward off malignant 
spirits, saying: “The one who was born first of the two is to be cleansed 
with the cut tips of kusa grass that have been sanctified with mantras, and 
he shall thus be known by the name KuSa. And this very quiet one, born 
second of the two, is to be cleansed by the elderly women with the 
remaining stalks, called /ava, and so he shall be Lava by name. Thus, the 
two of them, the twins KuSa and Lava, will be renowned by the two names 
that I have given them.” Taking the amulets from the sage’s hands with 
deep concentration, those women, free from impurity, then affixed them to 
the two infants. 

[9-11] In the middle of the night, Satrughna heard that wonderful news 
—the auspicious birth of twins to Sita—as well as praise of Rama, the 
announcement of the children’s names and dynastic name, and the 
application of the amulets that was being done. Then, returning to his leaf 
hut that night, he cried, “Thank heavens! Thank heavens!” Thus, that 


monsoon night in the month of Sravana passed quickly for great Satrughna, 
who was delighted. 

[12-14] And in the morning, mighty Satrughna, after completing his 
sequence of morning activities, folding his hands in reverence, took his 
leave of the sage and once more set out, heading west. He proceeded to the 
bank of the Yamuna, camping for seven nights on the way. There he took up 
residence in the ashram of those seers of pious reputation. And there that 
greatly illustrious king stayed with the sages, whose leader was the 
Bhargava Cyavana, engaging in many kinds of discourse. 


Sarga 59 
[1-2] Then, as the night came on, Satrughna questioned the brahman 
Cyavana, the delight of the Bhrgus, about Lavana’s strengths and 
weaknesses and about the power of his lance, saying, “Brahman, who were 
those who were previously struck down by him with that greatest of lances 
when they approached him for single combat?” 

[3-6] When Cyavana of immense blazing energy had heard that speech 
of great Satrughna, he replied to that delight of the Raghus: “The feats that 
he performed are countless, bull among men. But just hear from me what 
befell one scion of the Iksvaku lineage. Long ago, in Ayodhya, there was a 
mighty king, the son of Yuvanasva. That mighty man was famed throughout 
the three worlds as Mandhatr. Having brought the entire earth under his 
rule, that king and lord of the earth then prepared to conquer the world of 
the gods. 

[7-9] “Now, when, in his desire to conquer the world of the gods, 
Mandhatr had completed his preparations, Indra and the great gods were 
acutely afraid. Honored by the hosts of the gods with half of Sakra’s throne 
and half of his kingdom, the king gave his word and then ascended. 
Realizing his malicious intention, Indra, the chastiser of Paka, spoke these 
conciliatory words to the son of Yuvanasva: 

[10-11] “ ‘Bull among men, you are not yet the king of the world of 
men. Nevertheless, without having subjugated the entire earth, you desire 
the kingship of the gods here. If, hero, the entire earth were completely 
under your sway, then you, along with your servants, troops, and mounts, 
might exercise the rulership of the gods.’ 


[12-14] “But even as Indra was speaking in this fashion, Mandhatr said 
these words to him: ‘Where on the surface of the earth is my rule contested, 
Sakra?’ Thousand-eyed Indra said to him, ‘In Madhuvana, Madhu’s son, the 
raksasa named Lavana, does not obey your command, blameless king.’ 
When the king had heard those unwelcome and terrible words spoken by 
thousand-eyed Indra, he hung his head in shame and was unable to reply. 

[15-18] “And so, taking leave of thousand-eyed Indra and still hanging 
his head somewhat in shame, the majestic lord of men returned once more 
to this world. Cherishing indignation in his heart, the blameless king, 
together with his servants, troops, and mounts, came in order to subjugate 
Madhu’s son. Eager to fight Lavana, that bull among men dispatched a 
messenger to him. When he had gone there, the messenger said many 
unpleasant words to Madhu’s son, but the raksasa just devoured him as he 
was speaking in that fashion. 

[19-23] “When the messenger had not returned after some time, the 
king, seized with anger, assailed the raksasa with a hail of arrows from 
every side. Then, laughing, Lavana took that lance in his hand and released 
that supreme weapon for the destruction of the king, along with his entire 
retinue. That blazing lance reduced the king to ashes, along with his 
servants, troops, and mounts, and then returned to Lavana’s hand. And thus 
was that very great king slain, along with his troops and mounts. For the 
power of that lance, hero, is immeasurable and unsurpassed. However, 
tomorrow morning, without a doubt, you shall quickly kill Lavana before he 
can take up his weapon. Indeed, your victory is certain.” 


Sarga 60 

[1-4] As they were carrying on this conversation and hoping for an 
auspicious victory, the night passed swiftly for great Satrughna. Now at that 
very moment, in the clear dawn, that heroic raksasa went out of the city, 
intent on gathering food. At that juncture, heroic Satrughna crossed the 
Yamuna River and took up his position, bow in hand, at the gate of 
Madhupura. Then, just at midday, that raksasa of cruel deeds returned 
bearing the weight of many thousands of creatures. 

[5-8] When the rdaksasa spied Satrughna standing at the gate and holding 
his weapon, he said to him: “What are you going to do with that? In my 
wrath, I have devoured thousands of armed men such as you, lowest of 


men. Are you eager to die? This food of mine is still not enough, lowest of 
men. How 1s it, fool, that, having come, you have entered my mouth of your 
own accord?” As he was speaking in this fashion and laughing again and 
again, Satrughna, endowed with valor, shed tears of rage. 

[9-12] When great Satrughna was overwhelmed with rage, blazing 
sparks flew from his every limb. And in his towering rage Satrughna said to 
that night-roaming rdaksasa: “I am eager for battle—a single combat with 
you—evil-minded wretch. I am the son of DaSaratha and the brother of wise 
Rama. I am Satrughna, ‘Slayer of Enemies,’ by name, who has come here 
eager to kill you. So you must offer me single combat, as I am eager for 
battle. For you are the enemy of all living things, and you shall not escape 
me with your life.” 

[13-17] But even as that foremost of men was speaking in this fashion, 
the raksasa, chuckling, replied to him: “You fool, it is my good fortune that 
you have come. You fool, you lowest of men, it was Rama who, for the sake 
of a woman, killed the rdksasa named Ravana, the brother of my mother’s 
cousin. But because I held you in such contempt, I let the complete 
destruction of Ravana’s lineage pass and spared all of you especially. Thus, 
I did not kill all you lowest of men since I regarded you—your ancestors, 
your descendants, and you yourselves—as too insignificant. Since, you 
fool, you desire to fight, I will give you battle of whatever kind you wish. I 
will just make ready a weapon to deal with you.” 

[18-19] Then Satrughna said to him: “How will you escape from me 
with your life? For an accomplished warrior must not permit even a feeble 
enemy who has encountered him to escape. For someone of irresolute mind 
who gives an enemy an opportunity to escape will surely be slain through 
his dim-wittedness, just like a coward.” 


Sarga 61 

[1-2] When Lavana had heard those words of great Satrughna, he 
manifested the most violent rage, and he cried, “Stay right where you are! 
Stay right where you are!” Pounding his fist in his hand and loudly grinding 
his teeth, Lavana repeatedly challenged that tiger among the Raghus. 

[3-7] As Lavana of fearsome valor was speaking these words in this 
fashion, Satrughna, the slayer of the enemies of the gods, said these words 
to him: “Satrughna had not been born when you vanquished those others. 


Therefore, this very day, struck down by my arrow, you must go to the 
abode of Yama. And, evil-minded wretch, may the seers and learned 
brahmans see you struck down by me in battle this very day, just as the 
thirty gods saw Ravana struck down. Once you have fallen this very day, 
incinerated by my arrow, night-roaming rdksasa, the city and the 
countryside will be safe. This very day, my arrow, its head like the vajra 
itself, will, loosed by my arm, pierce your heart, as does a ray of the sun, a 
lotus.” 

[8—10] Addressed in this fashion, Lavana, beside himself with rage, 
hurled a huge tree at Satrughna’s chest. But that hero shattered it into a 
hundred pieces. Seeing his feat foiled, the mighty raksasa once again seized 
many trees and loosed them upon Satrughna. But as for Satrughna, who was 
filled with blazing energy, he cut down those many trees as they hurtled 
toward him, one after the other, with three or four straight arrows. 

[11-13] Mighty Satrughna then unleashed a hail of arrows on the 
raksasa’s chest. But the rdksasa did not falter. Then, laughing, Lavana 
easily tore up a tree and struck the hero on the head. The latter, his limbs 
gone slack, lost consciousness. When that hero had fallen, a great cry of 
“Alas! Alas!” arose from the seers and the hosts of gods and from the 
gandharvas and apsarases as well. 

[14-15] Paying no further heed to Satrughna, who had fallen, stricken, to 
the ground, the raksasa did not enter his residence, although he now had an 
opportunity to do so. Nor, having seen him fallen to the ground, did he get 
his lance. Instead, thinking him dead, he picked up his food. 

[16-19] But Satrughna regained consciousness after a short while and 
once more, holding his weapon, stood at the rdksasa’s gate, being honored 
by the seers. He then took up that divine, unfailing foremost of arrows. It 
was fearsome, and it glowed with blazing energy with which it filled the ten 
directions. Its tip was the vajra, and its impact was that of the vajra. Its 
weight was that of Mount Meru and Mount Mandara. It was smooth at 
every joint, and it was undefeated in battles. Its shaft was smeared with 
blood and sandalwood paste. It was a beautifully fletched arrow that was 
terrifying to the danava lords and the lords of the mountains and to the 
asuras. 

[20—23] Seeing that arrow, which was blazing like the fire of universal 
destruction when the end of a cosmic era is at hand, all beings were 


terrified. In great distress, the entire world, including the gods, asuras, 
gandharvas, sages, and the troupes of apsarases, approached Grandfather 
Brahma. And they said to Great-Grandfather Brahma, the bestower of 
boons and lord of the gods among gods: “Is it the end of the world, O God? 
Or has the end of the cosmic era come? We have never seen or heard 
anything like this, Great-Grandfather. O lord, the gods are dazed with terror 
at the thought of the destruction of the worlds.” 

[24—29] When Brahma, grandfather of the worlds, had heard those words 
of theirs, he explained the cause of their fear, thus soothing the fear of the 
gods. “Foremost among the gods, it is just the arrow that has been taken up 
by Satrughna for the destruction of Lavana in battle. You have all been 
stupefied by its blazing energy. For this arrow, because of which this fear 
has come, my children, is the eternal one, consisting of blazing energy that 
belonged of old to the god who created the world. This mighty arrow was 
created by that great Lord on account of Kaitabha and Madhu in order to 
destroy those two daityas. Thus, you should know that this arrow consists 
of the blazing energy of Visnu. And it is indeed the primordial body of great 
Visnu. So go forth from here and watch as that foremost of raksasas Lavana 
is slain by Rama’s great and heroic younger brother.” 

[30-31] When they had heard those pleasant words of that god of gods, 
they came to the place where Satrughna and Lavana were fighting. All 
beings gazed upon that arrow as it was held in Satrughna’s hand. With its 
divine radiance it resembled the fire that blazes up at the end of a cosmic 
era. 

[32-34] First glancing at the sky, which was crowded with the gods, the 
delight of the Raghus repeatedly roared like a lion and turned his gaze once 
more to Lavana. Then, challenged by great Satrughna, Lavana, filled with 
rage, approached for battle. Drawing his bowstring back to his ear, that 
foremost of bowmen released that great arrow toward Lavana’s chest. 
Swiftly tearing through his vast chest, it entered the underworld known as 
Rasatala. 

[35-36] Worshiped by the wise gods, the divine arrow penetrated to 
Rasatala and returned swiftly to that delight of the Iksvaku lineage. Pierced 
by Satrughna’s arrow, the night-roaming raksasa Lavana collapsed 
suddenly to the ground, like a mountain struck by a thunderbolt. 


[37-38] And as for that great divine lance, once the raksasa Lavana had 
been slain, it returned to the control of Rudra as all beings stood watching. 
Having struck down that terror of the three worlds with the blow of a single 
arrow, the great hero of the Raghus, with his bow and arrow raised, 
resembled the thousand-rayed sun when it has driven away the darkness. 


Sarga 62 
[1-3] Once Lavana had been slain, the gods, together with Indra, placing 
Agni at their head, spoke very pleasant words to Satrughna, scorcher of his 
foes: “Thank heavens you have been victorious, child! Thank heavens the 
raksasa Lavana has been slain, tiger among men! Choose a boon, Raghava. 
The granters of boons, who were anxious for your victory, are all assembled 
here, great-armed warrior. And a vision of us is never in vain.” 

[4-6] When the self-controlled hero, great-armed Satrughna, had heard 
the words of the gods, he cupped his hands at his forehead in reverence and 
replied, “May I quickly obtain for my residence this lovely and charming 
city of Madhupurt, which was crafted by the gods. Let this boon, which I 
cherish, be mine.” Delighted at heart, the gods said to Raghava, “So be it! 
Without a doubt it shall become the lovely city of Stirasena.” 

[7-12] Having spoken in this fashion, the great gods then ascended to 
heaven. And Satrughna of immense blazing energy sent for his army. Upon 
hearing Satrughna’s command, the army came at once, and Satrughna, 
through his command, commenced the settlement. And in the twelfth year, 
that lovely city, with its divine radiance, was fully established, as was the 
realm of the Stirasenas, which was free from any threat. Vasava sent the 
rains at the proper season, and so the fields were filled with grain. And the 
city, under the protection of Satrughna’s arms, was free from disease and 
filled with heroic men. Resembling a half-moon, it was adorned by the bank 
of the Yamuna. It was adorned with splendid mansions and adorned with 
squares and markets. And with a varied abundance of goods that hero 
adorned the great palace that had earlier been left bare by Lavana. 

[13-14] Gazing upon that prosperous city, Satrughna, Bharata’s younger 
brother, his mission accomplished, was extremely pleased and experienced 
the greatest delight. Then, after he had founded the city of Madhura, this 
thought occurred to him: “I would gaze upon Rama’s feet in this auspicious 
twelfth year.” 


Sarga 63 
[1-2] Thus, in the twelfth year, Satrughna desired to go—with a small 
retinue of retainers and troops—to Ayodhya, which was under the 
protection of Rama. Sending back his counselors, the leaders of the army, 
and his purohita, he went forth in an excellent chariot, which was radiant 
and yoked to horses. 

[3ab—appendix I, no. 9, Il. 1-5] Proceeding through seven or eight 
predetermined encampments, the immensely powerful delight of the 
Raghus reached the ashram of Valmiki, where he made camp. Then that 
bull among men, having bowed reverentially to the feet of Valmiki, 
accepted from the hands of the sage water for washing his feet, the guest- 
offering, and all that was fitting for a guest. And there the sage told great 
Satrughna thousands of extremely sweet and varied stories. 

['‘Appendix I, no. 9, ll. 6-11] The sage then said these words concerning 
the slaying of Lavana: “This was an extremely difficult task, which your 
ancestors could not accomplish. Gentle Satrughna, many great kings were 
destroyed, along with their troops and mounts, in fighting with the evil- 
minded Lavana. But you, bull among men, easily slew that evil creature. 
Through your blazing energy, your majesty, the terror of the world has been 
put to rest. 

[™Appendix I, no. 9, Il. 12-19] “The frightful slaying of Ravana was 
accomplished with great effort. You, however, accomplished this extremely 
great feat effortlessly. When Lavana was slain, the gods experienced 
tremendous delight, and delight was also generated for the world and all its 
beings. And I myself witnessed that battle just as it happened, bull among 
men, as I was seated in the assembly of great Vasava. Thus, Satrughna, you 
have increased my great joy as well, and so I shall kiss you on the head, for 
that is the highest expression of affection.” 

[Appendix I, no. 9, Il. 20-27] When the great sage had spoken in this 
fashion, he kissed Satrughna on the head and extended his hospitality to 
him and to those who were his followers. After that foremost of men had 
eaten, he heard, sweetly rendered in song, the supreme tale of Rama, in due 
order, just as it had occurred at that time. Upon hearing those words, so 
consonant with the truth and in accordance with what had happened long 
ago, that tiger among men, his eyes filled with tears, lost consciousness. 
After remaining unconscious for a short while, he sighed again and again, 


and, while the poem was still being sung, he heard that tale of the past as if 
it were happening right then. 

[°Appendix I, no. 9, Il. 28-33] And as for those who were the king’s 
followers, when they heard the magnificence of the singing, they were 
despondent and hung their heads and said, “This is wonderful!” The 
soldiers there said to one another: “What is this? Where are we? Is this an 
illusion or a vision in a dream? This history that we witnessed long ago, we 
are now once again hearing in an ashram! Is this magnificent musical 
composition taking place in a dream?” 

[pPAppendix I, no. 9, Il. 34-41] Having experienced the greatest wonder, 
they said this to Satrughna: “Best of men, please straightaway inquire of 
Valmiki, that bull among sages.” But Satrughna said to all of those soldiers, 
who were filled with curiosity: “It would be improper for us to ask such a 
thing. There are many miracles here in the ashram of the sage. It would not 
be proper for me to ask about them simply out of curiosity.” And when the 
delight of the Raghus had spoken these words to the soldiers, he 
respectfully saluted the great seer and then went to his own quarters. 

[sAppendix I, no. 9, Il. 42-45] But sleep would not come to that tiger 
among men as he lay there, preoccupied, pondering that unsurpassed song 
about Rama. Thus, the night passed swiftly for great Satrughna, once he had 
heard those immensely sweet words accompanied by stringed and 
percussion instruments. 

[‘Appendix I, no. 9, Il. 46-49] When the night had passed and he had 
completed his morning activities, Satrughna cupped his hands in reverence 
and spoke these words to that bull among sages: “Holy one, I wish to see 
Raghava, the delight of the Raghus. I wish to be given leave by you and 
these sages of severe vows.” 

[sAppendix I, no. 9, Il. 50-52; 3cd] As the Raghava Satrughna, destroyer 
of his foes, was speaking in this fashion, Valmiki embraced him and gave 
him leave. And he, after respectfully saluting that foremost of sages, 
mounted his very splendid chariot and, in his longing to see Raghava, 
proceeded swiftly to Ayodhya. 

[4-8] Upon entering that delightful city, the great-armed and majestic 
delight of the Iksvakus entered the assembly hall where Rama of 
tremendous radiance sat. Having reverentially saluted the great and truly 
valorous Rama, who seemed to glow with blazing energy, he cupped his 


hands in reverence and said to him: “I have done everything that was 
commanded, great king. Evil Lavana has been slain and that city has been 
populated. And the twelfth year has now gone by without you, delight of 
the Raghus. I can no longer bear to live apart from you, O king. Please be 
gracious to me, Kakutstha of immeasurable valor. For I cannot live apart 
from you any more than can a calf deprived of its mother.” 

[9-13] As Satrughna was speaking in this fashion, Rama embraced him 
and said this: “Do not be despondent, hero. This is not the conduct of a 
kshatriya. Kings do not despair while living abroad, Raghava, and, 
Raghava, one’s subjects must indeed be protected according to the code of 
the kshatriyas. But you may come from time to time, hero, to visit me and 
Ayodhya. However, you will have to go back to your city, best of men. You 
too are, without doubt, as dear to me as life itself. Nonetheless, the 
protection of the kingdom must be attended to. Therefore, Kakutstha, you 
may stay with me for five nights. After that, you will have to go back to 
Madhura together with your retainers, troops, and mounts.” 

[14-17] When Satrughna had heard these heartfelt words of Rama, 
which were in keeping with righteousness, Satrughna said in a voice filled 
with sorrow, “So be it.” And so, having dwelt there for five nights 
according to Raghava’s command, the great bowman Kakutstha prepared to 
depart. Taking his leave of great and truly valorous Rama, as well as of 
Bharata and Laksmana, he mounted his great chariot. Accompanied for a 
great distance by both great Laksmana and Bharata, Satrughna then 
proceeded swiftly to his own city. 


Sarga 64 
[1-3] Once he had sent Satrughna away, Raghava, delighted, enjoyed 
himself, along with his other two brothers, ruling the kingdom in 
accordance with righteousness. But after several days, an aged brahman of 
that country approached the royal gate, holding the dead body of a child. 
Wailing various lamentations filled with loving words and crying, “My son! 
My son!” over and over, he said these words: 

[4—7] “What evil deed must I have done in the past in some previous 
birth that I must see you, my only son, in the grip of death? For you, my 
little son, are a mere child but five years old and have not yet reached 
manhood. Yet, to my grief, you have come to an untimely death. In a few 


days, your mother and I will doubtless too be in the grip of death out of 
grief for you, my little son. I do not recall any lie that I have uttered nor any 
harm that I have done. For what evil deed of mine, then, has my son, a mere 
child, been led this day to the abode of Vaivasvata without having 
completed my obsequial rites? 

[8—9] “I have never before seen or even heard of such a dreadful thing as 
an untimely death in Rama’s realm. Without a doubt, it must be that there is 
some great misdeed on Rama’s part. Your majesty, you must restore this 
child to life as he has come under the sway of death. 

[10-15] “May you attain long life together with your brothers, your 
majesty, as we have always dwelt happily in this kingdom of yours, 
immensely powerful prince. But now the realm of the great Iksvakus has no 
protector since it has acquired for its protector Rama, a king who brings 
about the death of its children. Subjects who are not governed according to 
law perish through the transgressions of their king. And when the king is 
one whose conduct is unrighteous, people die before their time. And when 
the people in the towns and in the countryside act improperly, and yet there 
is no one to prevent them, then there is fear of death. It is perfectly clear 
beyond any doubt that either in the city or the countryside there must have 
been some transgression on the part of the king, and thus, there has been the 
death of a child.” Thus reviling the king over and over again with many 
different words, the brahman, consumed with sorrow, embraced his son. 


Sarga 65 

[1-6] And thus did Rama hear that twice-born brahman’s entire piteous 
lamentation, so filled with sorrow and grief. Wholly consumed with sorrow, 
he summoned his counselors, as well as Vasistha, Vamadeva, and his 
brothers, together with the vedic brahmans. The eight twice-born brahmans 
were ushered in together with Vasistha, and they addressed the king, who 
was as resplendent as a god, saying, “May you prosper!” All of those bulls 
among the twice-born brahmans—Markandeya, Maudgalya, Vamadeva, 
Kasyapa, Katyayana, Jabali, Gautama, and Narada—were seated on 
cushions, as were the counselors and the vedic brahmans, in proper fashion, 
according to their merit. Once all of those men of fiercely blazing energy 
had been seated, Raghava told them everything about why the twice-born 
brahman was wailing. 


[7-10] Now, when Narada had heard those words of the dejected king, 
he responded to him with these auspicious words there in the presence of 
the seers: “Listen, your majesty, to how this untimely death of a child has 
come about. Once you have heard it, heroic delight of the Raghus, you must 
do what needs to be done. In the beginning, Rama, in the Krta Yuga, only 
brahmans were ascetics. At that time, your majesty, a non-brahman could 
by no means be an ascetic. In that resplendent age, unshrouded by darkness, 
in which brahmans were preeminent, all were immortal and farsighted. 

[11-14] “Next came the age called the Treta Yuga, the age of men of 
powerful bodies. In that age, kshatriyas became able to practice the 
asceticism of that previous age. And compared to those great men in that 
age known as the Treta Yuga, those in the preceding age were superior to 
them in both strength and asceticism. The brahmans were superior and the 
kshatriyas were inferior in every respect. But over the course of the two 
yugas, they came to be equal in power. Then, unable to perceive any great 
difference between the brahmans and kshatriyas, all the authorities 
instituted regulations that governed all four social classes to address this. 

[15-18] “Nonetheless, unrighteousness set one foot on the earth, so that, 
through association with that unrighteousness, the twice-born ones became 
diminished. Then there appeared for the first time a limit to the span of life, 
so that people performed only auspicious acts and were devoted to truth and 
righteousness. But in the Treta Yuga those who were brahmans and 
kshatriyas practiced asceticism, while other people were engaged in serving 
them. And that, which was allotted to the vaisyas and sidras, came to be 
their highest righteous duty. But it was the sidras especially who revered 
all the other three classes. 

[19-22] “Then unrighteousness set down its second foot. And thus, that 
yuga came to be known as the Dvapara. And, bull among men, both 
unrighteousness and agriculture increased in that yuga reckoned as the 
Dvapara, which came to be their basis. And in the ywga known as the 
Dvapara, the practice of asceticism was extended to the vaisyas. But the 
sudra did not gain access to that practice—that is, to the performance of 
severe austerities—O bull among men. But eventually a person of the 
lowest class, O best of kings, will be able to perform very great asceticism. 
Indeed, the practice of asceticism in the future, that is, in the Kali Yuga, will 
be extended to those of the sidra class. 


[23-26] “The practice of asceticism by a sidra, even in the Dvapara, 
Rama, is a severe violation of righteousness. Surely then, your majesty, 
some wicked siudra, having become a great ascetic, is practicing austerities 
in some corner of your realm. And it is because of this that there has been 
the death of a child. For any evil-minded man who commits an unrighteous 
or forbidden act in the city or country of a king, O tiger among kings, goes 
swiftly to hell, as does that king. Of this there is no doubt. So you, tiger 
among men, must search your realm, and wherever you see any evil being 
done, you must take forceful action. In this way, your righteousness will 
increase and so will the life span of men, foremost of kings, and this child 
will live once more.” 


Sarga 66 

[1—4] When Rama had heard those words of Narada, which consisted, so it 
seemed, of the nectar of immortality, he experienced unequaled delight, and 
he said this to Laksmana: “Go, gentle Laksmana, and console that foremost 
of twice-born brahmans. Then have him place the boy’s body in a vat of oil. 
See to it, gentle brother, that the child’s body is placed there together with 
fine fragrances and highly aromatic oils so that it does not decompose. And 
you must act in such a way that there will be no destruction or 
disintegration of the body of this innocent boy while it is being preserved.” 

[S—7] When greatly illustrious Kakutstha had instructed Laksmana of 
auspicious marks in this fashion, he called to mind the Puspaka with the 
thought, “Come!” When the Puspaka, adorned with gold, perceived 
Raghava’s intentions, it came at once into his very presence. Bowing 
humbly, he said, “It is I, great-armed lord of men, your obedient servant, 
who has come.” 

[8—11] Upon hearing those welcome words of the Puspaka, the lord of 
men respectfully saluted those great seers, and he then boarded the flying 
palace. Taking up his bow, his quiver, and his brightly gleaming sword, he 
entrusted the city to those two heroes, Saumitri and Bharata, and proceeded 
to the west, searching the wastelands on every side. Then the majestic hero 
turned to the northern quarter, which is bounded by the Himalayas. Not 
finding even the most minor transgression there, the lord of men inspected 
the entire eastern region as well. 


[12-13] Then the delight of the royal seers traversed the southern 
quarter, where he spied a very large lake on the northern slopes of Mount 
Saivala. Close to the lake, majestic Raghava spied an ascetic hanging 
upside down while performing very severe austerities. 

[14-17] Approaching him who was performing supreme austerities, 
Raghava spoke these words: “You are fortunate, O you of excellent vows. 
To which of the four classes do you belong, you who are advanced in 
asceticism and of firm resolve? I, Rama Dasarathi, am asking you out of 
curiosity. Whether it be the attainment of heaven or the acquisition of a 
boon, I wish to hear, ascetic, about the goal in connection with which you 
have been practicing austerities. Pray, are you a brahman or are you an 
invincible kshatriya? Or if you are a vaisya or a siidra, you must tell me that 
truthfully.” 


Sarga 67 
[1-4] Upon hearing that speech of Rama, who was tireless in action, he 
spoke these words while still hanging upside down: “I was born into the 
sudra class, and I am engaged in severe austerities. For, greatly glorious 
Rama, I desire the status of a god in this very body. I would not speak 
falsely, your majesty, out of my desire to win the world of the gods. Know 
me, Kakutstha, to be a sudra known by the name Sambika.” But even as 
the stidra was speaking, Raghava drew his spotless and brightly gleaming 
sword from its sheath and cut off his head. 

[‘Appendix I, no. 11, Il. 1-8] Once that sudra had been slain, the gods, 
together with Indra and with Agni at their head, praised Kakutstha over and 
over again, crying, “Excellent! Excellent!” And a great shower of flowers 
made up of extremely fragrant and heavenly blossoms fell on all sides, 
scattered by the wind. Exceedingly pleased, the gods said to truly valorous 
Rama: “Wise and gentle Rama, you have splendidly carried out this deed on 
behalf of the gods. Please accept a boon, gentle Rama, whichever one you 
wish, tamer of your foes, since because of you, delight of the Raghus, this 
sudra will not enjoy heaven.” 

["Appendix I, no. 11, Il. 9-16] After listening with great concentration to 
the speech of the gods, Raghava cupped his hands in reverence and spoke 
these words to thousand-eyed Indra, smasher of citadels: “If the gods are 
pleased with me, let the son of the twice-born brahman live. Let them 


ordain for me this boon, which is my most cherished desire. It was through 
my transgression that this child, the brahman’s only son, whose time had 
not come, was led by Ka4la to the abode of Vaivasvata. Now, bless you, you 
must make him live. I promised that twice-born brahman this: ‘I will restore 
your son to life.” You ought not prove me false.” 

[YAppendix I, no. 11, Il. 17—Sab] Now, when the foremost among the 
wise gods had heard these words of Raghava, they were delighted with an 
abundance of delight, and they replied to that great hero: “Rest assured, 
Kakutstha, this very day, surrounded by his kinsmen, that little child has 
once more come to life. At the very moment that the sadra was struck 
down, Kakutstha, the child was restored to life. 

[~1127* Il. 1-6] “Bless you, may you obtain prosperity! We have 
accomplished our purpose, bull among men. We shall visit the ashram of 
Agastya, illustrious prince. The religious observances of that immensely 
illustrious brahman-seer are now completed. For the twelfth year has passed 
while he was practicing devotions underwater. We shall go there, 
Kakutstha, to pay our respects to the sage. Bless you! You too should go to 
see that foremost of seers.” 

[*1127* Il. 7-10] Having promised the gods with the words, “So be it!” 
the delight of the Raghus mounted the flying palace Puspaka, which was 
adored with gold. Then the gods set out in their vast flying palaces, while 
Rama swiftly followed them to the penance grove of the pot-born sage 
Agastya. 

[y1127* ll. 11-15; 1128*] When righteous Agastya, that treasure-house 
of austerities, saw that the gods had arrived, he honored them all without 
distinction. When they had accepted that reverence from him and had 
reverenced that great sage in return, the thirty gods, delighted, returned to 
the highest heaven, along with their attendants. Once they had gone, 
Kakutstha, having descended from the Puspaka, then respectfully greeted 
Agastya, foremost of seers. [’Verse 6 elided] 

[7-13] After he had respectfully saluted that great sage, who seemed to 
glow with blazing energy, the lord of men received the greatest hospitality 
and took his seat. The pot-born sage of great austerities and immense 
blazing energy said to him: “Welcome, Raghava, foremost of men. It is 
fortunate that you have come. I hold you in high esteem for your many 
excellent virtues. A guest must be honored and, your majesty, you dwell in 


my heart. For the gods had informed me that you had come to kill that 
sudra and that, through your righteousness, you have restored the 
brahman’s son to life. Please spend the night here with me, Raghava. At 
daybreak, you will go in the Puspaka to your own city. And please, dear 
Raghava Kakutstha, favor me and accept this ornament, which was 
fashioned by Visvakarman. It is celestial with its celestial beauty, and it 
shines with its own blazing radiance. For it is said that the giving away of 
something that has been given brings great benefits. Therefore, I would 
duly give it. Please accept it, bull among men.” 

[14-17] And Rama accepted the great sage’s splendid celestial ornament, 
which resembled the blazing sun, bringer of light. Once Rama had accepted 
that unsurpassed ornament, he began to ask the sage how the celestial jewel 
had come to be his: “How and from where, brahman, did you, holy one, 
acquire this extremely marvelous and splendid thing, so filled with beauty? 
And who brought it? It is out of curiosity, brahman, that I ask you, who are 
so greatly illustrious. For you, sir, are the greatest treasure-house of many 
wonders.” 

[18] As Kakutstha was speaking in this fashion, the sage said these 
words: “Listen, Rama, to what took place long ago in a bygone Treta 
Yuga.” 


Sarga 68 
[1-3] “Long ago, in that Treta Yuga, there was a vast forest tract, a hundred 
leagues in every direction. It was devoid of birds and beasts. As I was 
performing severe austerities in an uninhabited region of the forest, dear 
boy, I wandered about that forest in order to explore it. I cannot describe the 
beauty of that forest with its succulent fruits and roots and with its many 
different kinds of trees. 

[4-6] “In the middle of that forest, there was a lake that was a league 
across. It was filled with red and blue lotuses and covered with waterweeds. 
It was truly like a wonder. It was magnificent, and its waters were pleasant 
to the taste. It was limpid, calm, and lovely, and it was filled with flocks of 
birds. And near that lake, there was a great and marvelous ashram. It was 
ancient and extremely sacred. But it was devoid of ascetics. 

[7-9] “I spent a summer night there, bull among men, and, rising early in 
the morning, went down to the lake. Then, at a certain spot, I spied a 


corpse. It was quite plump and showed no signs of decay. Still exuding a 
splendid vital glow, it was lying in that body of water. I stood there, on the 
shore of the lake, for some time, Lord Raghava, pondering this matter and 
thinking, ‘What can this be?’ 

[10-14] “But then, after some time, I spied a magnificent celestial flying 
palace. Yoked to hamsas and as swift as thought, it was a wonder to behold. 
And there in that flying palace, heroic delight of the Raghus, a thousand 
apsarases with celestial ornaments attentively waited upon a heavenly 
being. Some of them sang delightful songs, while others played musical 
instruments. Then, even as I watched, Rama, delight of the Raghus, that 
heavenly being descended from the flying palace and began to eat the 
corpse. Then, when he had eaten duly and abundantly of that flesh to his 
heart’s content, the heavenly being went down into the lake and began to 
wash. After having washed in the proper fashion, bull among men, the 
celestial being began to mount that excellent and splendid flying palace. 

[15-17] “Then, looking up at that godlike being as he mounted, I spoke 
words to him in this fashion, bull among men: ‘Who are you, sir? And why, 
gentle sir, are you eating this abominable food? Please tell me. What an 
extraordinary thing—on the one hand, such a splendid being, virtually a 
god, and on the other, this abominable food! Gentle friend, I wish to hear 
about this truthfully.’ ” 


Sarga 69 

[1-4] “When that heavenly being had heard the pleasant speech that I had 
spoken, he cupped his hands in reverence and replied thus, delight of the 
Raghus: ‘Since you are asking me, twice-born brahman, listen to these 
inescapable events and how they led to both my felicity and my misery. 
Long ago my father, the illustrious and mighty Sudeva, was the king of 
Vidarbha and was renowned throughout the three worlds. Two sons were 
born to him, brahman, by his two wives. I am known as Sveta and the 
younger was Suratha. 

[S—10] “ ‘Then, when my father had ascended to heaven, the people 
consecrated me as king. And there, with great attentiveness, I ruled the 
kingdom righteously. And thus, brahman of excellent vows, thousands of 
years passed while I ruled the kingdom righteously, protecting my subjects. 
Having come to know the length of my life by virtue of a certain sign, 


foremost of twice-born brahmans, I retired to the forest, keeping my 
mortality in mind. And I entered this inaccessible forest devoid of beasts 
and birds in order to practice austerities in the lovely environs of the lake. 
After consecrating my brother, Suratha, in the kingdom as the lord of men, I 
came to this lake and practiced austerities for a long time. And after 
practicing the most severe austerities for three thousand years, great sage, I 
attained the unsurpassed Brahmaloka. 

[11-13] “ ‘But then, foremost of twice-born brahmans, while I was 
dwelling in heaven, hunger and thirst afflicted me. Because of that, 
supremely noble sage, my senses were reeling. I went to Grandfather 
Brahma, who is foremost in the three worlds, and said: “Blessed one, the 
Brahmaloka should be free from hunger and thirst. Of what action is this 
the outcome that I am nonetheless subjected to hunger and thirst? What 
shall be my food, O God? Tell me that, Grandfather.” 

[14-19] “ ‘But Grandfather Brahma said to me: “Your food, son of 
Sudeva, will be your own sweet flesh. You must eat that perpetually. While 
you were performing severe austerities, you nourished merely your own 
body. What is not sown, extremely wise Sveta, can never grow. You did not 
give even the smallest donation in that forest frequented by creatures. It is 
because of that, my child, that, even though you have reached heaven, you 
are afflicted by hunger and thirst. Now you must eat your own splendid 
body that has been well nourished with food and which will taste like the 
nectar of immortality. It will satisfy your hunger. But, Sveta, when the very 
great seer, the unassailable Agastya, shall set foot in this forest, you shall be 
freed from this hideous fate. For, gentle Sveta, he is able to save even the 
hosts of the gods, what to say of you, great-armed king, who are subject to 
hunger and thirst.” 

[20-23] “ ‘Having heard the pronouncement of the blessed god of gods, 
I take my own body as my abominable food, foremost among twice-born 
brahmans. I have been eating it, O brahman, for many multitudes of years, 
but still it never diminishes. And this, brahman-seer, is the ultimate 
satisfaction of my hunger. You must release me, who have fallen into this 
wretched state because of this hideous fate. For no one other than you, a 
twice-born sage born from a pot, could have come here. Please accept this 
ornament, gentle foremost of twice-born brahmans, for saving me. Please, 
brahman-seer, be gracious.’ 


[24-27] “Upon hearing that heavenly being’s words, so laden with 
misery, I accepted that magnificent ornament for the sake of saving him. No 
sooner had I accepted that splendid ornament than the former human body 
of the royal seer vanished. Once that body had vanished, the king, that royal 
seer, with the greatest delight, once more departed for the highest heaven 
gratified and overjoyed. It was for this reason, Kakutstha, that that person, 
who was equal to Sakra, gave me this celestial ornament, marvelous to 
behold.” 


Sarga 70 

[1-3] When Raghava had heard that most astonishing speech of Agastya, he 
began to question him once again out of respect for him as a guru as well as 
out of his amazement. “Holy one, how did that fearsome forest where 
Sveta, the king of Vidarbha, practiced austerities come to be devoid of 
animals and birds? And how is it that in order to practice austerities he 
entered that forest that had become deserted, devoid of creatures, and 
without any people? I wish to hear this just as it happened.” 

[4-6] When that sage of supremely blazing energy had heard Rama’s 
words, so filled with curiosity, he began to speak these words: “Long ago, 
Rama, in the Krta Yuga, Lord Manu wielded the rod of punishment. His son 
was the great Iksvaku, the increaser of his lineage. Manu established his 
invincible son in his former kingdom and said to him, ‘May you be the 
founder of royal lineages on earth.’ 

[7-10] “And, Raghava, the son promised his father, saying, ‘So be it.’ 
Then Manu, supremely delighted, spoke again: ‘I am pleased, supremely 
illustrious son, there is no doubt that you shall be the founder. You must 
protect your subjects with the rod of punishment, but let that rod not be 
used without good cause. The rod of punishment, when employed properly 
and brought down upon men who have committed crimes, leads a king to 
heaven. Therefore, my great-armed son, you must be diligent with respect 
to the rod of punishment. For if you do this, the greatest righteousness will 
be yours.’ 

[11-13] “When Manu had thus instructed his son copiously and 
attentively, he went in great happiness to the highest heaven, that is, the 
unsurpassed Brahmaloka. And once he had departed for the highest heaven, 
Iksvaku, of immeasurable splendor, was given over to brooding, thinking, 


‘How can I father sons?’ Then, by means of various sacrificial rites, Manu’s 
righteous son fathered a hundred sons, who were equal to the sons of the 
gods. 

[14-16] “Now, dear boy, delight of the Raghus, the youngest of them all 
was stupid and ignorant and did not obey his elder brothers. Foreseeing that 
the rod of punishment [danda] would inevitably fall upon the body of that 
dullard, his father gave him the name ‘Danda.’ Perceiving his son’s terrible 
defect, Raghava, tamer of your foes, he gave him a kingdom between the 
Vindhya and the Saivala mountains. 

[17-19] “And so, Rama, Danda became king there, and he founded an 
incomparable and unsurpassed city on the lovely slopes of the mountains. 
He gave that city the name Madhumanta, lord, and he chose USanas of 
excellent vows as his purohita. And thus the king, together with his 
purohita, ruled that kingdom, which was filled with happy people, as if it 
were the kingdom of the gods in heaven.” 


Sarga 71 
[1] When the great pot-born seer had related this to Rama, he continued 
with the next part of the story. 

[2-4] “And there, Kakutstha, for many tens of thousands of years the 
dull-witted Danda ruled that kingdom, which was free from all troubles. 
Now once, during the delightful month of Caitra, the king visited the 
charming ashram of Bhargava. And there Danda spied Bhargava’s daughter 
wandering in the woodlands. She was unsurpassed and had no equal on 
earth in beauty. 

[S—6] “Upon seeing her, that extremely dull-witted king was smitten by 
the arrows of Ananga, and, in great agitation, he approached the girl and 
said these words: ‘Where are you from, lovely, fair-hipped girl? And whose 
daughter are you? Smitten as I am by Ananga, I ask you, my fair-waisted 
one.’ 

[7-11] “But even as the lustful king was speaking in this fashion, 
intoxicated in his infatuation, the Bhargava girl replied to him with these 
courteous words: “You must know me to be the eldest daughter of the 
godlike Bhargava, tireless in action. My name, lord of kings, is Araja, and I 
dwell here in the ashram. My father is your guru, lord of kings, and you are 
a disciple of that great sage. If he were to be angered, that sage of great 


austerities would inflict a very great calamity upon you. If, however, you 
are to do this with me according to the path of the virtuous, which 1s fixed 
according to righteousness, then, foremost of kings, you must petition my 
immensely glorious father. Otherwise, there would be dreadful 
consequences for you, since, with his anger, my father could burn up even 
the three worlds.’ 

[12—14] “Now as Araja was speaking in this fashion, Danda, smitten by 
the arrows of Kama and intoxicated with desire, cupped his hands to his 
forehead and said to her: ‘Be gracious, fair-hipped girl, you must not let this 
moment pass. For, my fair-faced one, my very life is being torn apart on 
your account. As long as I have you, let me suffer death or dreadful sin. So 
love me, timid one, your lover, who loves you to distraction.’ 

[15-17] “Having spoken in this fashion, the powerful king seized the girl 
forcibly with both arms and began to rape her at will as she struggled. Once 
he had done this evil, very dreadful, and extremely horrifying thing, Danda 
went immediately to the unsurpassed city of Madhumanta. But as for Araja, 
weeping and terrified, she waited for her father not far from the ashram.” 


Sarga 72 

[1-3] “Now after a short time, the divine seer of immeasurable splendor, 
afflicted with hunger and surrounded by his disciples, returned to his 
ashram having heard about what had happened. He spied Araja. Desolate 
and covered with blood, she had lost her radiance like the moonlight 
swallowed up in the morning by the red dawn. And his anger flared up—all 
the more so as he was afflicted by hunger—as if to consume the three 
worlds, and he said this to his disciples: 

[4-6] “ ‘Now witness the destruction—as dreadful to look upon as a 
raging flame of fire—of this perverse and ignorant Danda. This evil fool, 
who dared to touch the blazing flame of fire, eater of oblations, now faces 
destruction, along with his followers. Since this fool has committed such a 
sin, so dreadful to contemplate, he must therefore reap the fruit of his evil 
act. 

[7-10] “ ‘In seven nights this stupid king, who performs such evil acts, 
will meet his death, along with his retainers, troops, and mounts. With an 
immense dust storm, Indra, the chastiser of Paka, will parch that fool’s 
kingdom for a hundred leagues all around. Every living thing that is here, 


both fixed and moving, will be completely destroyed by that immense dust 
storm. After seven nights, every living thing throughout the length and 
breadth of Danda’s realm will become invisible as if made of dust.’ 

[11-12] “When, inflamed with anger, he had spoken in this fashion, he 
told the people who dwelt in the ashram, “You must now stay beyond the 
borders of this country.” When the people who dwelt in the ashram had 
heard those words of USanas, they departed from Danda’s realm and made 
their residence outside of it. 

[13-15] “After he had spoken to the sages in this fashion, he said this to 
Araja: ‘You must stay here in the ashram, you stupid girl, engaged in 
profound meditation. This lake, however, will remain brilliantly clear for 
the distance of a league around. Enjoying it without anxiety, Araja, you 
must wait here for the proper time. And whatever creatures may come to 
dwell for the night in your vicinity will be forever spared from the dust 
storm.’ 

[16-18] “After Bhargava had spoken in this fashion, he took up his 
residence elsewhere. And after seven days, just as that expounder of 
Brahman had predicted, everything was reduced to ashes. This is that very 
realm of Danda lying between the peaks of the Vindhya and Saivala 
mountains. It was cursed by the brahman-seer long ago when that violation 
of righteousness had been committed. And ever since that time, Kakutstha, 
it has been called the Dandaka forest, while the area where the ascetics 
stayed likewise became ‘Janasthana.’ 

[19-21] “I have now told you all of that about which you asked me, 
Raghava. Now, hero, the time for performing the sandhya rites 1s passing. 
All around us, all these great seers, their water pots filled, have performed 
their ablutions and are worshiping the sun. And those seers, the foremost of 
brahmans, all together are hymning the sun as it is about to set, Rama. Now 
go and perform your ablutions.” 


Sarga 73 
[1-4] Heeding the words of the seer, Rama approached that holy lake, 
frequented by apsarases, to perform the sandhya rites. After having 
completed his ablutions and having performed the evening sandhya rites, 
Rama entered the ashram of the great pot-born sage. And Agastya arranged 
many kinds of fruits and roots as well as herbs and wholesome vegetables 


for his meal. When the foremost of men had eaten that food, which was like 
the nectar of immortality, he spent the night there, pleased and satisfied. 

[S—7] After rising early in the morning and performing his daily rituals, 
the foremost of the Raghus, tamer of his foes, approached the seer for 
permission to depart. Respectfully saluting the great pot-born seer, Rama 
said: “I would depart, and so I beg of you, please grant me leave. I am 
blessed, and I am graced by the sight of such a great personage as you, and 
I shall return here to see you in order to purify myself.” 

[8—12] As Kakutstha was thus speaking these words—so marvelous to 
apprehend—the sage, so rich in austerities, who viewed all through the eye 
of righteousness, was supremely delighted, and he said: “Your words, 
Rama, are extremely wonderful, each of their syllables mellifluous. It is you 
alone, delight of the Raghus, who purify all the worlds. And all who see 
you, Rama, even for a mere moment, are purified and attain heaven, where 
they are worshiped by the divinities. But those living beings on earth who 
look upon you with an inimical eye are struck down by the rod of Yama and 
go straight to hell. So go safely and confidently on your journey, free from 
all dangers. Rule the kingdom in accordance with righteousness. For you, 
sir, are the recourse of all the world.” 

[13-16] Addressed in this fashion by the sage, the wise king extended 
his arms with his hands cupped in reverence and respectfully saluted that 
seer of holy conduct. Then, after respectfully saluting that foremost of sages 
and all those sages, so rich in austerities, he calmly mounted the Puspaka, 
which was adorned with gold. And as he, who was like great Indra, was 
departing, the hosts of sages on every side honored him with blessings, just 
as the immortal gods might thousand-eyed Indra. Comfortably mounted in 
the Puspaka, which was adorned with gold, Rama resembled the hare- 
marked moon abutting the clouds at the onset of the rainy season. 

[17-19] Then, at midday, Kakutstha, who was honored all along the way, 
reached Ayodhya and descended from the flying palace. After dismissing 
the resplendent Puspaka, which moved at its master’s will, Rama spoke 
these words to the gatekeeper who was posted in the inner courtyard: “Go 
to swift-striding Laksmana and Bharata, report my arrival, and summon 
them without delay.” 


Sarga 74 


[1—2] When the gatekeeper had heard that speech of Rama, who was tireless 
in action, he summoned the two princes and then informed Rama. Upon 
seeing that his beloved Bharata and Laksmana had arrived, Rama embraced 
them and spoke these words: 

[3-7] “I have faithfully accomplished this unsurpassed task for the 
twice-born brahman. And therefore, Raghavas, I now wish to firmly 
establish the bulwark of righteousness. I wish to perform the unsurpassed 
rajasuya together with both of you, who are my second selves, for in this 
lies everlasting righteousness. For it was by sacrificing with the rdjasiya 
rite, accompanied by excellent oblations and excellent subsidiary rites, that 
Mitra, destroyer of his foes, attained the position of Varuna. And it was by 
sacrificing with the rdjasuya rite in accordance with righteousness that 
Soma, who knew righteousness, attained fame among all the worlds and an 
eternal domain. You must carefully consider with me what would be best at 
this time, and you must state prudently what would be beneficial in the time 
to come.” 

[8—14] When Bharata, skillful in speech, had heard these words of 
Raghava, he cupped his hands in reverence and said these words: “In you, 
noble brother, resides the highest righteousness. On you rests the entire 
earth, the bearer of wealth. And in you, great-armed prince of measureless 
valor, abides glory. Just as the immortal gods look upon Prajapati, all the 
great kings, those protectors of the earth, look upon you as the lord of the 
world, as do we as well. And the people regard you as their father, 
immensely powerful king. Raghava, you are the refuge of all living beings 
on earth as well. Therefore, your majesty, how can you undertake such a 
sacrifice, which would witness the destruction of the royal lineages on 
earth? For in the performance of that, your majesty, the annihilation—like 
the universal destruction—of all men on earth who have attained manly 
valor will come to pass. Tiger among men, you who are of unequaled valor 
through your virtues should not destroy the earth, for it 1s already under 
your sway.” 

[15-19] When truly valorous Rama had heard that speech of Bharata, 
which seemed to consist of the nectar of immortality, he experienced 
unequaled delight. And he said these splendid words to the increaser of 
Kaikeyi’s joy: “I am indeed pleased and gratified by your words this day. 
These words in conformity with righteousness, which you have boldly 


uttered, tiger among men, will be the salvation of the earth. Because of your 
excellent speech, knower of righteousness, I will surely desist from that 
intention of mine, which was to perform that foremost of rites, the rdjasitya. 
Protection of the people is a duty of kings on a par with sacrifice. 
Therefore, I shall heed your words, which were so well spoken and finely 
articulated.” 


Sarga 75 

[1-3] Once Rama and great Bharata had spoken in this fashion, Laksmana 
too spoke splendid words, to the delight of the Raghus: “The great sacrifice, 
the asvamedha, purifies one of all sins. May this foremost of sacrifices, 
which is both incomparable and sanctifying, please you. For we have heard 
this ancient tale concerning the very great Sakra Vasava. Once, when he 
was overwhelmed by the sin of brahmahatya, killing a brahman, he was 
purified by the asvamedha. 

[4—8] “They say that long ago, great-armed brother, when the gods and 
the asuras had come together, there was a great descendant of Diti named 
Vrtra, who was highly regarded throughout the worlds. He was a hundred 
leagues in breadth and three times that in height, and, in his affection, he 
looked fondly upon all the three worlds. Knowing righteousness and proper 
conduct and perfected through his intellect, he ruled the entire earth single- 
mindedly and in accordance with righteousness. At that time, while he was 
ruling, the earth produced every desirable thing. And the roots and fruits 
that were produced were succulent. That great being’s land was extremely 
rich, and it brought forth crops without cultivation. And such was the 
prosperous kingdom, wonderful to behold, that he enjoyed. 

[9-10] “Then an idea occurred to him: ‘I must practice unexcelled 
austerities. For austerity is the greatest good. For austerity is the greatest 
happiness.’ Having set his eldest son as supreme ruler over his subjects, he 
performed severe austerities, thus causing anxiety to all the divinities. 

[11-15] “Now, while Vrtra was engaged in austerities, Vasava was 
extremely distressed. He approached Visnu and said these words: ‘Through 
practicing austerities, O great-armed lord, Vrtra has conquered the worlds. 
For he is mighty and righteous and I am unable to oppose him. If he should 
continue to perform austerities, O lord of the gods, then, as long as the 
worlds may endure, they will remain under his control. And yet, immensely 


powerful Lord, you ignore that supremely exalted one. For surely Vrtra 
could not survive for even a moment if you were angry with him. For ever 
since he attained this amicable relationship with you, Visnu, he has enjoyed 
the lordship of the worlds. 

[16-18] “ ‘Immensely illustrious Lord, you must extend your grace to 
the world. For it is only through your action that the whole world may be at 
peace and free from dissolution. All the gods, denizens of heaven, look to 
you, Visnu. You must render assistance to them through the great feat of 
killing Vrtra. Indeed, you have always rendered assistance to these great 
divinities. This feat is impossible for others. You, sir, are the refuge of those 
who have no other refuge.’ ” 


Sarga 76 
[1-2] When Rama, the destroyer of his foes, had heard those words of 
Laksmana, he said to him, “Please tell me in full about the slaying of 
Vrtra.” Addressed in this fashion by Raghava, Laksmana, increaser of 
Sumitra’s joy, resumed his narration of that celestial tale. 

[3—7] “Once Visnu had heard those words of thousand-eyed Indra and of 
all the gods, denizens of heaven, he said this to all of them, who were led by 
Indra: ‘I have long been bound by ties of affection to the very great Vrtra. 
Because of that, I will surely not kill that great asura as a favor to you. 
However, I must certainly fulfill your ultimate desire. Therefore, I shall tell 
you the means whereby you shall slay Vrtra. I shall divide myself into three 
parts. In this way, there is no doubt that thousand-eyed Indra will kill Vrtra. 
Let one portion enter Indra Vasava, the second the vajra, and the third the 
earth. After that, Sakra will slay Vrtra.’ 

[8—9] “Now as the lord of the gods was speaking in this fashion, the gods 
spoke these words: ‘Without a doubt, O slayer of the daityas, it will happen 
thus, just as you say. May blessings be upon you. We shall depart, eagerly 
anticipating the slaying of the asura Vrtra. O supremely noble lord, endow 
Vasava with your own blazing energy.’ 

[10-11] “Then all the great gods, led by thousand-eyed Indra, proceeded 
to the forest where the great asura Vrtra was. They saw the foremost of the 
asuras engaged in austerities. Suffused with blazing energy, he seemed as if 
to consume the three worlds and to scorch the very heavens. 


[12-14] “At the mere sight of that foremost of asuras, the gods were 
terrified. And just as they were thinking, ‘How will we kill him? How will 
we not suffer defeat?’ thousand-eyed Indra, smasher of citadels, seized his 
vajra with both hands and hurled it at Vrtra’s head. As it fell on Vrtra’s 
head, that fearsome weapon blazed, as it were, with great flames like the 
fire of universal destruction. Seared by that weapon, the whole world was 
terrified. 

[15-16] “But brooding about his unimaginable killing of Vrtra, the 
illustrious lord of the wise gods fled to the ends of the earth. Nonetheless, 
even as Indra fled, the sin of brahmahatya, killing a brahman, pursued him 
and fell upon his limbs. Then misery took hold of Indra. 

[17-19] “Their enemy had been slain, but since they had lost Indra, the 
gods, with Agni as their leader, worshiped Visnu, the foremost in the three 
worlds, again and again saying: ‘You are the highest refuge, O God. You are 
Lord and the firstborn of the world. It is for the sake of the protection of all 
beings that you took the form of Visnu. You have slain Vrtra, but the sin of 
brahmahatya 1s afflicting Vasava. Please, tiger among the gods, declare the 
means for his liberation.’ 

[20—22] “When Visnu had heard these words of the gods, he said: ‘Let 
Sakra sacrifice to me alone. Then I shall purify that wielder of the vajra. 
Once Indra, the chastiser of Paka, has sacrificed to me with the sacred 
asvamedha, he shall be free from fear, and he will once more attain the 
lordship of the gods.’ When he had instructed the gods in this fashion with 
this speech, which was like the nectar of immortality, Visnu, the lord of the 
gods, being lauded, returned to heaven.” 


Sarga 77 

[1-3] When Laksmana had thus described the entire slaying of Vrtra, 
omitting nothing, that foremost of men began to tell the rest of the story, 
saying: “Then, once the immensely powerful Vrtra, the terror of the gods, 
had been slain, Sakra, the slayer of Vrtra, overwhelmed with the sin of 
brahmahatya, was unable to regain consciousness. Having resorted to the 
ends of the earth, he lay there, unconscious and insensate, writhing like a 
serpent. 

[4-5] “Now after thousand-eyed Indra had vanished, the world was in a 
terrible state. The earth looked devastated, parched, its forests desiccated. 


Ponds, lakes, and rivers were empty of water, and there was distress on the 
part of creatures caused by the drought. 

[6-7] “But as this world was wasting away, the gods, their minds 
agitated, performed the sacrifice previously prescribed by Visnu. Then all 
the hosts of the gods, together with their preceptors and the seers, 
proceeded together to the place where Indra lay, dazed with fear. 

[8—9] “When they saw thousand-eyed Indra, dazed by the sin of 
brahmahatya, they placed that lord of the gods at their head and performed 
the asvamedha. Then, O lord of men, a very grand asvamedha proceeded 
for the sake of the purification of great Mahendra from the sin of 
brahmahatya. 

[10-11] “But then, at the conclusion of the sacrifice, Brahmahatya 
herself approached those great ones and said these words: ‘Where, then, 
will you establish a residence for me?’ Gratified and filled with delight, the 
gods then said to her, “You must divide yourself by yourself into four parts, 
O unassailable lady.’ 

[12—15] “When Brahmahatya, with whom it was impossible to abide, 
had heard the speech of the great gods, there, in their presence, she 
requested a residence somewhere else: ‘With one portion, I will dwell in 
rivers when they are filled with water, and with the second, in trees. This is 
the truth I am telling you. And as for my third portion, with that I will dwell 
for three nights in women endowed with youth and filled with pride, as a 
crusher of their pride. And, O you bulls among the gods, with my fourth 
portion, I will possess those who intentionally kill innocent brahmans.’ 

[16] “Then the gods replied to her, ‘Everything shall be just as you say, 
O you with whom it is impossible to abide. May you prosper according to 
your desire.’ 

[17-19] “Then, filled with joy, the gods paid homage to thousand-eyed 
Indra. And thus did Vasava become free from anxiety and purified of sin. 
Once thousand-eyed Indra had regained his position, the world became 
tranquil. And then Sakra worshiped that sacrifice of marvelous appearance. 
For such is the power of the asvamedha, O delight of the Raghus. 
Therefore, immensely fortunate king, you should offer sacrifice with the 
asvamedha.” 


Sarga 78 


[1-2] When Raghava of immense blazing energy had heard the speech that 
Laksmana had spoken, he, who was himself skilled in speech, smiled and 
responded with these words: “It is entirely and exactly as you say, 
Laksmana, with respect to the killing of Vrtra and the benefits of the 
asvamedha. 

[3-7] “For I have heard, gentle brother, that, long ago, the extremely 
righteous and majestic Ila, the son of Kardama Prajapati, was the lord of the 
country of Bahli. That greatly illustrious king brought the entire earth under 
his control. And, tiger among men, he ruled his kingdom as if it were his 
son. Afflicted with fear of him, gentle delight of the Raghus, the supremely 
noble gods, the sons of Diti, the great asuras, the great serpents, the 
raksasas, the gandharvas, and the extremely great yaksas paid him homage. 
Indeed, the three worlds themselves feared that great king when he was 
angry. For such was the king of the Bahlikas. He was unwavering in 
righteousness and in might. He was highly illustrious and supremely exalted 
in intellect. 

[8—10] “Once, in the charming month of Caitra, that great-armed king, 
together with his retainers, troops, and mounts, conducted a hunt in a 
beautiful forest. In that forest the king slaughtered animals in their hundreds 
and thousands, but even after killing them, the great king was not satisfied. 
Slaughtering ten thousand animals of various kinds, the great king 
wandered into the region where Mahasena was born. 

[11-13] “But there the unassailable lord of the god among gods, Hara, 
accompanied by all his attendants, was making love to the daughter of the 
king of the mountains. There, near a mountain waterfall, Uma’s lord, whose 
banner bears the lord of cattle, had turned himself into a woman in his 
desire to delight the goddess. And whichever creatures in that region of the 
forest bore a masculine gender, along with everything else that was there, 
came to have a feminine gender. 

[14-16] “At that very juncture, King Ila, the son of Kardama, wandered 
into that region, slaughtering thousands of animals. And there, delight of 
the Raghus, he saw that everything, including the serpents, beasts, and 
birds, had been turned into females and that he himself, as well as his 
attendants, had become women. When he saw himself in such a condition, 
he became immensely distressed. But when he realized that this was the 
work of Uma’s lord, he was terrified. 


[17-19] “Then the king, together with his servants, troops, and mounts, 
took refuge with the great god, black-throated Siva of the matted locks. 
That beneficent and illustrious Lord, together with the goddess, laughed, 
and, as he was a granter of boons, he said these words to the son of 
Prajapati: ‘Get up! Get up, immensely powerful royal seer Kardameya! 
Gentle prince of excellent vows, choose any boon other than manhood.’ 

[20-22] “Thus was the grief-stricken king denied by the great god; but 
since he had become a woman, he would accept no other boon from that 
foremost of gods. Then, stricken with still greater grief, the king 
wholeheartedly prostrated himself before the great goddess, daughter of the 
king of the mountains, and said: “Goddess of boons! Granter of boons! 
«You are the most beautiful woman in all the worlds. O gentle goddess, the 
vision of whom is never in vain, I appeal to you. Homage to you.’ 

[23-24] “Understanding what was in the heart of the royal seer, the 
goddess, with the approval of Rudra, replied with these auspicious words in 
the presence of Hara: “The god will be the granter of half of the boon, and 
similarly I will be of the other half. Therefore, you may choose half of 
womanhood and half of manhood for as long as you wish.’ 

[25—26] “When the king had heard the goddess’s unsurpassed and most 
marvelous boon, he was delighted at heart and then said these words: ‘If, O 
Goddess, you who are unequaled in the world for beauty, are pleased with 
me, then may I once again be a man for a month, after first having become 
a woman for a month.’ 

[27-29] “When the goddess of the lovely face realized what he desired, 
she replied with these auspicious words: ‘It shall be so. Your majesty, when 
you are a man, you will not remember your having been a woman, and 
when, in the following month, you become a woman, you will not 
remember your ever having been a man.’ And in this way, the king Ila 
Kardami, having been a man for a month, would then, for a month, become 
a woman named [14, the most beautiful woman in the triple world.” 


Sarga 79 
[1-3] When Laksmana and Bharata had heard the story of Ila as it had been 
narrated by Rama, they were extremely amazed. Cupping their hands in 
reverence toward Rama, they then asked once more for a detailed account 
of the particular situation of that great king. “How did that king endure his 


misfortune while he was a woman? On the other hand, what sort of life did 
he lead when he was a man?” 

[4-7] When Kakutstha had heard their words, so filled with curiosity, he 
related how it had fared with that king. “Having become the most beautiful 
woman in the world, she passed that very first month surrounded by those 
women who had previously been his attendants. Soon she, the most 
beautiful woman in the world, her eyes like lotus petals, wandered on foot 
deep into that forest, which was filled with trees, shrubs, and creepers. 
Then, having left all the mounts behind, [la enjoyed herself throughout a 
broad mountain meadow. 

[8—10] “Now in that forested region, not far from the mountain, there 
was an extraordinarily beautiful lake frequented by flocks of various birds. 
In the middle of it, [la then spied Soma’s son, Budha, who was blazing with 
the effulgence of his body, like the full moon newly risen. Engaged in 
severe and difficult austerities there in the water, he was glorious, 
unfettered, and in the full flush of youth. 

[11-12] “Together with her companions, who had previously been men 
but had now become women, O delight of the Raghus, she, in her 
astonishment, ruffled the entire lake. But as for Budha, no sooner had he 
caught sight of her than he was afflicted by the arrows of Kama. Unable to 
control himself, he began to tremble in the water. 

[13-15] “Gazing at Ila, whose beauty exceeded any in the triple world, 
he fell to thinking: ‘Who can she, who surpasses even a goddess, be? Never 
have I seen anyone endowed with such beauty even among the goddesses, 
the apsarases, or the women of the great serpents and the asuras. If she is 
not the wife of another, she would be a fitting one for me.’ With this 
thought in mind, he came out of the water to the shore. 

[16-17] “Once he had caught his breath, that righteous sage then called 
out to four of the young women, and they, in turn, greeted him respectfully. 
The righteous sage asked them, ‘To whom does this woman, the most 
beautiful in the world, belong? And why has she come here? Tell me the 
truth at once.’ 

[18—21] “And when those women had heard his speech, so pleasant and 
sweet, with its sweet syllables, they all replied with sweet voices: ‘This fair- 
hipped woman continues to be our leader. Lacking a husband, she wanders 
with us through the depths of the forest.” When he had heard the women’s 


speech with its obscure wording, the twice-born Budha recited the sacred 
avartini spell. When he had thus come to know the entire matter concerning 
that king, just as it had come about, that bull among sages said to all of 
those women: 

[22—23] “ ‘Here the fortunate kimpurusas dwell on the slopes of the 
mountain. You too shall dwell on this mountain, and so you must arrange 
your living quarters. All of you women will forever live on roots, leaves, 
and fruits, and you shall surely obtain kimpurusas as your husbands.’ 

[24] “No sooner had that large group of women heard that speech of the 
son of Soma than they were turned into kimpurusa women. They then 
inhabited that mountain in many different places.” 


Sarga 80 
[1—2] And then, when Laksmana and Bharata had heard about how those 
women had become kimpurusas, they both said, “How wonderful!” to 
Rama, the lord of the people. Righteous and illustrious Rama then resumed 
the tale of Prajapati’s son Ila, saying: 

[3-6] “When Budha, the foremost of seers, had seen that all of those 
kinnara women had dispersed, he smiled gently and addressed that 
beautiful woman: ‘O fair-faced woman, I am the dearly beloved son of 
Soma. Please love me with devotion, fair-hipped one, and with tender 
regard.’ When [1a, who was cut off from her own retinue in that deserted 
place, had heard those words of his, she replied to that great planetary 
divinity of lovely radiance: ‘I do as I please, gentle sir, and I am at your 
disposal. Command me, son of Soma, and do as you desire.’ 

[7—8] ““When the son of the moon god had heard that wonderful response 
of hers, he was overcome with excitement, and, filled with desire, he made 
love with her. And for Budha, who, filled with desire, was passionately 
making love to fair-faced Ia, the month of Madhava passed as if it were a 
mere instant. 

[9-11] “Then, after a full month, Ila, Prajapati’s majestic son, whose face 
was like the full moon, awoke in their bed. And there King Ila spied Soma’s 
son, engaged in austerities in the lake, standing without any support, his 
arms raised, and he said: ‘Blessed one, I came to this inaccessible mountain, 
along with my retinue, but I do not see that army. Where in the world have 
those followers of mine gone?’ 


[12—14] “When he had heard that speech of the royal seer, who had lost 
his memory, Budha responded with beguiling words, soothing him with his 
resonant voice: ‘Your retainers were annihilated by a massive hailstorm, 
while you, afflicted with fear of the wind and rain, slept in the ashram. Take 
heart, bless you. For you may dwell here as you please, hero, free from fear 
and anxiety, living on fruits and roots.’ 

[15-18] “Comforted by that speech but saddened at the death of his 
retainers, the immensely illustrious king replied with these splendid words: 
‘I shall renounce my kingdom, for, deprived of my retainers, I cannot 
continue even for a moment. You must please grant me permission, 
brahman. My eldest son, who is known as Sagabindu, is immensely 
illustrious, O brahman. Devoted to righteousness, he will take over my 
kingdom. For I cannot bear to go there and speak those dreadful words to 
the happy wives of my retainers, O sage of immense blazing energy.’ 

[19-21] “As the lord among kings was speaking in this fashion, Budha 
comfortingly uttered these extraordinary and wonderful words: ‘Please 
choose to remain here. You must not grieve, immensely powerful 
Kardameya. When you have dwelt here for a year, I will bring about 
something of benefit to you.’ When Ila had heard those words of Budha, 
who was tireless in action, he made up his mind to stay just as that exponent 
of the doctrine of Brahman had urged. 

[22—25] “Thus, he, having become a lovely woman for one month, made 
love constantly, while as a man in alternate months, he set his mind on 
righteousness. Then, in the ninth month, she, fair-hipped Ila, gave birth by 
the son of Soma to a son, Purtiravas, the child of her own body. As soon as 
her immensely powerful son, who looked just like Budha, was born, the 
fair-hipped Ila placed him in his father’s hands. And as for the self- 
controlled Budha, after comforting the lord of men who had now become 
male, he entertained him with tales exemplary of righteousness.” 


Sarga 81 
[1-2] When Rama had spoken in this fashion about the miraculous birth of 
Purtiravas, Laksmana and the extremely illustrious Bharata spoke once 
again: “When she, the beloved of Soma’s son, had dwelt with him for a 
year, what did she do then? Please tell us just as it happened, foremost of 


99 


men. 


[3-7] When Rama had heard the sweetness of the words of those two 
who were inquiring of him, he continued the story of Prajapati’s son. “Then, 
after heroic Ila had once again become a man, supremely wise and 
immensely illustrious Budha summoned the extremely noble Samvarta, 
Bhrgu’s son Cyavana, the sage Aristanemin, the delightful Pramodana, and 
the sage Durvasas. When he had brought them all together, the eloquent 
sage, well composed through his self-control, addressed his guests, all of 
whom perceived the highest truth: ‘This is the great-armed King Ila, son of 
Kardama. You all know what happened to him. Now you must do what 
would be best for him.’ 

[8—10] “While they were conversing, Kardama of immense blazing 
energy arrived at the ashram together with some eminent twice-born 
brahmans. Pulastya, Kratu, Vasatkara, and Omkara of great blazing energy 
came to the ashram. All of them were delighted at heart at meeting one 
another, and desiring only the best for the lord of Bahli, they then 
individually offered him advice. 

[11-13] “Now, for the sake of his son, Kardama spoke words that were 
extremely beneficial: ‘Twice-born brahmans, hear my words as to what 
would be best for the king. I can see no remedy other than bull-bannered 
Siva. And, indeed, no sacrifice other than the as’vamedha is as dear to that 
great god. Therefore, let us all sacrifice to the unassailable god on the king’s 
behalf.’ Addressed in this fashion by Kardama, all those bulls among twice- 
born brahmans agreed to that sacrifice in order to propitiate Rudra. 

[14—17] “The royal seer named Marutta, the conqueror of enemy citadels 
and a disciple of Samvarta, performed the sacrifice. The great sacrifice took 
place near Budha’s ashram, and the greatly illustrious Rudra was supremely 
gratified. Then, upon the completion of the sacrifice, Uma’s lord was 
pleased and, with the greatest delight, said the following with regard to [la 
to all those twice-born brahmans: ‘I am pleased with the asvamedha and 
with your devotion, O foremost of twice-born brahmans. What excellent 
favor may I do for this lord of Bahli?’ 

[18-19] “As the lord of the gods was speaking in this fashion, those 
twice-born brahmans, well composed, further propitiated him so that [a 
might become a man. Then, delighted at heart, Rudra restored his manhood. 
And having granted that to [1a, the immensely illustrious god vanished. 


[20-24] “Once the asvamedha had been completed and Hara had 
vanished, all those farsighted, twice-born brahmans departed just as they 
had come. And as for King Ila, having left Bahli, he founded the glorious 
and unsurpassed city of Pratisthana in the middle country. But as for 
Sasabindu, that conqueror of enemy citadels, he became king in Bahli, 
while Prajapati’s mighty son Ila was king in Pratisthana. In time, Ila 
attained the unsurpassed Brahmaloka, and King Purtravas Aila inherited 
Pratisthana. For such is the power of the asvamedha, O bulls among men, 
that Ila, having been a woman, regained his manhood and other things that 
were difficult to obtain as well.” 


Sarga 82 

[1-3] When immeasurably radiant Kakutstha had related this to his two 
brothers, he once more addressed to Laksmana these words in keeping with 
righteousness: “Laksmana, once I have summoned Vasistha, Vamadeva, 
Jabali, Kasyapa, and all the other preeminent twice-born brahmans who are 
experts in the asvamedha, and once I have taken counsel with them, I shall, 
with great concentration, release a horse endowed with all the auspicious 
signs.” 

[4-6] When he had heard those words spoken by Raghava, Laksmana, 
acting quickly, summoned all those twice-born brahmans and presented 
them to Raghava. When they had seen the highly unassailable Raghava, 
who resembled a god and who was respectfully bowing at their feet, they 
honored him with blessings. Cupping his hands in reverence, Raghava then 
addressed those foremost among the twice-born brahmans in words 
concerning the asvamedha that were in keeping with righteousness. 

[7-13] When Rama had heard the wonderful words concerning the 
asvamedha on the part of the foremost among the twice-born brahmans, he 
was extremely pleased. Having secured their approval, Rama said to 
Laksmana: “Great-armed prince, send for the great Sugriva, saying to him, 
‘Bless you, please come quickly, together with the great tawny monkeys 
and many of their dependents, in order to participate in this greatest of 
sacrifices.” And let great-armed Vibhisana, traveling swiftly, attend the 
asvamedha accompanied by many rdksasas, who can travel anywhere at 
will. And, tiger among men, let those kings who are eager to please me 
come quickly with their retinues to the unsurpassed sacrificial ground. 


Moreover, Laksmana, you must invite to the asvamedha all those twice- 
born brahmans, wholly devoted to righteousness, who dwell in distant 
lands. And, great-armed prince, let the seers, those treasure-stores of 
asceticism, be summoned as well as the great seers—together with their 
wives—who dwell in distant lands. 

[14-16] “Great-armed prince, please give instructions for a vast 
sacrificial enclosure on the banks of the Gomatt, in the Naimisa forest, for it 
is unsurpassed in holiness. And, immensely powerful prince, let a hundred 
thousand cartloads of the finest rice and ten thousand cartloads of sesame 
seeds and mudga beans go on ahead. Let the immensely wise Bharata go on 
ahead accompanying many tens of millions in gold coins and more than a 
billion in silver. 

[17-19] “Indeed, let the immensely wise Bharata go on ahead, placing 
before him rows of shops along the way, all the actors and dancers, the 
townsfolk young and old, twice-born brahmans in deep concentration, 
skilled workmen, highly expert craftsmen, all my mothers, the princes’ 
womenfolk, and a golden image of my wife, one fit for consecration at the 
sacrificial rite.” 


Sarga 83 
[1-3] When Bharata’s elder brother had swiftly sent ahead all the sacrificial 
requisites, omitting nothing, he released a piebald stallion marked with the 
auspicious signs. And then, once he had placed Laksmana, together with the 
sacrificial priests, in charge of the horse, Kakutstha proceeded with his 
army to the Naimisa forest. And when great-armed Rama saw _ the 
superlative and marvelous sacrificial enclosure, he experienced unequaled 
delight, and he cried, “How magnificent!” 

[4-8] While Rama was dwelling in the Naimisa forest, all the lords of 
men came from every kingdom and Rama honored them. The immensely 
illustrious foremost of men ordered costly royal pavilions for those great 
kings together with their retinues. And Bharata, together with Satrughna, 
then quickly gave food, drink, and garments to those great kings and their 
retinues. And all the great monkeys, along with Sugriva, humbly waited 
upon the brahmans. Vibhisana too, surrounded by many garlanded 
raksasas, waited upon the seers of fierce austerities as their servant. 


[9-11] And thus, in strict accordance with the injunctions, that sacrifice, 
the asvamedha, commenced. Meanwhile, the horse proceeded to wander 
under the protection of Laksmana. While the great king’s asvamedha was 
going on, there was no cry other than: “Give confidently and freely until all 
who ask are satisfied.” And it was seen that the monkeys and the rdksasas 
gave accordingly. And there at the king’s preeminent sacrifice, which was 
thronged with happy and well-nourished people, there was no one who was 
unwashed, unhappy, or underfed. 

[12-16] Even the great seers there who had lived a long time could not 
recall such a sacrifice that had been adorned with such an abundance of 
gifts. Although silver, gold, jewels, and garments were continually being 
given away, there appeared to be no end of them. “Such a sacrifice has 
never been seen before, even on the part of Sakra, Soma, Yama, or Varuna,” 
so said those treasure-houses of austerity. The monkeys were stationed 
everywhere, as were the raksasas, and, their hands full, they gave clothing 
and wealth generously to those who desired them. Such was the sacrifice, 
replete with every virtue, of that lion among kings. It continued for more 
than a year and was in no way deficient. 


Sarga 84 

[1-4] While that preeminent and marvelous sacrifice was proceeding, as has 
been described, the bull among sages, Valmiki, quickly arrived, along with 
his disciples. When he had viewed that heavenly sacrifice, so marvelous to 
behold, he had some charming leaf huts constructed a little apart from the 
encampments of the seers. Delighted, he then said to his two disciples: “Go 
and, with great concentration and with the greatest joy, sing the poem, the 
Ramayana, in its entirety in the holy encampments of the seers, in the 
dwellings of the brahmans, on the royal highways and byways, and at the 
dwellings of the kings. 

[S—7] “But you must especially sing it right before the sacrificial priests 
near the entrance to Rama’s dwelling, where the sacrifice is going on. You 
must keep on singing, pausing only from time to time to eat the various 
sweet fruits that grow on the hilltops here. For indeed, in eating these fruits 
and these especially delicious roots, dear boys, you will experience no 
fatigue and can stay clear of the city. 


[8—10] “And if Rama, the lord of the earth, should summon you to 
perform in the presence of the assembled seers, then let the singing 
commence. With the greatest delight, you must sing twenty sargas each day 
according to the several tempos, just as I taught you earlier. And you must 
not harbor even the slightest greediness in expectation of wealth. For of 
what use is wealth to ashram dwellers, who partake of only fruits and roots? 

[11-14] “But if Kakutstha should ask you, ‘Whose sons are you?’ you 
must speak thus to that lord of men, saying, ‘We are disciples of Valmiki.’ 
While playing on these very melodious strings and their frets, as I showed 
you earlier, you should sing most sweetly and confidently. You must sing it 
from the beginning, showing no disrespect for the king. For the king is by 
rights the father of all beings. Therefore, tomorrow morning, you two, 
delighted at heart and with great concentration, should sweetly sing this 
song to the accompaniment of both stringed and percussion instruments.” 

[15-16] Then, when the supremely noble and highly illustrious seer 
Valmiki Pracetasa had repeatedly instructed them in this fashion, he fell 
silent. The two princes, having been properly prepared through the 
guidance of the Bhargava, just as were the Asvins, took to heart those 
splendid words spoken by the seer, and, filled with anticipation, they passed 
the night comfortably. 


Sarga 85 

[1-3] When the night had given way to dawn, the two princes bathed, made 
their oblations into the fire, eater of oblations, and then sang in place after 
place, just as they had been instructed to do earlier by the seer. Kakutstha 
heard about that narrative of his past adventures in various lands and about 
the unprecedented mode of recitation, which was ornamented by singing, 
replete with the various tempos, and accompanied by stringed and 
percussion instruments. And when he heard about it being performed by 
two boys, Raghava was overcome with curiosity. 

[4—8] Then, during an interval of the rite, that tiger among men, the king, 
assembled the great seers, kings, scholars, townsfolk, experts in ancient 
lore, grammarians, and the aged, twice-born brahmans, and when he had 
assembled them all, he had the two singers brought in. The delighted hosts 
of seers there and the immensely powerful kings, drinking tn, as it were, the 
king and those two singers with their eyes, then all said to one another 


simultaneously: “Both of them look like Rama, just like reflections of the 
same image. Were they not wearing matted locks and barkcloth garments, 
we would not be able to discern any difference between Raghava and the 
two who are singing.” 

[9-11] And as those assembled were conversing in this fashion, the two 
young sages began a song that enhanced the delight of those who heard it. 
Then that sweet and ethereal musical performance took place there, and 
because of the perfection of the singing, none of those who heard it could 
get enough of it. First, 1t commenced from the beginning, that is, from the 
sarga in which there was the meeting with Narada. Continuing from there, 
they sang twenty sargas. 

[12-15] Then, in the late afternoon, after having heard those twenty 
sargas, Raghava, who was so fond of his brothers, said to Bharata: 
“Kakutstha, you must at once give these two great singers eighteen 
thousand gold coins. The exertions of these two youths must not be in 
vain.” But the two great bards were perplexed and would not accept the 
gold that was being offered, saying: “Of what use is this to us? We are two 
forest dwellers who are quite satisfied with woodland fruits and roots. What 
would we do in the forest with this brightly shining gold?” 

[16-18] As the two of them were speaking in this fashion, Rama and all 
those who were listening were greatly amazed and were filled with 
curiosity. Eager to hear about the origin of that poem, Rama, of immense 
blazing energy, asked the two young sages: “What is the extent of this 
poem? And what did the great man base it on? Indeed, which bull among 
sages 1s the creator of this great poem?” 

[19-21] The two young sages then spoke these words to Raghava, who 
was questioning them: “The author, the holy Valmiki, by whom this, your 
life history, has been revealed in its entirety, is present at the sacrifice. 
Starting from the beginning, lord of kings, there are five hundred sargas, 
and it is based upon your entire life, your majesty, including the good and 
the bad. If you decide to hear it, your majesty, then, great chariot-warrior, 
please listen to it, together with your younger brothers, when you are at 
leisure during an interval of the rite.” 

[22-23] Rama replied, “By all means!” And so, delighted, the two of 
them, having taken leave of Raghava, went back to their dwelling, where 
the bull among sages waited. But as for Rama, having heard the sweetness 


of that singing, he returned to the sacrificial enclosure, along with the sages 
and the great kings. 


Sarga 86 
[1-3] Together with the sages, kings, and monkeys, Rama listened to the 
supremely wonderful singing for many days. During the singing, Rama, 
having recognized the two bards as Sita’s sons, said these words in the 
midst of the assembly: “Go hence into the presence of the holy one and say 
in my words: 

[4-6] “ ‘If Sita be of untainted conduct or if she has expiated her sin, 
then let her, with the permission of the great sage, demonstrate her purity 
here. Then, after having determined the will of the sage and the intentions 
of Sita, who may be eager to give some proof of her innocence, report to me 
at once. Tomorrow morning, for the sake of clearing my name as well, let 
Janaka’s daughter Maithili take a solemn oath here in the midst of the 
assembly.’ ” 

[7-10] When the messengers had heard these supreme and wonderful 
words of Raghava, they proceeded together to the sacrificial enclosure 
where the bull among sages was staying. Prostrating themselves before the 
great and radiant sage of immeasurable splendor, they repeated Rama’s 
gentle and sweet words. When he had heard their speech and had 
understood Rama’s intention, that sage of enormous blazing energy then 
spoke these words: “So be it! Bless you all. Since a husband is a wife’s 
divinity, Sita will act in such a way that Raghava 1s satisfied.” 

[11-13] Addressed in this fashion by the sage, all those immensely 
powerful messengers of Rama returned to Raghava, and they all repeated 
the sage’s words. And so, when the delighted Kakutstha had heard the 
words of the great sage, he addressed the seers and kings assembled there, 
saying, “These holy ones together with their disciples, these lords of men, 
along with their retinues, and anyone else who so desires—let them witness 
Sita’s oath.” 

[14-16] When they had heard those words of great Raghava, there arose 
on the part of all those foremost seers a great cry of “Excellent!” And the 
great kings too praised Raghava, saying, “Only you, best of men, and no 
one else on earth would do such a thing.” When Raghava had thus made his 


decision, he said, “It shall take place tomorrow.” Then that destroyer of his 
foes dismissed them all. 


Sarga 87 

[1-7] When the night had given way to dawn, King Raghava of immense 
blazing energy went to the sacrificial enclosure and summoned all the seers. 
Vasistha, Vamadeva, Jabali, Kasyapa, Visvamitra of prolonged austerities, 
Durvasas of great austerities, Agastya, Sakti, Bhargava, Vamana, long-lived 
Markandeya, Maudgalya of great austerities, the Bhargava Cyavana, 
Satananda the knower of righteousness, Bharadvaja of blazing energy, and 
Agni’s son Suprabha—these and many other sages of fierce vows, as well 
as all those kings, tigers among men, assembled. And all of those great ones 
—the very mighty rdksasas and the immensely powerful monkeys— 
assembled out of eager anticipation. And kshatriyas, vaisyas, and sudras by 
the thousands all assembled to witness Sita’s oath. 

[8—12] Once Valmiki, the foremost of sages, had heard that they had all 
assembled in this fashion and were as motionless as if they had been turned 
to stone, he quickly entered together with Sita. Thinking only of Rama, 
Sita, choked with tears, followed behind the seer, her face downcast and her 
hands cupped in reverence. When those assembled saw Sita coming behind 
Valmiki like Sri following Brahma, there arose a great cry of “Excellent!” 
And thus, a great cheer burst forth from all of those who had been 
overwhelmed with a vast grief born of sorrow. Some cried, “Excellent, 
Sita!’ others, “Excellent, Rama!” and still others there cried, “Excellent! 
Excellent!” to both of them. 

[13-20] Then, together with Sita, Valmiki, that bull among sages, strode 
into the midst of the mass of people and spoke in this fashion to Raghava: 
“Here, Dasarathi, is Sita, of strict vows, who practices righteousness. Even 
though she had done no wrong, she was abandoned by you near my ashram. 
Sita will give proof of her innocence to you of solemn vows, Rama, you 
who are fearful of the malicious rumors among the people. You must permit 
her to do so. And here are Janaki’s two sons, born as twins. These two 
unassailable boys are your sons as well. This that I am telling you is the 
truth. I am the tenth son of Pracetas, O delight of the Raghavas. I do not 
recall ever uttering an untrue statement. Thus, these two are your sons. I 
have performed austerities for many thousands of years. Just as Maithili is 


innocent, so may I enjoy their fruits. When, Raghava, at the rapids in the 
wilderness, I had scrutinized Sita with regard to her five senses and her 
mind as the sixth, I realized, ‘She is blameless,’ and so I took her in. She, 
who holds her husband as her divinity and who is of blameless conduct and 
innocent, will give proof of her innocence to you, who are fearful of the 
malicious rumors among the people.” 


Sarga 88 

[1-4] When Raghava was addressed in this fashion by Valmiki and had 
caught sight of Sita, who resembled a goddess, he cupped his hands in 
reverence; and there, in the midst of the assembled people, he replied: “Let 
it be exactly as you say, illustrious knower of righteousness. But your 
blameless words, brahman, are proof enough for me. Moreover, Vaideht had 
already given proof of her innocence long ago in the presence of the gods. 
But although I knew Sita to be innocent, brahman, I nonetheless abandoned 
her out of fear of the people. Therefore, please, sir, forgive me. And I 
acknowledge that these two bards, born as twins, are my sons. So let me 
show my affection toward Maithilt once she has proven that she is 
blameless in the midst of the people assembled here.” 

[S—8] When the foremost among the gods realized what Rama intended, 
they all assembled, placing Grandfather Brahma at their head. There were 
the Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the Visvedevas, the hosts of the Maruts, 
the Asvins, the seers, the gandharvas, the troupes of the apsarases, and the 
sadhyas. Indeed, all the gods and all the foremost seers were there. At that 
moment, Vayu, god of wind, foremost of gods, auspicious, pleasant, 
delightful, and bearing a heavenly fragrance, refreshed the entire mass of 
people. All the people assembled there from every country witnessed that 
inconceivable and almost miraculous thing that had taken place, just as if it 
were long ago in the Krta Yuga. 

[9-10] When Sita, who was clad in ochre garments, saw all those who 
were assembled, she cupped her hands in reverence, cast down her eyes, 
and lowered her face. Then she spoke these words: “As I have never even 
thought of any man other than Raghava, so may Madhavi, the goddess of 
the earth, open wide for me.” 

[11-13] And as Vaidehi was thus taking this oath, a miraculous thing 
occurred. From the surface of the earth there arose an unsurpassed, 


heavenly throne. It was borne on the heads of great serpents of 
immeasurable might. It was adorned with every jewel, and it was celestial 
with its celestial beauty. Then Dharani, the goddess of the earth, who was 
on that throne, took Maithilt in her arms and, greeting her with words of 
welcome, seated her upon it. 

[14-16] At the sight of Sita entering Rasatala while seated on that 
throne, a continuous celestial shower of blossoms rained down upon her. 
Suddenly there arose a great cry of “Excellent!” among the gods: 
“Excellent! Excellent! O Sita, you who demonstrate such virtuous 
conduct!” Such were the many different cries that the gods uttered as they, 
hovering in the sky, witnessed, with delighted hearts, Sita’s entrance into 
the earth. 

[17—20] All those who were present in the sacrificial enclosure—the 
sages as well as those tigers among men, the kings—could not get over 
their amazement. Among all beings, fixed and moving, in the sky and on 
the earth—including the enormous danavas and the lords of the great 
serpents in Patala—some, delighted, cried out, while some were lost in 
thought. Some just gazed at Rama, while others, stupefied, gazed at Sita. 
They all assembled to witness Sita’s entrance into the earth. And for that 
moment the entire world was completely transfixed. 


‘bSarga 88* (Appendix I, Number 13, Lines 1-51) 

[1-3 = Il. 1-6] When Vaideht had entered the underworld known as 
Rasatala, all the people and the sages there cried out, “Excellent! 
Excellent!” in Rama’s presence. Leaning on his wooden staff, his eyes 
clouded with tears, hanging his head, his mind distressed, Rama was 
profoundly heartbroken. After weeping for a long time, Rama, shedding 
copious tears, was overcome by rage and grief, and he said these words: 

[4—10 = ll. 7-20] “Grief such as I have never before felt seems to want to 
grip my heart right here. Sita just now vanished right before my eyes, just 
as did Laksmi from Indra. Earlier she was carried away and concealed on 
the Lankan shore of the great ocean. And yet, I brought her back even from 
there, how much more easily might I do so from the depths of the earth. O 
Vasudha, goddess of earth! My lady, you must give Sita back to me or else I 
shall display my wrath so that you will know who I truly am. Granted, you 
are my mother-in-law, for Maithili came forth from you, and she was 


adopted long ago by Janaka, who, plough in hand, was ploughing. 
Therefore, you must either give Sita back or open wide for me. For I must 
be with her, whether it be in the underworld known as Patala or in the 
highest heaven. Therefore, you must bring Sita back for I have been driven 
mad on account of Maithilt. This very day, if you do not give me back Sita, 
who has entered the earth, just as she was, I shall destroy you entirely, along 
with your mountains and forests. I will either destroy the earth or let 
everything in this world be once more nothing but water!” 

[11-21 = ll. 21-40] As Kakutstha, the delight of the Raghus, filled with 
rage and grief, was speaking in this fashion, Brahma, together with the 
hosts of gods, said to him: “Rama! Rama! You of excellent vows! You must 
not torment yourself. Remember your immemorial nature and our counsel, 
tormentor of your foes. At this time, you must recall that you are an 
unassailable incarnation of Visnu. You must heed what I say in the midst of 
this assembly. This very poem that you have heard is the foremost of 
poems. No doubt, it will explain everything in great detail, Rama. Valmiki 
has rendered everything, hero, starting from the time of your birth, 
including your experiences of joy and sorrow, and even what is yet to come. 
This, the first poem, is entirely devoted to you, Rama Raghava; for no one 
other than you deserves to enjoy such poetic fame. Moreover, I heard it in 
its entirety a long time ago together with the gods. It is divine and of 
marvelous form. It is utterly truthful, and it obscures nothing. Now, 
Kakutstha, tiger among men, your mind focused in keeping with 
righteousness, you must listen to the poem, the Ramayana, including the 
remaining events that are yet to come. So, most illustrious prince of 
immense blazing energy, together with the seers here, listen to the great 
remainder of this poem known as the Uttara. By no means, Kakutstha, is 
this culminating section to be heard by anyone other than the great seers 
and you, hero, who are the supreme seer.” 

[22—23 = I]. 41-45] When the god Brahma, lord of the three worlds, had 
said this much, he went off to the highest heaven together with Vasava and 
the gods. But then those immensely powerful great seers, the inhabitants of 
Brahma’s world who had been there, with Brahma’s permission, returned, 
since their hearts were set upon it, to hear the Uttara, which concerned the 
future of Raghava. 


[24—26 = Il. 46-51] Then, having heard the auspicious words of the God 
of gods, Rama, of supreme blazing energy, said this to Valmiki: “Holy one, 
the sages, inhabitants of Brahma’s world, have set their hearts on hearing 
the Uttara, which concerns my future. Please let it commence tomorrow.” 
Once he had resolved thus and had accepted those two bards, Rama quickly 
dismissed the assembly and retired to the sacrificial hall. 


Sarga 89 

[e:-Appendix I, no. 13, Il. 52-56; 7.89.1] When the night had brightened into 
dawn, Rama assembled the great sages. Then he said to his two sons, “Now 
sing, setting all cares aside.” Then, once the venerable great seers were 
seated, the two bards sang that poem, the Uttara, which related future 
events. But because then, at the conclusion of the sacrifice, Vaidehi had 
entered the earth by virtue of her perfect fidelity, Rama was deeply 
disconsolate. No longer able to see Vaidehi, he regarded this world as 
empty. He was completely overwhelmed by grief and could get no peace of 
mind. 

[2-4] After dismissing all the kings, as well as the apes, monkeys, and 
rdaksasas, he had the hosts of eminent brahmans dismissed, laden with 
wealth. Then, after dismissing them all, lotus-eyed Rama entered Ayodhya, 
cherishing Sita in his heart. The delight of the Raghus took no wife after 
Sita, so that in sacrifice after sacrifice, a golden Janaki served in the role of 
his wife. 

[S—7] For ten thousand years he performed the asvamedha as well as ten 
times as many vajapeyas, in which there was a distribution of much gold. 
And majestic Rama offered the agnistoma and the atirdtra, as well as the 
gosava rites, at which great wealth was distributed, and other rites as well, 
accompanied by ample sacrificial fees. And in this way a very long time 
passed while great Raghava ruled the kingdom, exerting himself in 
righteousness. 

[8—10] The apes, monkeys, and rdksasas remained under Rama’s rule, 
and the kings were devoted to Raghava, day in and day out. Parjanya 
brought the rains at the proper time, there was abundant food, and the 
directions were pellucid. The city and the countryside were filled with 
happy and well-nourished people. While Rama was ruling the kingdom, no 


one suffered an untimely death, nor at that time did illness afflict any living 
creature, nor was there any breach of righteousness. 

[11-15] Then, after a long time, R&ma’s illustrious mother, surrounded 
by her sons and grandsons, succumbed to the law of time. Sumitra followed 
her, as did illustrious Kaikeyi, who, after performing many different acts of 
righteousness, was established in the highest heaven. All of them were 
established in heaven, and, once reunited with King Dasaratha, those 
fortunate women resumed their wifely duties. Time after time Rama gave 
generous donations to brahman ascetics on behalf of his mothers, without 
distinction. Righteous Rama made offerings of many precious things to his 
ancestors and performed supremely excellent sacrifices, thus gratifying his 
ancestors and the gods. 


Sarga 90 
[1-3] Now after some time, King Yudhajit Kekaya dispatched his guru, the 
immeasurably splendid brahman-seer Gargya, the son of Angiras, to great 
Raghava. And out of affection the king gave Rama an unsurpassed gift of 
ten thousand horses, woolen blankets, jewels, and splendid garments of 
varied hue, as well as many ornaments. 

[4-7] When Raghava Kakutstha heard that the great seer Gargya was 
approaching and that he had come as the beloved emissary of his uncle 
Asvapati, he went forth to a distance of two miles, along with his retinue, 
and there he honored Gargya and accepted that wealth. After he had 
inquired affectionately about the complete well-being of his maternal uncle, 
Rama began to question that extremely illustrious seer, once the latter had 
been seated: “What words has my maternal uncle uttered on account of 
which the holy one, foremost among the eloquent, like a second Brhaspati, 
has come here?” 

[8—13] When the brahman-seer heard what Rama had said, he began to 
tell Raghava in detail the extraordinary mission that was to be undertaken: 
“Your maternal uncle, Yudhajit, has uttered these affectionate words, great- 
armed bull among men. Now hear them, if you please: “There is a country 
that lies along both banks of the Sindhu. It is the supremely beautiful 
kingdom of the gandharvas, and it is richly endowed with fruits and roots. 
The thirty million heroic and immensely powerful sons of Sailiisa, heavily 
armed gandharvas, protect that country in battle. After conquering them, 


great-armed Kakutstha, along with the splendid kingdom of the 
gandharvas, you must, with great concentration, establish two cities. No 
one else can accomplish this. That country is extremely beautiful. You will 
love it, great-armed hero. I would not lie to you.’ ” 

[14-18] When Raghava had heard this, he was delighted both with the 
great seer and with his maternal uncle. He spoke thus, “So be it!” and fixed 
his gaze upon Bharata. Delighted, Raghava, his hands extended and cupped 
in reverence, said to the twice-born brahman: “These two princes will 
conquer that country, brahman-seer. These two, Taksa and Puskala, are the 
valorous sons of Bharata. Well guarded by our maternal uncle and focused 
on righteousness, they will place Bharata at their head, and then, together 
with their troops and retinue, they will annihilate the sons of the gandharva. 
Then they will divide the two cities between them. Once he has founded 
those two splendid cities and established his two sons in them, the 
extremely righteous Bharata will once again return to me.” 

[19-20] When he had addressed the brahman-seer in this fashion, Rama 
gave his orders to Bharata, together with his troops and retinue, and then 
consecrated the two princes. And so, under an auspicious constellation, 
Bharata placed the son of Angiras before him and set forth together with his 
army and the two princes. 

[21-25] As if commanded by Sakra, that army set forth from the city. It 
was unassailable even by the gods and asuras, and it was accompanied for a 
long way by Raghava himself. Flesh-eating creatures and enormous 
raksasas, thirsting for blood, shadowed Bharata. And many hosts of 
malignant and extremely fearsome spirits, in their thousands, lusting to 
devour the flesh of the gandharvas’ sons, went before the army, as did 
many thousands of lions, tigers, and jackals, while carrion birds circled in 
the sky. After camping on the way for a month and a half, the army, intact 
and filled with happy and well-nourished troops, reached Kekaya. 


Sarga 91 
[1-3] When Yudhajit, lord of the Kekayas, had heard that Bharata had come 
as the commander of an army, together with Gargya, he experienced the 
greatest delight. Together with a huge host of men, the lord of the Kekayas 
marched forth. Hastening, he advanced against the godlike gandharvas. 


Together, swift-striding Bharata and Yudhajit, along with their troops and 
their retinues, reached the city of the gandharvas. 

[4-5] Upon hearing that Bharata had come, the immensely powerful 
gandharvas assembled from all directions, roaring and eager to fight. Then 
began a tumultuous, hair-raising, and immensely terrifying battle that went 
on for seven nights without either side gaining the victory. 

[6-8] Then, in a rage Bharata, Rama’s younger brother, employed Kala’s 
supremely terrifying divine weapon-spell, known as the Samvarta, against 
the gandharvas. Caught by Ka4la’s noose and torn to pieces by the 
Samvarta, all thirty million of them were instantly annihilated on the spot 
by great Bharata. The gods, denizens of heaven, could not recall such a 
ghastly slaughter of such great warriors within the space of an instant. 

[9-11] Once those heroes had been slain, Kaikayi’s son, Bharata, 
founded two prosperous and splendid cities, establishing Taksa in Taksasila 
and Puskara in Puskaravati. Within five years, the lovely country of the 
gandharvas, now the kingdom of Gandhara, was filled with provinces and 
their inhabitants. Both cities were filled with masses of wealth and jewels 
and were adorned with parklands. Their competition over the extent of their 
respective virtues made them rivals of each other. 

[12-14] Both appeared extremely resplendent, and all transactions there 
were honest. They were filled with large numbers of parks and vehicles, and 
their central markets were well laid out. Both of those splendid cities were 
charming and adorned with great wealth, as well as with extremely 
beautiful mansions and identical seven-storied palaces. Both were adorned 
with many beautiful shrines to the divinities. Having established them over 
a period of five years, Raghava’s younger brother Bharata, that great-armed 
son of Kaikayi, returned to Ayodhya. 

[15-16] When majestic Bharata had respectfully saluted great Raghava, 
who was like righteousness incarnate, just as Vasava might Brahma, he 
reported to him the great slaughter of the gandharvas and the settlement of 
that region, just as they had transpired. When Raghava had heard all this, he 
was delighted with him. 


Sarga 92 
[1-4] When R&aghava had heard that, he, together with his brothers, 
experienced delight, and he said these extraordinary words to them: 


““Saumitri, these two young sons of yours, Angada and Candraketu, are well 
versed in righteousness. They are powerful bowmen and fit for kingship. I 
will consecrate these two as kings. Please find a country for them right 
away—one that is pleasant and spacious—where those two bowmen can 
enjoy themselves. But please, gentle brother, seek out a country in which 
there will be no oppression of kings and no destruction of ashrams, so that 
we may give no offense.” 

[S—6] When Rama had spoken in this fashion, Bharata replied: “There is 
the delightful and salubrious country of Karapatha. Let a city for great 
Angada be established there as well as a lovely and salubrious one called 
Candrakanta for Candraketu.” 

[7-9] Raghava agreed to those words that Bharata had spoken, and then, 
having subjugated that country, he established a city for Angada. And so for 
Angada, Rama, tireless in action, established and carefully guarded the 
delightful and charming city of Angadtya. And in the land of Malla, he 
established for the immensely powerful Candraketu the renowned and 
heavenly city of Candrakanta, which was like the city of heaven. 

[10-12] Then those heroes—R&ama, Bharata, and Laksmana— 
unassailable in battle, attained the greatest delight and performed the 
consecration of the two princes. After they had consecrated the two princes, 
they sent them off accompanied by their armies and retinues—Angada to 
the western country and Candraketu to the north. Laksmana Saumitri 
accompanied Angada, while Bharata served as the commander of 
Candraketu’s rear guard. 

[13-17] Laksmana remained in Angadiya for a year, and when his 
unassailable son was firmly established, he returned once again to Ayodhya. 
As for Bharata, having similarly spent yet one more year, he returned once 
again to Ayodhya, where he approached Rama’s feet. Extremely righteous 
Saumitri and Bharata, devoted to Rama’s feet, in their love for him, did not 
realize how much time had passed. And so, in this fashion, ten thousand 
years passed by, while they constantly exerted themselves in righteousness 
and in their duties to the populace. Having passed the time with contented 
hearts, they were enveloped in prosperity and fixed on the supreme path of 
righteousness. The three of them, resplendent with blazing energy, truly 
resembled the three sacred fires kindled and fed with oblations in a great 
sacrifice. 


Sarga 93 

[1-3] Now after some time, during which Rama was steadfast in the path of 
righteousness, Kala, in the form of an ascetic, arrived at the king’s gateway. 
He spoke these words to the steadfast and illustrious Laksmana: “Inform 
Rama that I have come on a mission of grave importance. For I am the 
messenger of an exceedingly mighty and immeasurably powerful great seer. 
Because of my mission, I have come here, immensely powerful prince, 
wishing to see Rama.” 

[4-7] When Saumitri had heard those words of his, he immediately 
informed Rama that an ascetic had something he wished to communicate. 
He said: “May you, immensely splendid king, conquer both worlds through 
righteousness. An ascetic, whose radiance is that of the sun, bringer of light, 
has come as a messenger to see you.” When Rama had heard the words 
uttered by Laksmana, he said, “Please, dear boy, bid that sage of immense 
energy, who is bearing someone’s message, enter.” And Saumitri, saying, 
“So be it,” ushered in the sage, who seemed to be shining with his radiant 
energy and was blazing, as it were, with rays of light. 

[8—11] Approaching the foremost of the Raghus, who was shining with 
his own blazing energy, the seer addressed Raghava in sweet words, saying, 
“May you prosper.” Rama of immense blazing energy honored him, gave 
him the guest-offering, and then began to inquire about his undisturbed 
well-being. When he had been asked by Rama about his well-being, that 
immensely illustrious and most eloquent sage sat down upon a heavenly 
seat of gold. Then Rama said to him, “Welcome, great sage. Now please 
report the words of him of whom you have come as a messenger.” 

[12-15] Encouraged by that lion among kings, the sage uttered these 
words: “This must be related privately; nor should my words be 
compromised by prying eyes. Raghava, you must put to death anyone who 
overhears or might witness this. This must be so if you have any respect for 
the words of the foremost of sages.” Vowing, “So be it,” Rama said to 
Laksmana: “Position yourself at the door, great-armed prince, and send the 
chamberlain away. For, Saumitri, I must put to death anyone who might 
overhear or witness the conversation between me and the seer, which must 
be uttered in secret.” 

[16-17] Then, having thus entrusted Laksmana with the guardianship of 
the door, Raghava Kakutstha said these words to the sage: “Please tell me 


what you have to say. Please tell me without hesitation the message you 
have in mind and on account of which you were sent. For it is also in my 
heart.” 


Sarga 94 

[1-3] “Hear now, great-armed and immensely powerful Rama, the purpose 
for which I have come. I have been sent by the god Grandfather Brahma. In 
a previous existence, heroic conqueror of enemy citadels, I was your son, 
Kala, the destroyer of all things, who was produced by your power of 
creative illusion. The blessed Grandfather, Lord Brahma, guardian of the 
worlds, says: ‘Great-armed Rama, your agreement was to protect the 
heavenly worlds. 

[4-6] “ ‘And long ago, when, through your power of creative illusion, 
you yourself had drawn in the worlds, you first created me as you lay on the 
waters in the vast ocean. Then, through your power of creative illusion, 
having created the serpent Ananta, of immense coils, who lies upon the 
waters, you engendered those two immensely powerful beings Madhu and 
Kaitabha, covered with the heaps of whose bones this mountain-girded 
earth became known as Medin1. 

[7—10] “ ‘Then, when you had produced me too, in a lotus—as radiant as 
the celestial sun—that was growing from your navel, you assigned to me 
the entire task of the generation of creatures. Since I was entrusted with this 
burden, I worshipfully approached you, the lord of the universe, saying, 
“Please, sir, you who are the source of my blazing energy, provide for the 
protection of these creatures.” Moreover, you are unassailable, and 
therefore, because of your eternal nature, you took on the form of Visnu in 
order to protect all beings. You are the mighty son of Aditi and the increaser 
of your brothers’ delight. For you render assistance to the worlds whenever 
the need arises. 

[11-15] “ ‘When all creatures were being terrorized, it was you, 
foremost of living beings who, desiring to kill Ravana, set your mind on 
dwelling among men. At that time, you yourself set the limit of your 
sojourn at ten thousand years and ten hundred. You became a son through 
your own intention, and your life span here among men is now completed. 
And thus, foremost among the best of men, Kala has approached you. But 
if, great king, you still wish to serve your subjects, then, by all means, 


please remain, hero.’ Thus spoke Grandfather Brahma. ‘On the other hand, 
if you desire to regain the world of the gods, Raghava, then let the gods, 
having a protector in Visnu, be free from anxiety.’ ” 

[16-19] When Raghava had heard the words that Grandfather Brahma 
had spoken, just as they were reported by K4la, he replied, smiling, to the 
destroyer of all: “I have heard the extremely marvelous words of the god of 
gods. Your arrival has produced tremendous delight. Bless you. I shall 
return from whence I have come. You have come here in accordance with 
my heart’s desire. I have no hesitation in this regard. I must attend to all the 
needs of the gods, who are my obedient subjects, and now, at the end of 
everything, I will do as Grandfather Brahma says.” 


Sarga 95 

[1-4] As the two were conversing in this fashion, the holy seer Durvasas 
arrived at the king’s gate, anxious to see Rama. And approaching Saumitri, 
that foremost of seers said, “Show me in to Rama at once, lest my purpose 
be thwarted.” When Laksmana, slayer of enemy heroes, had heard the 
sage’s speech, he respectfully saluted that great seer and spoke these words: 
“Tell me, holy one, what needs to be done? And what is your purpose? 
What can I do for you? For, O brahman, Raghava is busy. Otherwise, please 
wait a little while.” 

[S—9] When that tiger among seers had heard this, choking with rage, he 
spoke these words to Laksmana, burning him up, as it were, with his gaze: 
“Saumitri, you must announce me to Rama this instant. Otherwise I shall 
curse this kingdom, you, the city, Raghava, Bharata, and whatever progeny 
you all may have! For I am unable any longer to contain the rage that is in 
my heart.” When Laksmana had heard those terrifying words of the great 
seer, he reflected in his mind on their import. He announced the seer to 
Raghava, after having resolved: “Let me alone die. Let there not be the 
destruction of everything.” 

[10-13] No sooner had King Rama heard Laksmana’s words than he 
dismissed Kala and, quickly rushing out, met Atri’s son. Respectfully 
saluting the great seer, who seemed to glow with his blazing energy, 
Kakutstha cupped his hands in reverence and said, “What may I do for 
you?” When the powerful Durvasas, foremost among sages, had heard the 
words uttered by Rama Raghava, he replied to him, saying: “Listen, O you 


who are devoted to righteousness. This very day, Raghava, I have 
completed a fast of one thousand years. I desire some freshly prepared food 
from you, sinless king.” 

[14—15] When Rama heard those words, he was filled with great delight, 
and he brought that foremost of sages some freshly prepared food. When 
that most excellent of sages had eaten that food, which was like the nectar 
of immortality, he said, “Well done, Rama!” and returned to his ashram. 

[16-18] When he had departed, Raghava of immense blazing energy was 
at first delighted at heart, but then, when he recalled Kala’s words, he was 
stricken with grief. When he remembered that thing which was too dreadful 
to contemplate, he was greatly afflicted by grief. His face downcast and his 
mind distressed, he was unable to speak. But then Raghava, reflecting in his 
mind on Ka&ala’s words, said, “All this must pass away.” Then that greatly 
illustrious prince fell silent. 


Sarga 96 

[1-4] Now, when Laksmana saw R&aghava, despondent, with his face 
downcast—like the moon in eclipse—he, remaining cheerful, spoke to him 
in sweet words, saying: “You must not suffer anguish for my sake, great- 
armed warrior. For such is the course of destiny that has been determined 
by our previous actions. You must keep your promise and slay me without 
misgiving, gentle brother. For, Kakutstha, men who do not keep their 
promises go to hell. If you love me, great king, if you hold me in your 
favor, then kill me without hesitation and thus, uphold righteousness.” 

[S—7] Addressed in this fashion by Laksmana, Rama, the lord of men, his 
senses reeling, assembled his counselors as well as his purohita, and in their 
midst told them about the arrival of Durvasas and the promise he had made 
to the ascetic, just as it had all taken place. When his counselors, along with 
his preceptors, had heard that, they kept still, but Vasistha of immense 
blazing energy spoke these words: 

[8—11] “All this was foreseen, great-armed and illustrious Rama: your 
terrifying death and your separation from Laksmana. Abandon him! 
Destiny is all-powerful. You must not falsify your promises. For when a 
promise proves false, righteousness itself is undermined. And if 
righteousness were undermined, the entire triple world, together with its 
fixed and moving contents, as well as the hosts of gods and seers, would be 


destroyed without a doubt. Therefore, tiger among men, for the sake of the 
protection of the triple world, you must—this very day—provide for the 
welfare of the universe through the execution of Laksmana.” 

[12-13] When Rama had heard those words, which were fully in keeping 
with both righteousness and statecraft, he addressed Laksmana there in the 
council of those who had gathered: “There must be no transgression of 
righteousness. Therefore, I will banish you, Saumitri. For whether it be 
banishment or execution that is ordained, both are the same to the virtuous.” 

[14-18] No sooner had these words been uttered by Rama than 
Laksmana, his eyes clouded with tears, departed swiftly. But he did not 
return to his home. Proceeding to the bank of the Sarayi River, he ritually 
sipped its water and then, cupping his hands in reverence, he closed off his 
senses and held his breath. Then all the gods, together with Sakra, the 
troupes of apsarases, and the hosts of seers, showered him with flowers as 
he sat there absorbed in yoga, not breathing. And in such a way that no man 
witnessed it, Sakra took immensely powerful Laksmana, still in his earthly 
body, and entered heaven. Then all of the foremost among the gods, 
together with the seers, thrilled and delighted, worshiped him, who had 
returned to his state as the fourth part of Visnu. 


Sarga 97 
[1-3] After he had banished Laksmana, Rama was consumed with grief and 
sorrow, and he said this to his purohita, his counselors, and the people of 
the city: “This very day, here in Ayodhya, I shall consecrate as king the 
valorous lord Bharata, who is devoted to righteousness. Then I shall depart 
for the forest. Bring in the requisite materials so that there may be no loss of 
time. For I will depart this very day by the path that Laksmana has taken.” 

[4-5] When they heard what Raghava had said, all his subjects instantly 
bowed their heads to the ground and became as if lifeless. When Bharata 
heard Rama’s words, he too was stunned. But he rejected the kingship and 
said this to Raghava: 

[6-8] “I swear to you by truth itself, your majesty, delight of the 
Raghus, and by the heavenly world as well, that without you, I do not desire 
kingship. Your majesty, lord of men, you must consecrate these two bards— 
valorous KuSa in the kingdom of Kosala and Lava in the northern kingdom. 


And let swift-striding messengers go to Satrughna and, without delay, let 
them report to him our departure for heaven.” 

[9-10] When Vasistha heard what Bharata had said and saw that the 
people of the town were downcast and afflicted with grief, he spoke these 
words: “Rama, my dear boy, look at your subjects prostrate on the ground. 
Once you have determined what they desire to be done, you must not do 
anything to displease them.” 

[11-16] Acting on the advice of Vasistha, Kakutstha, having bidden his 
subjects to rise, addressed them all in these words: “What must I do?” Then 
all of his subjects said these words to Rama: “Wherever you may go, Rama, 
we shall follow after you. This is our highest delight. This we regard as our 
highest duty. Our constant and most deeply cherished desire is set upon 
following you. If you have any affection for the people of the city, if you 
have the deepest love for them, then, Kakutstha, let us, along with our sons 
and wives, accompany you on the path of the virtuous. If we are not to be 
abandoned by you, Lord, then you must lead us all, whether it be to a 
penance grove, the inaccessible wilderness, a river, or the ocean.” 
Recognizing their resolve and reflecting upon both fate and the firm 
devotion of the townsfolk, he replied, “Very well.” 

[17-20] Once Raghava had reached this decision in this fashion, that 
very day, he consecrated both of those great bards, Kusa and Lava— 
valorous KusSa in the kingdom of Kosala and Lava in the northern kingdom. 
And he gave each of them abundant wealth, as well as a thousand chariots, 
thirty thousand elephants, and ten thousand horses. And thus, they had 
abundant jewels and great wealth and were surrounded by happy and 
prosperous people. Once he had consecrated those two valiant princes and 
dispatched them to their respective cities in this fashion, he sent messengers 
to great Satrughna. 


Sarga 98 
[1-6] Urged on by Rama’s words, the swift-striding messengers proceeded 
swiftly to Madhura without making camp on the way. Then, after three days 
and nights, when they had reached Madhura, they immediately reported 
everything to Satrughna just as it had taken place. In this fashion, the 
messengers immediately reported to great Satrughna everything—the 
banishment of Laksmana, Raghava’s promise, the consecration of his two 


sons, his being followed by the townsfolk, the founding by wise Rama of 
Kusa’s charming city named Kusavati on the slopes of the Vindhya 
mountains, the founding of Sravati, Lava’s charming and renowned city, the 
exodus of the people from Ayodhya, and Bharata’s following Raghava. 
Then saying, “You must hurry, your majesty,” they fell silent. 

[7-10] When that delight of the Raghus had heard about the terrible, 
impending destruction of his family, he assembled his subjects and his 
purohita, Kaficana, and related to them everything, just as it had taken 
place, as well as his own imminent ascension together with his brothers. 
Then the valiant lord of men consecrated his own two sons. Subahu 
received Madhura and Satrughatin got Vaidisa. Dividing the army of 
Madhura between his two sons, he established them both as kings endowed 
with wealth and grain. 

[11-16] Then, having sent off Satrughatin to be king in Vaidisa, Raghava 
went swiftly to Ayodhya with but a single chariot. There he saw the great 
king in the company of the immortal sages. He was blazing, as it were, like 
fire and was clad in a thin linen garment. Cupping his hands in reverence 
and controlling his senses, that knower of righteousness respectfully saluted 
Rama and, reflecting upon righteousness, spoke these words: “Now that I 
have properly consecrated my two sons, the Raghavas, and endowed them 
with wealth, know, your majesty, that I am determined to follow you. And 
please do not say anything to the contrary with regard to this, for your 
command is not to be disobeyed. Please do not abandon me, hero, for I am 
especially devoted.” Recognizing how adamant Satrughna’s resolve was, 
Rama, the delight of the Raghus, spoke these words to him: “Very well.” 

[17-20] No sooner had he finished pronouncing these words than the 
monkeys who could take on any form at will and the hosts of apes and 
raksasas arrived in great numbers. Once they learned of Rama’s departure, 
all those sons of the gods, sons of seers, and sons of gandharvas assembled. 
When they had all assembled there, they respectfully saluted Rama and 
said: “Illustrious king, we have come in order to follow you. If, Rama, bull 
among men, you were to depart without us, then you would have struck us 
down as if you were wielding the rod of Yama.” 

[21—23] When he had thus heard those words of the apes, monkeys, and 
raksasas, he then spoke sweetly to Vibhisana in gentle tones: “Vibhisana, as 
long as your people shall endure, you shall live on as the immensely 


powerful lord of the raksasas in Lanka. You must protect your subjects in 
accordance with righteousness. Please do not argue with me.” 

[24—26] When Kakutstha had addressed him in this fashion, he then said 
to Hanuman: “Resign yourself to remaining alive, for you must not violate 
your vow. As long as the tales about me remain current in the world, lord of 
the tawny monkeys, you must uphold your vow by remaining alive.” When 
he had spoken in this fashion, Kakutstha Raghava then said to all the other 
apes and monkeys, “You may depart with me.” 


Sarga 99 

[1-3] Now, when the night had given way to dawn, the immensely 
illustrious Rama, broad chested, his eyes like lotus petals, said to his 
purohita, “Let the agnihotra vessel, its fire blazing with ghee, go on before, 
as well as the umbrella consecrated for the vajapeya, beautifying the great 
highway.” Then, according to the ritual injunctions, Vasistha of blazing 
energy performed the entire sacred rite of departure for the next world, 
omitting nothing. 

[4-9] Then, clad in a garment of linen and invoking the Supreme 
Brahman, Rama took up kusa grass with both hands and, fastening it, he 
prepared to set forth. Uttering no unnecessary words whatsoever at any 
point, making no unnecessary movements, spurning all comforts on the 
road, and blazing like the many-rayed sun, he set forth from his house. On 
Rama’s left side was Padma, that is, Sri, in deep concentration. On his right 
was large-eyed Hri, and before him was Vyavasaya, resolution incarnate. 
There were also the various kinds of arrows and his well-strung bow. All of 
these, taking on human form, respectfully followed Kakutstha. The vedas in 
the form of brahmans, the Sdavitrimantra, protector of all, the syllable om, 
the sacred utterance vasat, and all the great seers, those gods on earth: all of 
them, deeply devoted to Rama Kakutstha, followed him, who had reached 
the gateway to heaven. 

[10-13] As he was proceeding, the women of the inner apartments, 
together with the elderly, the children, the serving women, the eunuchs, and 
the male attendants, followed him. And Bharata, accompanied by the 
women of his inner apartments, followed as well, along with Satrughna. 
Then, having vowed their dedication to Rama Raghava and thus being 
utterly devoted to him, the great brahmans, in deep concentration and 


accompanied by the agnihotra fire, followed that immensely wise 
Kakutstha, together with their sons and their wives. His counselors and their 
attendants too, together with their sons, kinsmen, and retinues, all joyously 
followed Rama. 

[14-18] After them, all the ministers, surrounded by delighted and 
prosperous people, deeply moved by Rama’s virtues, followed him as he 
proceeded. That splendid host of monkeys—all of them devoted to Rama, 
all of them bathed, joyful, happy, and in fine fettle—was chattering in a 
frenzy of delight. No one there was despondent, ashamed, or miserable. 
Instead, all were delighted and joyous. It was a great wonder. The people of 
the countryside had come merely to witness the king’s departure. However, 
once they had come and witnessed it, they became just as devoted as the 
others. And so, in great concentration and with the deepest devotion, the 
apes, monkeys, and rdksasas, as well as the people who dwelt in the city, 
followed behind. 


Sarga 100 

[1-4] When he had gone a league and a half, the delight of the Raghus 
spied the river Sarayu, of holy waters, that lay just before him as he looked 
to the west. At that very moment, Brahma, grandfather of the worlds, 
surrounded by all the gods and great seers and accompanied by hundreds of 
millions of celestial flying chariots, came to where Kakutstha, who was 
setting out for heaven, stood. A shower of flowers, scattered by the wind, 
fell in great abundance. 

[S5—9] Then, as the sky was filled with the sound of hundreds of trumpets 
and crowded with gandharvas and apsarases, Rama approached the waters 
of the Sarayt on foot. Then Grandfather Brahma spoke these words from 
the sky: “Come, Visnu, bless you. Fortunately you have come, Raghava. 
Please, O lord of immense blazing energy, return with your godlike brothers 
to your own essential Vaisnava form, which is the eternal Brahman. For you 
are the refuge of the worlds, large-eyed Lord, yet no one other than Maya, 
your immemorial consort, truly knows you. You are the Great Being— 
inconceivable, indestructible, and the sum of all things. O lord of immense 
blazing energy, please return of your own accord to whichever form you 
wish.” 


[10-13] When the immensely wise Rama had heard those words of 
Grandfather Brahma and had confirmed his resolution, he bodily entered, 
together with his younger brothers, the blazing energy proper to Visnu. 
Then, once he had returned to his form as Visnu, the divinities—including 
the sddhyas, the hosts of the Maruts together with Indra, led by Agni, and 
accompanied by the celestial hosts of the seers, the gandharvas, the 
apsarases, the great birds, the great serpents, and the daityas, danavas, and 
raksasas—all worshiped that God. All of them were delighted and joyful. 
All of them had their dearest wish fulfilled. They all cried out, ““Wonderful! 
Wonderful!” For the highest heaven was free from any impurity. 

[14-15] Then Visnu of immense blazing energy said to Grandfather 
Brahma: “Please, O lord of firm vows, grant heavenly worlds to all of these 
hosts of people. For all these resolute devotees, who have abandoned their 
bodies for my sake, have followed me out of love and are therefore worthy 
of my devotion.” 

[16-19] When Lord Brahma, patriarch of the world, had heard those 
words of Visnu, he said: “All these who have accompanied you shall go to 
the worlds known as the Santanikas. Even an animal that abandons its life 
breaths while thinking upon Rama with devotion shall surely also dwell in 
Santana, which is endowed with every virtue and is just next to the 
Brahmaloka. The monkeys shall return to their own places of birth and so 
shall the apes. Those of splendid birth shall return to those from whom they 
issued forth, starting with the gods and including the seers, the great 
serpents, and the yaksas.” 

[20—22] When the lord of the gods had spoken in this fashion, everyone 
proceeded to the Gopratara tirtha, and there, their eyes overwhelmed with 
joyful tears, they entered the Sarayi. Each and every living soul who 
entered the water became filled with joy. Then each one, casting off his or 
her human body, mounted a flying chariot. Even those born in the wombs of 
animals, once they reached the waters of the Saray, became celestial and 
shone with a celestial beauty like gods. 

[23—25] All beings, whether fixed or moving, upon reaching the waters 
of the Sarayii and moistening themselves with it, attained the world of the 
gods. Whatever had been the divine origin of each of the monkeys, apes, 
and raksasas, they each entered that, after having deposited their bodies in 
the water. Once the patriarch of the world had dispatched all of them to 


their respective heavens, that immensely wise being, in great delight, 
returned to heaven together with the thirty gods, who were similarly 
delighted. 

[26] Here ends the foremost of tales, known as the Ramayana, together 
with its epilogue. It was composed by Valmiki and is worshiped by 
Brahma. 

The end of the Uttarakanda. 


a Emendation: see PVR 7: 1411. 
b Emendation: see PVR 7: 1411. 
c Emendation: see PVR 7: 1411. 
d Emendation: see PVR 7: 1411. 
e Emendation: see PVR 7: 1411. 
f Emendation: see PVR 7: 1411. 
g Emendation: see PVR 7: 1411. 
h Emendation: see PVR 7: 1411. 
i Emendation: see PVR 7: 1411. 
j Emendation: see PVR 7: 1411. 
k Emendation: see PVR 7: 1411. 
1 Emendation: see PVR 7: 1411. 
m Emendation: see PVR 7: 1411. 
n Emendation: see PVR 7: 1411. 
o Emendation: see PVR 7: 1411. 
p Emendation: see PVR 7: 1411. 
q Emendation: see PVR 7: 1411. 
r Emendation: see PVR 7: 1411. 
s Emendation: see PVR 7: 1411. 
t Emendation: see PVR 7: 1411. 
u Emendation: see PVR 7: 1411. 
v Emendation: see PVR 7: 1411. 
w Emendation: see PVR 7: 1411. 
x Emendation: see PVR 7: 1411. 
y Emendation: see PVR 7: 1411. 
z Emendation: see PVR 7: 1411. 
aa Emendation: see PVR 7: 1411. 
bb Emendation: see PVR 7: 1411. 
cc Emendation: see PVR 7: 1411. 
dd Emendation: see PVR 7: 1411. 


Glossary of Important Sanskrit Words, 
Proper Nouns, and Epithets 


adambara: a type of drum 

adharma: unrighteousness; what is evil or immoral 

Aditi: daughter of Daksa; wife of KaSyapa; mother of the gods 

adityas: a class of gods; sons of Aditi 

Adityas: the collective name of a group of deities, normally seven or eight in number, chief of whom 
is Varuna 

Agastya: a famous sage; pot-born son of Mitra-Varuna and Urvast; associated with the south; narrates 
history of Ravana and the raksasas 

Agni: god of fire 

Ahalya: wife of Gautama; cursed by her husband after she was seduced/raped by the god Indra 

Aiksvaka: descendant of Iksvaku, used mainly of Dasaratha and Rama 

Airavata: a celestial elephant; Indra’s mount 

djas: a class of seers 

Akampana: a raksasa warrior; slain by Hanuman 

Aksa: son of Ravana and Mandodar‘; slain by Hanuman 

Amaravatt: Indra’s heavenly city 

Anala: eldest daughter of Vibhisana 

Ananga: “bodiless”; epithet of Kama, god of love 

Ananta: the great snake associated with Visnu; said to support the earth 

Anaranya: solar dynasty king slain by Ravana; predicts that an Iksvaku king will kill him 

Anasitya: wife of the sage Atri; famous for her devotion and chastity 

Anga: country where Romapada ruled 

Angada: (1) monkey prince; son of Valin; (2) a son of Laksmana; rules city of Angadtya in the 
country of Karupatha 

Angadtya: (1) capital city of Karapatha; ruled by Angada; (2) son of Laksmana 

Anila: a name of the god of wind 

Afyana: (1) name of a cosmic elephant; (2) name of a mountain 

Anjana: mother of Hanuman 

Anuhlada: younger son of the demon Hiranyakasipu 

apsarases: celestial maidens or nymphs, known for their beauty; frequently seen in the service of the 
gods, especially Indra 

Araja: daughter of USanas Kavya; raped by Danda; cursed by her father 

Aristanemi: “having an uninjured wheel-felly”; epithet for the sage Kasyapa; father of Garuda and 
Aruna; husband of Vinata 

Arjuna Kartavirya: thousand-armed king of Mahismati; defeats and binds Ravana 

Arundhatt: wife of the sage Vasistha 


asoka: grove; site of Sita’s confinement in the city of Lanka 

asuras: a class of demons; the half brothers and rivals of the devas, “gods” 

asvamedha: “horse sacrifice”; important vedic sacrifice 

ASvapati: father of Kaikey1; maternal grandfather of Bharata; king of Rajagrha 

ASvins: twin deities of the vedic pantheon renowned for their beauty 

Atikaya: Ravana’s son; raksasa warrior slain by Laksmana 

avatara: “incarnation”; used primarily of the ten incarnations of Visnu 

Ayodhya: capital city of the Iksvakus 

Bala (v./. Vala): demon slain by Indra; “slayer of Bala” is a common epithet of Indra 

bali: a type of offering commonly made of grain, rice, or other food 

Bali: Bali Vairocana, king of the asuras 

Bhaga: one of the eight Adityas 

Bhagiratha: son of Dilipa; great-great-grandson of Sagara; brings Ganges to earth 

Bhagitratht: “daughter of Bhagiratha”; epithet of the Ganges 

Bharadvaja: a sage; disciple of Valmiki; renders hospitality to Rama and Bharata; tells Rama how to 
reach Mount Citrakita; father of Devavarnint; grandfather of Kubera Vaisravana 

Bharata: DaSaratha’s second son; son of Kaikey1; younger brother of Rama 

Bhargava: a powerful brahman family descended from the sage Bhrgu; as a patronymic, refers to any 
descendant of that family 

Bhava: one of the names of Siva 

bhert: a type of drum 

Bhogavati: city of the serpents, conquered by Ravana 

Bhrgu: a great brahman sage; patriarch of the Bhargava family 

Brahma: the creator divinity of the Hindu “trinity”; “Grandfather” of all living creatures; granter of 
boons 

Brahmahatya: female personification of brahmahatya 

brahmahatya: the sin of killing a brahman 

Brahmaloka: the world or heaven of Brahma 

brahman: (1) a name for the Indian religio-philosophical concept of the impersonal and attributeless 
principle underlying existence; (2) a specific class of sacrificial priests 

brahman: one of the four classes of traditional Hindu society; the priestly class 

Brahmarasi: name of an asterism 

Brhaspati: preceptor of the gods; purohita, “family preceptor” of Indra 

Budha: a sage; son of Soma; lover of Ila; father of Purtiravas 

Caitraratha: Kubera’s pleasure garden on Mount Meru 

Candra: (1) the moon god; (2) a mountain situated in the midst of the ocean of milk 

Candraketu: a son of Laksmana; rules city of Candrakanta in the country of Malla 

Citrakita: mountain where Rama, Sita, and Laksmana first live during their exile 

Cyavana: a Bhargava brahman; leader of the delegation of sages from the Yamuna region 

Dadhimukha: a monkey; maternal uncle of Sugriva; guardian of the madhuvana 

daityas or daiteyas: a class of demons descended from Diti 

danavas: a class of demons descended from Dani 

Danda: dull-witted royal son of Iksvaku; founds city of Madhumanta; rapes Araja; cursed by her 
father, USanas Kavya 

Dandaka: forest where Rama, Sita, and Laksmana spend the greater part of their exile 

Danu: (1) father of Kabandha; (2) a patronymic of Kabandha, cursed to become a raksasa 

Danu: daughter of Daksa; wife of Kasyapa; mother of the demons known as danavas 

Dasagriva: “Ten-necked”; original name of Ravana 


Dasgaratha: king of Ayodhya; father of Rama, Bharata, Laksmana, and Satrughna 

Dasaratha or Dasarathi: “descendant of Dasaratha”; common patronymic of Rama and his brothers 

Devantaka or Surantaka: a raksasa warrior slain by Hanuman 

Devayani: wife of Yayati; daughter of USanas Kavya; mother of Yadu 

Dharant: name of Madhavi, the earth goddess 

Dharma: god of righteousness 

dharma: righteousness; law; what is good or moral 

Dhruva: the pole star 

Dhimraksa: a raksasa warrior slain by Hanuman 

dindima: a type of drum 

Diti: daughter of Daksa; wife of Kasyapa; mother of the demons known as daityas 

Drona: a mountain situated in the midst of the ocean of milk 

Dundubhi: (1) a demon slain by Valin; Rama kicks his corpse to demonstrate his strength to Sugriva; 
identified as both a danava and an asura; (2) an asura, son of Maya 

Durvasas: an irascible sage; predicts Rama’s future; interrupts Rama’s meeting with Kala 

Diusana: a general in Khara’s raksasa army in Janasthana; slain by Rama 

Gandhara: a country on the banks of the Sindhu River 

gandharvas: a class of semidivine beings known for their musical abilities; massacred by Bharata; 
gandharva women are noted for their beauty 

Ganges: a famous sacred river of ancient and modern India; personified as the daughter of Himalaya; 
sister of Parvati 

Garuda or Garutmant: king of birds; Visnu’s mount; son of Kasyapa and Vinata; frees Rama and 
Laksmana from Indrajit’s serpent weapons 

Gautama: a sage; husband of Ahalya; father of Satananda 

Godavari: a river in the Deccan 

Guha: king of the Nisaddas and lord of Srfigaverapura; assists Rama during his exile; hosts Bharata 
and his army 

guhyakas: demi-gods who attend Kubera and guard his treasures 

Haimavatt: daughter of Himavant (Himalaya); patronymic of Uma and her sister, the river Ganges 

Hanuman: Rama’s devoted monkey companion; son of the wind god; counselor to Sugriva; finds 
Sita; fights for Rama 

Hara: one of the names of Siva 

Hari: one of the names of Visnu 

Hema: an apsaras; friend of Svayamprabha; wife of the daitya Maya; mother of Mandodart 

Himalaya[s]: a mountain range and king of the mountains; has two daughters—Uma, the wife of 
Siva, and the river Ganges 

Himavant: a variant of Himalaya 

Hiranyakasipu: a daitya slain by the Narasimhavatara (Man-Lion) of Visnu 

homa: a type of oblation, commonly consisting of “ghee,” or clarified butter 

Hri: goddess of modesty 

hum: sacred or mystical syllable used in spells, often destructively 

Iksvaku: (1) patronymic ancestor and family name of royal House of Ayodhya; (2) son of Manu; 
ancestor of Rama’s lineage; father of Danda 

Ila: son of Kardama; king of Bahli; transformed into a woman, Ia 

Ila: originally Ila; a king transformed into a woman by curse of Siva; wife of Budha; mother of 
Pururavas 

Indra: king of the devas, “gods”; leads their hosts into battle against the asuras; slayer of Vrtra and 
other asuras; captured by Indrajit 


Indrajit: “conqueror of Indra”; epithet of Ravana’s sorcerer son Meghanada Ravani; captures Indra in 
battle; slain by Laksmana 

itihasa: “so indeed it was”; history 

Jabali: a minister of Dasaratha; tries to persuade Rama to return from exile 

Jahnavt: “daughter of Jahnu’”; epithet of the Ganges 

Jamadagnya: see Rama Jamadagnya 

Jambavan: king of the rksas; monkey general; sends Hanuman to bring the mountain of healing 
herbs; son of Brahma and earthly son of Gadgada 

Jambidvipa: the Indian subcontinent 

Janaka: lord of Mithila; adoptive father of Sita 

Janaki: “daughter of Janaka”; common patronymic of Sita, wife of Rama 

Janasthana: part of the Dandaka forest and residence of Sirpanakha, sister of Ravana and his cousin- 
brother Khara; site of Rama’s battle with Khara and Diisana 

Jatayus: a vulture; friend of Dasaratha; slain by Ravana while trying to prevent Sita’s abduction 

Jaya: daughter of Daksa; wife of Brahma; mother of Rama’s divine weapons 

Jayanta: (1) Indra’s son; wounded by Indrajit; rescued by Puloman; (2) minister of Dasaratha 

Kabandha: son of Danu; a rdksasa slain by Rama 

Kaikast: daughter of Sum4lin; second wife of Visravas; mother of Ravana, Kumbhakarna, Vibhisana, 
and Strpanakha 

Kaikeyi (v./. Kaikayt): “daughter of Kekaya” or “lady of Kekaya”; patronymic or epithet of a junior 
wife of Dasaratha; mother of Bharata; schemes with Manthara to have her son consecrated in 
Rama’s place 

Kaildsa: a mountain peak in the Himalayas; abode of Siva and Parvati 

Kakutstha: “descendant of Kakutstha”; a common patronymic of Rama and his brothers 

Kala: time incarnate; name of the god of death; visits Rama in the guise of an ascetic 

Kalmasapada: a king; ancestor of Rama cursed by Vasistha to become a cannibal; also called 
Mitrasaha and Saudasa 

Kama: god of love 

Kandarpa: epithet of Kama, god of love 

Kartikeya (v.l. Karttikeya): “son of the Krttikas”; matronymic; son born from Siva’s semen; his 
stepmothers are the Krttikas 

Kasyapa or Kasyapa: son of the sage Marici; husband of Diti and Aditi; father of aditvas and daityas 

Kasyapa: “descendant of Kasyapa”; patronymic; father of Vibhandaka; grandfather of RSyasrmga 

Kausalya: “lady of Kosala”; epithet of senior wife of Dasaratha; mother of Rama 

Kausika: “a descendant of Kusa”; generally a patronymic given to ViSvamitra 

Kaustubha: precious gem produced from the churning of the ocean 

Kavya: “descendant of Kavi”; patronymic of Bhrgu’s son; usually called Usanas Kavya or Sukra; 
preceptor of the asuras and other demons 

Kekaya: (1) name of the father of Kaikeyt; (2) name of country of Kaikeyi’s birth in northwest India 

Kesarin: a monkey; Hanuman’s nominal father 

Kesava: one of the names of Visnu 

Khara: “cousin-brother” of Ravana and Sirpanakha; slain by Rama in the Dandaka forest 

kimkaras: a class of rdksasas 

kimpurusas: see kinnaras 

kinnaras: a class of semidivine beings who dwell in the Himalayas; sometimes represented as having 
the head of a horse and a human body; their women are famed for their beauty 

Kirti: goddess of fame 

Kiskindha: a city (sometimes a cave) inhabited by the monkeys 


Kosala: kingdom of the Iksvakus 

Krsasva’s sons: the personified weapons that Visvamitra gives Rama 

Krttikas: the Pleiades; stepmothers of Kartikeya 

kshatriya: one of the four classes of traditional Hindu society; the warrior class 

Kubera: god of wealth; called Vaisravana, “son of Visravas”; elder stepbrother of Ravana; king of the 
yaksas and the kinnaras 

Kumara: name of Siva’s son; see Kartikeya 

Kumbhakarna: gargantuan brother of Ravana; cursed to long sleep; slain by Rama 

KusSa: (1) a great sage; the mind-born son of Brahma; his great-grandson is Visvamitra; (2) a son of 
Rama and Sita; twin brother of Lava; disciple of Valmiki; singer of the Ramayana at Rama’s 
asvamedha; consecrated by Rama in kingdom of Kosala 

Kusadhvaja: Janaka’s younger brother and ruler of Samkasya; his two daughters, Mandavi and 
Srutakirti, marry Bharata and Satrughna, respectively 

Laksmana: son of Dagaratha by Sumitra; twin brother of Satrughna; constant companion of Rama 

Laksmi: goddess of wealth and fortune 

Lanka: Ravana’s capital city; location of Sita’s confinement 

Lava: a son of Rama and Sita; twin brother of Kusa; disciple of Valmiki; singer of the Ramayana at 
Rama’s asvamedha; consecrated by Rama in the northern kingdom [of Kosala] 

Lavana: a malevolent asura or raksasa slain by Satrughna 

Madana: epithet of Kama, the god of love 

Madhavi: epithet of the goddess of the earth, also known as Dharant; mother of Sita 

Madhu: (1) an asura slain by Visnu; (2) a raksasa kinsman of Ravana; (3) a benevolent asura, father 

of Lavana 

Mahadeva: “the great god”; epithet of Siva 

Mahendra: one of the seven principal mountains of Jambidvipa; mountain from which Hanuman 

begins his leap to Lanka 

Maheévara: “the great lord”; epithet of Siva 

Mahodara: raksasa warrior; Ravana’s “cousin-brother”; slain by the monkey Nila 

Mainaka: mountain that offers Hanuman refuge during his leap across the ocean 

Maithilt: “woman of Mithila”; epithet of Sita 

Malaya: one of the seven principal mountains of Jambudvipa 

Malin: a rdksasa; son of Sukesa and the gandharvi Devavati 

Malyavan: great-uncle and adviser to Ravana 

Malyavan: name of a mountain where Rama and Laksmana spend the rainy season, also called 

Mount Prasravana, ““The Mountain Rich in Streams” 

Manasa: lake on Mount Kailasa created by Brahma; the Sarayti River flows from it 

Mandakint: river flowing near Mount Citrakita 

Mandara: mountain used as the churning rod in the churning of the ocean 

Mandavi: elder daughter of Janaka’s brother, Kusadhvaja; wife of Bharata 

Mandhatr: a king; ancestor of Rama; slain by Lavana 

Mandodari: daughter of the daitva Maya and the apsaras Hema; chief queen of Ravana 

Manmatha: epithet of Kama 

Manthara: (1) daughter of Virocana; killed by Indra; (2) hunchbacked servant of Kaikeyt 

mantra: a sacred or mystical formula 

Manu: traditionally considered the father of the human race; legendary founder of the Iksvaku 

dynasty 

Marica Kasyapa: see Kasyapa 


Marica: a raksasa; son of Sunda and Tataka; Ravana’s ally; aids in the abduction of Sita; turns 
himself into a magical deer; slain by Rama 

maricipas: a Class of seers 

Maruta: name of Vayu, god of wind; father of Hanuman 

Maruti: “son of Maruta’”’; patronymic of Hanuman 

Maruts: the storm gods; sons of Aditi; companions of Indra 

Marutta: king of Usirabija; defeated by Ravana 

masas: a class of seers 

Matali: charioteer of Indra 

Matanga: a sage; lives near RSyamiika mountain; curses Valin to die if he comes there; Rama and 

Sita visit his ashram 

Matarisvan: epithet of Vayu, god of wind 

Maya: “divine illusion”; immemorial consort of Visnu 

Maya: an asura lord; architect of the asuras; father-in-law of Ravana 

Meghanada: “roaring like a thundercloud”; epithet of Indrajit; son of Ravana; wounds Rama, 

Laksmana, and the monkeys; defeats and captures Indra 

Mena: wife of Himalaya; mother of Uma and Ganges 

Menaka: an apsaras sent by Indra to seduce Visvamitra 

Meru: the name of a mountain; the axis mundi 

Mithila: capital of the kingdom of Videha; ruled by Janaka 

Mitra: a god; curses Urvast to live on earth with Purtiravas 

Mitrasaha: see Kalmasapada 

mrdanga: a type of drum 

Mrtyu: “death”; name of Yama, the god of death 

Mila: an asterism 

muraja: a type of drum 

Nala: a monkey; son of Visvakarman; designs the bridge to Lanka for Rama and his army 

Nalakibara: nephew of Ravana; lover of Rambha; curses Ravana to die if he forces himself on a 

woman 

Namuci: an asura slain by Indra 

Nandana: the pleasure garden of Indra 

Nandi(n) or Nandigvara: a minister of Siva 

Nandigrama: village where Bharata lived during Rama’s exile 

Narada: a divine sage; gives discourse on the yugas; tells Ravana to fight Yama; tells Rama of the 

asceticism of Sambika 

Narantaka: a raksasa warrior; slain by Angada 

Narayana: one of the names of Visnu; defeats raksasas 

Narmada: a river in western India; scene of combat between Ravana and Arjuna Kartavirya 

Nikumbha: son of Kumbhakarna; adviser to Ravana; slain by Hanuman 

Nikumbhila: (1) a goddess worshiped by the raksasa women; (2) a sacred grove where Indrajit 

sacrifices 

Nimi: a king cursed by Vasistha; granted a boon by the gods to live in people’s eyes 

Nirrti: goddess of chaos 

Nisada: a tribal hunter who slays the male of a pair of mating kraurica birds, thus inspiring Valmiki 

to compose the first s/oka, “verse,” of poetry 

Nisadas: forest-dwelling hunters and fishermen, ruled by Guha 

Nivatakavacas: a clan of demons; allies of Ravana 

Nrga: a king cursed to become a lizard 


om: a sacred, auspicious syllable 

Paka: a demon slain by Indra; the deed gives rise to the common epithet of the great god Pakasasana, 
“Chastiser of Paka” 

Pampa: the lake where Rama and Laksmana first encounter Hanuman and Sugriva 

panava: type of drum 

Paficavatt: the forest where Rama, Sita, and Laksmana first live during their exile 

Parjanya: god of rain 

Parvati: epithet of Uma 

pataha: a type of drum 

Patala: a netherworld, abode of the serpents; its capital city is Bhogavati 

Paulastya: “descendant of Pulastya”; patronymic of Ravana 

pisacas: a class of demons of a particularly low order 

Prahasta: a raksasa counselor to Ravana; raksasa warrior; father of Jambumalin; slain by Nila 

Prajapati: “lord of creatures”; epithet of Brahma 

Prajapatis: the mind-born sons of Brahma 

Prasravana: “The Mountain Rich in Streams”; the mountain where Rama and Laksmana spend the 
rainy season; also called Mount Malyavan 

Pulastya: mind-born son of Brahma; grandfather of Ravana; asks Arjuna Kartavirya to release 
Ravana 

Puloman: name of a demon; father of Indra’s wife, Saci 

purohita: household priest or family preceptor 

Piru: younger son of Yayati by Sarmistha; takes on his father’s curse of decrepitude; inherits his 
father’s kingdom 

Purtravas: son of Budha and [14; king in Pratisthana 

Pusan: a solar god in vedic mythology 

Puskal(r)a: son of Bharata; rules in Puskaravati 

Puspa(ka): flying palace stolen by Ravana from Kubera Vaisravana; gifted to Rama 

Raghava: “descendant of Raghu”; common patronymic of Rama and his brothers 

Raghu: son of Kakutstha and ancestor of Rama 

Rahu: an asura; he causes eclipses by swallowing the sun or the moon 

Rajagrha: capital city of the Kekayas 

rdjasiya: great sacrifice performed by a universal monarch as a sign of undisputed sovereignty 

raksasas: a class of violent and bloodthirsty demons regarded as the implacable enemies of 
brahmanical culture and civilization; their king is the ten-headed Ravana, who rules from the 
island-fortress of Lanka 

Rama Dasarathi: eldest son of Dasaratha by Kausalya and hero of the Ramayana 

Rama Jamadagnya: known also as Bhargava Rama or Parasurama; son of the sage Jamadagni; 
confronts and then yields to Rama 

Rambha: an apsaras; attempts to seduce Visvamitra but is cursed by him; loved by Tumburu; raped 
by Ravana 

Rasatala: name of an underworld 

Rati: wife of Kama, the god of love 

Ravana: main antagonist of the Ramayana; overlord of the raksasas; also called DaSagriva, “Ten- 
necked” 

Ravani: “son of Ravana”; patronymic of Meghanada Indrajit 

rksas: an unidentified type of primate; translated as “ape” in order to distinguish these animals from 
other simians 

Rksarajas: a monkey; biological father of Valin and Sugriva 


Rksavant: the name of a mountain 

Rohini: a daughter of Daksa; favorite consort of the moon; a constellation 

Romapada: king of Afiga; friend of Dagaratha; father of Santa; the father-in-law of RSyasriga 

Rsyamtka or Rsyamtika: mountain where Rama meets Sugriva 

Réyasriiga: the innocent boy-sage; son of Vibhandaka; husband of Santa; performs sacrifice for 
Dasaratha 

Rudra: one of the names of Siva 

Rudras: a class of gods; sons or companions of the storm god 

Ruma: a wife of Sugriva 

Sabala: Vasistha’s wish-fulfilling cow; name of Nrga’s cow 

Sabari: ascetic woman visited by Rama and Laksmana in the forest 

Saci: consort of Indra; daughter of Puloman 

Saci’s lord: common epithet of Indra 

Sagara: an Iksvaku king; ancestor of Rama; has two wives, Kesini, on whom he fathers one son, 
Asamafnyja, and Sumati, on whom he fathers sixty thousand sons 

Sagara: god of the ocean 

Sakra: “mighty one”; common epithet of Indra 

Salakatankata: daughter of Sandhya; mother of the raksasa Sukesa, whom she abandons 

Sambara: an asura; enemy of Indra 

Sambasadana: an asura slain by Kesarin 

Sambiika: siidra ascetic executed by Rama 

Sampati: (1) a vulture; brother of Jatayus; aids the monkeys in their search for Sita; (2) a raksasa 
counselor of Vibhisana; (3) a monkey 

Samudra: god of the ocean; see Sagara 

Sanatkumara: name of a seer who tells the RSyasrmga story 

sandhya rites: (1) daily vedic rites consisting of the sipping of water, prayers, and mantras, especially 
the Gayatrimantra; (2) Sandhya, “Twilight”; mother of Salakatankata 

Safikara: one of the names of Siva 

Santa: Romapada’s daughter; Rsyasriiga’s wife 

sarabha: a mythical beast 

Sarabhafiga: an ascetic whom Rama, Sita, and Laksmana seek out after their encounter with the 
raksasa Viradha 

Sarama: a raksasa woman; comforts Sita during her captivity; wife of Vibhisana 

Sarana: a rdksasa spy 

Sarasvatt: (1) goddess of speech; (2) name of a river 

Saray: river flowing on the outskirts of Ayodhya 

Sardiila: a raksasa spy 

Sarmistha: a daitya woman; daughter of Vrsaparvan; beloved wife of Yayati; mother of Piru 

Sdastra: the collective textual scholarship of a field of knowledge, for example, law or literature. 

Satananda: son of Gautama and Ahalya; preceptor of Janaka; narrates the story of the conflict 
between Visvamitra and Vasistha 

Satrughna: youngest son of Dagaratha by Sumitra; twin brother of Laksmana; Bharata’s friend and 
constant companion; kills Lavana and founds the city of Madhura 

Satyavatt: wife of Rctka and sister of Visvamitra; she follows her husband to heaven and becomes the 
divine river Kausikt 

Saudasa: a king cursed by Vasistha to become a cannibal; also called Kalmasapada and Mitrasaha 

Saumitri: “son of Sumitra”’; matronymic of Laksmana 

Savitr: “the impeller”; epithet of Strya in his role as the “impeller” of all creatures 


simha bird: probably the roc, a mythical bird 

Simhika: a raksasa woman; tries to obstruct Hanuman’s leap; slain by Hanuman 

Sita: daughter of Janaka; wife of Rama; heroine of the Ramayana 

Siva: one of the three main gods of the Hindu trinity, along with Brahma and Visnu; famed for his 
asceticism; husband of Uma (Parvati) 

Soma: name of Candra, god of the moon 

Sri: goddess of royal fortune, or beauty; consort of Visnu; incarnated as Sita 

Sriigavera: a city on the Ganges River ruled by the Nisada king Guha 

Srutakirti: Kugadhvaja’s youngest daughter; wife of Satrughna 

Sruti: “what is heard”; the revealed corpus of the brahmanical tradition; the vedic corpus 

Sthanu: one of the names of Siva 

Subahu: (1) a raksasa; brother of Marica; slain by Rama; (2) son of Satrughna; becomes king of 
Madhura 

Sudra: one of the four classes of traditional Hindu society; the servant class 

Sugriva: king of the monkeys; son of Surya; younger brother of Valin; ally of Rama 

Suka: a raksasa spy 

SukeSsa: a rdksasa; son of Vidyutkesa and his wife Salakatankata; abandoned by his mother; father of 
Malin, Malyavan, and Sumalin 

Suketu: a yaksa; father of Tataka 

Sukra or Sukracarya: the sage Usanas Kavya; a scion of the Bhargava gotra; identified with the 
planet Venus; hereditary purohita of the asuras; father of Devayant; curses his son-in-law, Yayati 

Sumali(n): a raksasa; father of KaikasT 

Sumantra: charioteer and adviser to King Dasaratha; Rama’s charioteer and counselor; drives Rama, 
Sita, and Laksmana on their journey into exile; drives Sita on her way to banishment 

Sumitra: junior-most wife of Dasaratha; mother of the twins Laksmana and Satrughna 

Sunahgepa: middle son of Rcika, a Bhargava sage; sold by his parents to the Iksvaku king Ambarisa 
as a replacement sacrificial victim; saved by Visvamitra 

Suparna: name of the bird Garuda, Visnu’s mount 

Suparsva: a rdksasa adviser to Ravana 

Surasa: a goddess; takes the form of a raksasi to test Hanuman’s strength and valor 

Siirpanakha: the sister of Ravana; attempts to seduce Rama in the Paficavati; disfigured by Laksmana 

Surya: sun god; father of Sugriva 

Susena: monkey physician; heals wounded Laksmana; father-in-law of Sugriva 

Sutiksna: a sage whom Rama, Sita, and Laksmana visit during their exile 

Suvela: a mountain climbed by Rama and his forces 

svaha: (1) a ritual utterance; (2) goddess, wife of Agni 

Svayamprabha: daughter of Merusavarni; friend of Hema who guards her dwelling; delivers 
monkeys from cave 

Sveta: ascetic king of Vidarbha; doomed to eat his own corpse 

Taksa: son of Bharata; rules in Taksasila 

Taksaka: a serpent lord defeated by Ravana 

Tamasa: a river near the Ganges on whose banks Valmiki has his ashram 

Tara: a monkey general of Sugriva 

Tara: wife of Valin 

Tataka: a yaksa woman who is cursed to become a raksasi; mother of the raksasa Marica; at 
Visvamitra’s behest, Rama kills her 

Trijata: a raksasa woman who comforts Sita during her captivity; has dream of Rama’s victory 

Triktta: three-peaked mountain on which the city of Lanka is said to be located 


Tripura: the city of the demons; destroyed by Siva 

Trisanku: Iksvaku king; ancestor of Rama; desires to obtain heaven in his mortal form; aided by 
Visvamitra 

Trisiras or Trimutrdhan: “three-headed”; a raksasa warrior; slain by Hanuman 

Tumburu: one of the kings of the gandharvas; loves the apsaras Rambha 

Tvastr: divine craftsman of the Indian pantheon 

ccaihsravas: divine horse produced during the churning of the ocean; given to Indra 

ma: wife of Siva; daughter of the mountain Himalaya; often called Parvati; allows Ila, who was 

transformed into a woman, to alternate between genders 

Urmila: daughter of Janaka and wife of Laksmana 

Urvasi: an apsaras 

USanas or Usanas Kavya: preceptor of the asuras; see Sukracarya 

Vaideha: “man of Videha”; epithet of Janaka 

Vaidehi: “woman of Videha”; epithet of Sita 

vaikhanasas: a class of supernatural sages born from the nails and hair of Brahma 

Vainateya: “son of Vinata”; matronymic of Garuda and Aruna 

Vairocana: see Bali 

Vaisravana: “descendant of Visravas”; patronymic of Kubera, god of wealth 

vaisya: one of the four classes of traditional Hindu society; the merchant and farmer class 

Vaitarant: the river of hell 

Vaivasvata: “son of Vivasvant”; patronymic of Yama 

vajra: (1) a thunderbolt; (2) the thunderbolt weapon of the god Indra 

Vajradamstra: a raksasa adviser to Ravana 

Vajrahanu: a rdksasa adviser to Ravana 

valakhilyas: a supernatural class of tiny sages 

Valin: king of the monkeys; husband of Tara; son of Indra; elder brother of Sugriva, killed by Rama 

Valmiki (v./. Valmika): sage and composer of the Ramayana; shelters Sita and raises her sons; brings 
them back to Ayodhya 

Vamadeva: a minister of DaSaratha 

Varuna: lord of the ocean; regent of the west 

Varuni: Varuna’s daughter; comes forth during the churning of the ocean; the personification of wine 

vasat: an utterance said at the end of a sacrificial verse 

Vasava: a name of Indra 

Vasistha: the purohita, “family preceptor,” of the Iksvakus; rival of Visvamitra 

Vasudeva: a name of Visnu; assumes the form of the sage Kapila 

Vasuki: a great serpent used as the rope in the churning of the ocean 

Vasus: a class of deities, normally eight in number 

Vatapi: a raksasa; brother of Namuci; takes the form of a ram that was eaten by some brahmans; 
killed by Agastya 

Vayu: god of the wind; deforms the daughters of Kusanabha; father of Hanuman 

vedas: the ancient scriptures of the brahmanic tradition 

Vedavati: a brahman woman assaulted by Ravana; vows to be reborn to destroy him 

Vibhandaka: son of Kasyapa; father of RSyasrnga 

Vibhisana: a raksasa lord; defector brother of Ravana; ally of Rama; instructed by Rama to remain 
on earth to rule the rdksasas 

Videha: (1) epithet of Janaka; (2) kingdom of Janaka 

vidyadharas: a class of semidivine beings; vidyadhara women are famed for their beauty 

Vidyujjihva: (1) a danava lord; husband of Sirpanakha; (2) raksasa master of illusion 


U 
U 


Vidyutkesa: a raksasa; son of Heti and his wife Bhaya; husband of Salakatankata; father of Sukesa 

Vinata: (1) a raksast who taunts Sita; (2) mother of Garuda and Aruna 

Vindhya: a mountain range north of the Narmada River; traditional boundary between North and 
South India 

Viradha: a raksasa; attempts to abduct Sita; slain by Rama and Laksmana 

Virocana: an asura king; ancestor of Bali; his daughter, Manthara, is slain by Indra 

Virtipaksa: a raksasa warrior; field marshal of Ravana; slain by Sugriva 

Visala: son of Iksvaku and Alambusa; founder of the city of Visala 

visala: a famous city through which Rama passes on his journey to Mithila 

Visnu: one of the three principal gods (“the trinity”) of the Hindu pantheon along with Brahma and 
Siva; incarnates on earth in the form of Rama in order to kill Ravana 

Visravas: a brahman sage; father of Kubera, Ravana, Kumbhakarna, Vibhisana, and Sirpanakha 

Visvakarman: architect of the gods; builds Lanka; father of the monkey architect Nala 

Visvamitra: originally a kshatriya king; becomes a brahman through severe austerities; mentor of 
Rama; gives Rama divine weapons; rival of Vasistha 

Visvavasu: one of the kings of the gandharvas 

Vitapavati: name for Alaka, city of the yaksas 

Vivasvant: a name of Siirya, the sun god 

Vrtra: a powerful brahman ascetic asura or daitya killed by Indra 

Yadu: elder son of Yayati by Devayani; cursed by his father 

yajna: ritual sacrifice 

yaksa: a class of semidivine beings associated with Kubera; yaksa women are known for their beauty 

Yama: god of death; regent of the south; battles Ravana 

Yamuna: a famous and holy river 

yatudhana: used as a term for raksasas or for a specific class of raksasas 

Yayati: an ancient king; son of Nahusa; husband of Devayani and Sarmistha; cursed by his father-in- 
law, USanas Kavya; father of Yadu and Piru; exchanges his old age with his youngest son Ptru 

Yudhajit: a son of the king of the Kekayas; a brother of Kaikey1; maternal uncle of Bharata 

Yupaksa: (1) a raksasa warrior; killed by Hanuman; (2) a raksasa minister of Ravana; wakes 
Kumbhakarna 


Glossary of Weapons 


arrows 
arrow: bdna, margana, isu, etc. 
arrowhead: bana, salya 
barbed: vikarni 
broad-headed: ndlika 
crescent-headed: bhalla 
half-iron: ardhanardca 
half-moon-headed: ardhacandra 
heads like calves’ teeth: vatsadanta 
heads like folded palms: afijalika 
heads like herons’ feathers: silimukha 
heads like the tips of karavira leaves: vipdatha (oleander Nerium odorum) 
heads with ear-like blades: karni 
horseshoe-headed: Asurapra 
iron: nardca 
lions’ fangs: simhadamstra 
long-headed: salya 
razor-tipped: ksura 
axe: parasu 
barbed dart: kunta 
battle-axe: parasvadha 
bludgeon: musundi (v.l. musrnthi, bhusundi, bhrsundi) 
bow: capa, karmuka, sardsana, dhanuh, etc. 
broad sword, double-edged sword: rsti 
club: yasti / yasti 
cudgel: musala 
dart: prasa 
dart/missile/lance: asant 
discus: cakra—small discus: cakrah; big discus: cakram 
goad: ankusa 
hook: ankusa 
hundred slayers: sataghni 
iron club, beam, or battering ram: parigha 
iron cudgels: tomara 
javelin: sakti 
lance: Sila 
mace: gada 
mallet: kita 


nirghdata: perhaps a mechanical weapon that makes a noise like a thunderbolt 
noose: pasa 

ploughshare: hala 

scimitar: khadga [when used with asi] 

short javelin: bhindipala / bhindipala 

sling: ksepani / ksepaniyva 

spear: pattisa / pattasa 

staves: dandayuddha 

sword: asi, khadga, nistrimsa 

trident: trisiila 

vajra: (1) Indra’s thunderbolt; (2) thunderbolt-like weapon 
vrksa: treelike weapon 

war hammer: mudgara 


Bibliography 


The Text and Translation of the Valmiki Ramayana 

The Valmiki Ramayana: Critical Edition. (1960-1975). 7 vols. General 
editors, G. H. Bhatt and U. P. Shah. Baroda: Oriental Institute (VR). 

The Ramayana of Valmiki: An Epic of Ancient India. (1984—2019). 7 vols. 
Edited by Robert P. Goldman. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press (PVR). 

Balakanda 

The Ramayana of Valmiki: An Epic of Ancient India, vol. 1, Balakdnda. 
(1984). Edited and translated by Robert P. Goldman. Introduction by 
Robert P. Goldman. Annotation by Robert P. Goldman and Sally J. 
Sutherland. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 

Ayodhyakanda 

The Ramayana of Valmiki: An Epic of Ancient India, vol. 2, Avodhyakanda. 
(1986). Translated by Sheldon I. Pollock. Edited by Robert P. 
Goldman. Introduction and annotation by Sheldon I. Pollock. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 

Aranyakanda 

The Ramayana of Valmiki: An Epic of Ancient India, vol. 3, Aranyakanda. 
(1991). Translated by Sheldon I. Pollock. Edited by Robert P. 
Goldman. Introduction and annotation by Sheldon I. Pollock. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 


Kiskindhakanda 
The Ramayana of Valmiki: An Epic of Ancient India, vol. 4, 
Kiskindhakanda. (1994). Translated by Rosalind Lefeber. Edited by 
Robert P. Goldman. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 


Sundarakanda 


The Ramayana of Valmiki: An Epic of Ancient India, vol. 5, Sundarakdnda. 
(1995). Edited and translated by Robert P. Goldman and Sally J. 
Sutherland Goldman. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 


Yuddhakanda 
The Ramayana of Valmiki: An Epic of Ancient India, vol. 6, Yuddhakanda. 
(2009). Translated by Robert P. Goldman, Sally J. Sutherland 
Goldman, and Barend van Nooten. Annotation by Robert P. Goldman, 
Sally J. Sutherland Goldman, and Barend van Nooten. Edited, with 
introduction, by Robert P. Goldman and Sally J. Sutherland Goldman. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 


Uttarakanda 
The Ramayana of Valmiki: An Epic of Ancient India, vol. 7, Uttarakanda. 
(2016). Edited and translated by Robert P. Goldman and Sally J. 
Sutherland Goldman. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 


Works Consulted 


Bhatt, G. H., ed. (1960). Introduction to The Balakanda: The First Book of 
the Valmiki Ramayana: The National Epic of India, pp. x11i—xxviil. 
Baroda: Oriental Institute. 

Brockington, John L. (1984). Righteous Rama: The Evolution of an Epic. 
Delhi: Oxford University Press. 

Brown, W. Norman. (1940). “The Basis for the Hindu Act of Truth.” 
Review of Religions 5: 36-45. 

———. (1968). “The Metaphysics of the Truth Act (satyakriya).” In 
Meélanges de’Indianisme a la Mémoire de Louis Renou, pp. 171-77. 
Paris: E. de Boccard. 

——. (1972). “Duty as Truth in Ancient India.” Proceedings of the 
American Philosophical Society 116.3: 252-68. 

Dante Alighieri. (1966-1967). La Commedia secondo l’antica vulgataa 
Commedia secondo l’antica vulgata. 4 vols. Edited by Giorgio 
Petrocchi. Milan: Mondadori; reprint, Florence: Le Lettere, 1994. 

Debroy, Bibek, trans. (2017). The Valmiki Ramayana. 3 vols. New Delhi: 
Penguin. 


Fitzgerald, James L. (1998). “Some Storks and Eagles Eat Carrion: Herons 
and Ospreys Do Not: Kankas and Kuraras (and Badas) in the 
Mahabharata.” Journal of the American Oriental Society 118(2): 257— 
61. 

Gandhi, Mahatma. (1929). Young India (September 19): 305. 

Goldman, Robert P. (1980). “Ramah Sahalaksmanah: Psychological and 
Literary Aspects of the Composite Hero of Valmtki’s Ramayana.” 
Journal of Indian Philosophy 8: 149-89. 

Goldman, Robert P., and Sally J. Sutherland Goldman. (2019). 
Devavanipravesika: An Introduction to the Sanskrit Language. 4% ed. 
Berkeley: Institute for South Asia Studies. 

Lord, Albert B. (2000). The Singer of Tales. 2"! ed. Edited by Stephen 
Mitchell and Gregory Nagy. Harvard Studies in Comparative 
Literature. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Mahabharata: Critical Edition. (1933-1970). 24 vols. With Harivamsa 
(1969-1971). Critically edited by V. S. Sukthankar et al. Poona: 
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. 

Sutherland, Sally J. (Sally J. Sutherland Goldman). (1989). “Sita and 
Draupadi: Aggressive Behavior and Female Role-Models in the 
Sanskrit Epics.” Journal of the American Oriental Society 109(1): 63— 
wee 

Thapar, Romila. (2002). Early India: From the Origins to AD 1300. 
Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Wuyastyk, Dominik. (2004). “Jambudvipa: Apples or Plums?” In Studies in 
the History of the Exact Sciences in Honor of David Pingree. Edited by 
C. Burnett et al., pp. 287-301. Leiden: Brill. 


Suggestions for Further Reading 


As noted in the introduction, readers who are interested in pursuing 
particular issues in the history, translation, reception, and interpretation of 
Valmiki’s immortal work should consult our fully introduced and copiously 
annotated translation of the poem along with its bibliographies. In addition, 
for some general background to the epic and its relation to its later versions, 
and to the other great Sanskrit epic poem, the Mahabharata, we recommend 
the following brief reading list. 


Brockington, John L. (1984). Righteous Rama: The Evolution of an Epic. 
Delhi: Oxford University Press. 

—__——. (1998). The Sanskrit Epics. Leiden: E. J. Brill. 

Goldman, Robert P., and Sally J. Sutherland Goldman. (2004). “The 
Valmiki Ramayana and the Ramayana Tradition.” In Hindu World, 
edited by Sushil Mittal and Gene Thursby. New York: Routledge. 

Goldman, Robert P., and Sally J. Sutherland Goldman. (2010). “The 
Ramayana.” In Brill Encyclopedia of Hinduism, edited by Knut A. 
Jacobsen et al., pp. 161—86. Leiden: Koninklijke Brill NV. 

McGill, Forrest, ed. (2016). The Rama Epic: Hero, Heroine, Ally, Foe. San 
Francisco: Asian Art Museum, Cheng-Moon Lee Center for Asian Art 
and Culture. 

Pollock, Sheldon I. (1993). “Ramayana and Political Imagination in India.” 
Journal of Asian Studies 52(2): 261-97. 

Raghavan, V., ed. (1989). The Ramayana Tradition in Asia: Papers 
Presented at the International Seminar on the Ramayana Tradition in 
Asia, New Delhi, December 1975. New Delhi: Sahitya Akademi. 
Reprint. 

Richman, Paula, ed. (1991). Many Ramayanas: The Diversity of a 
Narrative Tradition in South Asia. Berkeley: University of California 
Press. 

———. (2000). Questioning Ramayanas: A South Asian Tradition. New 
Delhi: Oxford University Press. 


Index 


abandonment: of child, 477, 732 (see also child(ren)); of Lanka by raksasas, 731, 740, 744; of Sita 
by Rama, 6, 17-19, 794-98 

abducted women: curse Ravana, 16, 29-30; grief of, 762—63 

abduction: of daughters of serpents, yaksas, raksasas, men, daityas, and danavas by Ravana, 5, 16, 
762-63; of Kumbhinasi by Madhu, 765; of Saci by Anuhlada, 396; of Sita by Ravana, 12-15, 24, 
30, 32, 52, 56, 320-27;—Brahma witnesses, 324;—\-creatures seem to mourn, 325;—crow foretells, 
351;—foreshadowing of, 30;—Jatayus attempts to stop, 13, 321—23;—-monkeys witness, 326-27; 
—as pivotal event of poem, 12;—prophecy of, by Nisakara, 422;—-Ravana plots, 303-4; — 
recalled, 355-57; 413, 434, 482, 519-20, 787;—rumors arise about, 793;—-Suparsva as witness to, 
420;—by Viradha, 12, 32, 52, 265—267;— recalled, 460, 677; of Taksaka’s wife, by Ravana, 299; of 
wife of Sugriva, 361; of women by Ravana, 16, 29, 30, 762—63 

Abhijit: quarter facing, 423 

abhijit (rite), 68 

Abhira: region to be searched by southern search party, 402 

adharma. See unrighteousness 

Adhirtarajasa: son of Kuga (2), 84 

adhyayas (chapters): of Mahabharata, 9n 

Adikavi, First Poet: Valmiki as, 4 

Adikavya, First Poem: Ramayana as, 4 

Aditi: gives birth to Dhatr, 230;—to gods, 97-98, 280, 744;— to Visnu, 82; Indra son of, 71; Maruta 
son of, 785; Rama as son of, 849; sister of Diti, 744; Vayu (Maruta) son of, 785; wife of Kasyapa, 
280, 744 

Aditya (sun god), 403, 780. See also Siirya 

aditya(s) (class of divinities): 280, 403, 455, 768, 770-71, 772, 842; sons of Aditi, accept Sura, 98 

Aeneid, 3 

Agastya (brahman), 166; ascetic power of, 277, 279; associated with southern quarter, 181, 276, 407, 
707, 728; attends Rama’s asvamedha, 841; austerities of, 823; birth of, from a pot, 804; curses 
Marica and Tataka, 78; celestial ornament, accepts from Sveta;—gives to Rama, 824;—-made by 
Visvakarman, 824;—Rama accepts, 726; deeds of, recounted, 276-77; describes austerities of 
Ravana and his brothers, 742; directs Rama to Paficavatt, 279; encounter of, with Ilvala and Vatapi, 
275-76, 312; etymology of name of, 275; fasting of, 277; gives celestial jewel/ornament to Rama, 
824;—arrow and quivers of Indra to Rama, 278; gods instruct Rama to visit ashram of, 823; 
identifies Rama as Visnu, 740; makes south safe from raksasas, 276; monkeys see, on Mount 
Malaya, 401; places Mahendra on southern shore, 401; as pot—born sage, 729, 823, 824, 827, 829; 
praises Hanuman, 787; praises Sita, 278—79; Rama asks Sutiksna directions to ashram of, 274—75; 
—dwells in heart of, 824;—-gives gifts to, 166;—receives divine weapons from, 278;—visits 
ashram of, with gods, 17, 18, 823—29;—-visits ashram of, with Laksmana and Sita, 277-79; region 
of, 181; reminds Rama that he killed Valin, 782; role of, in Uttarakanda, 16-17, 19, 26, 29; tells 


cautionary tales, 16—17;—-of Danda, 826—28;—of Sveta, 824-26; tells history of celestial 
ornament/jewel, 824—26;—desolation of the Dandaka Forest, 826—28;—-Hanuman’s childhood, 
783—87;—raksasas, Ravana, and Ravana’s kin, 16-17, 729-82; Suttksna directs Rama to ashram 
of, 275; tells genealogy of Kubera, 729-33; ViSvakarman builds palace for, 401; on women’s 
nature, 279 

Agastya’s brother: ashram of, 52, 275—76 

Agni (god of fire), 108, 114, 188, passim: Anala name of, 612; banner of, smoke, 188; as bearer or 
eater of oblations, 282, 514, 516, 564, 578, 708, 793; divine weapon or weapon-spell (astra) of, 80, 
108, 606-7, 639, 653, 685, 751; does not harm Hanuman, 514;—Sita, 516; dwells in Arjuna’s 
firepit, 775; Ganges gives birth to child of, 732; gods worship Visnu with, 854; as having golden 
seed, 775; Indrajit sacrifices to, 641; Indrajit worships, 773; as leader of gods, 817, 823, 832; as 
purohita of the gods, 89; role of, in Skanda’s birth, 89-90, 559; and Siva’s semen, 88-89; Sita 
enters, 708;—prays to, 513-14; as Vaisvanara, 785; as witness, 356, 358, 359, 523, 793, 782;—of 
nonaggression pact of Arjuna-Ravana, 780;—of Ravana-Nivatakavacas alliance, 761;—of Sita’s 
ordeal by fire, 708, 710; words of, to Ganges, 89;—to Indra, 101 as wrathful, 767; Yama attended 
by, 757 

agnihotra (rite), 28, 87, 104, 105, 119, 174, 189, 211, 229, 262, 268, 306, 567, 571, 741, 786, 853 

agnipariksa. See ordeal by fire 

agnistoma (sacrifice), 567, 764, 845 

agriculture: increases in Dvapara Yuga, 821 

Ahalya: austerities of, 100; Brahma creates, 774; etymology of name of, 774; Gautama curses, 101, 
774; Indra rapes, 774; —seduces, 100-101; loses distinction as only beautiful woman, 774—75; 
story of, in Balakanda, 100—-102;—in Uttarakanda, 774-75 

Aiksvaka(s): DaSaratha, 121, 145, 167, 169, 171; Kurus, 36; Rama, 77, 182, 184; Rama and 
Laksmana, 342 

Airavata (elephant), 290, 299; Hanuman mistakes, for fruit, 784; Indra seeks Hanuman on, 784; as 
mount of Indra, 290, 444, 517, 540, 635, 772; son of Iravati, 280; Sudarsana born in lineage of, 
630; as world guardian, 280 

Airavata (mountain), 206 

Aisika (weapon-spell): of Atikaya, 639 

ajas or Gjas (class of ascetics), 302-3 

Ajatasatru (king of Magadha): defeats janapada of Kosala, 36 

Akampana (raksasa troop leader) (1), Hanuman fights and kills, 596-98; killing of recalled, 715, 
728; leads raksasa troops into battle, 596-97; minister of Ravana, 769; Ravana hears of death of, 
599; son of Sumalin and Ketumati, 734 

Akampana (raksasa troop leader) (2), 603, 668 

Aksa (son of Ravana): Hanuman fights and kills, 53, 504-6; Ravana sends to fight Hanuman, 503 

Alambusa (gandharva woman), 227-28 

Alambusa (mother of Visala), 99 

Alarka: gives his eyes to brahman, 145 

alliance: of Rama and Sugriva, 13, 25, 356, 367; of Ravana and Nivatkavacas, 761 

ally/allies: Bharata assembles, to aid Rama, 787; of Bharata, 240; of Dasaratha, 74, 84; dismissal of, 
by Rama, 17, 787-89; Guha as, of Kosalan court, 41; of House of Iksvaku, 226, 254; Jatayus as, of 
Kosalan court, 24; Kabandha makes, known to Rama, 344-45; Kumbhakarna devours, 626; 
Laksmana as, of Rama, 249; monkeys as Rama’s, 15, 70, 393, 495, 535; Pratardana as, of Rama, 
787; of Rama, 19, 24, 488, 705, 707-8, 711, 713, 719; Rama and Sugriva as, 358, 367, 384, 392— 
93, 396, 483, 486, 488, 522-23, 590, 715; of Ravana, 31, 323, 488; Sugriva and Vibhisana as 


Rama’s closest, 699; of Sugriva, 384, 590; treatment of, 384-85; Vibhisana as, of Rama, 5, 15, 56, 
551-52, 702; of Visvamitra, 104 

alms: daughter as, 730 

Amaravati (Indra’s heaven), 58-59, 437, 439, 575, 630, 650, 716, 731, 734, 746, 755, 780; Lanka 
compared to, 319 

Ambarisa, 252; genealogy of, 122; sacrifice of, 113-14 

ambush: of Valin by Rama, 13, 368 

Amsumant (name for the sun), 349 

Amsumant (son of Asamafija), 96; attains heaven, 94; genealogy of, 122, 252; searches for Sagara’s 
horse, 93-94; son of Asamaifija, 91, 93; unable to bring Ganges to earth, 94 

amulet: Kausalya gives, to Rama, 159; Valmiki gives, to Lava and KuSa, 813 

Anala. See Agni 

Anala (rdaksasa): minister of Vibhisana, 573; son of Malin, 734 

Anala (1): one of Daksa’s sixty daughters, 280; brings forth fruit trees, 280 

Anala (2): relates information to Sita, 489; Vibhisana’s eldest daughter, 489 

Anala (3): as daughter of Malyavan and Sundari, 734; as granddaughter of Malyavan, 765; mother of 
Kumbhinast, 765, 808 

Ananta (thousand-headed god), 399 

Anaranya: father of Prthu 122, 252; Ravana fights and kills, 16, 755-56 

Anastya (ascetic woman), 56; advises Sita on wifely duties and devotions, 260; asceticism of, 259; 
audience of, with Sita, 259-63; created roots and fruits and caused the Jahnavi to flow, 259; 
description of, 259; gives gifts to Sita, 261; reduced ten nights to one, 259; Sita tells, about birth 
and marriage, 261-62; wife of Atri, 259 

ancestor(s): of Bhagiratha, flooded with water, 96; Dilipa unable to save, 94 

Andhaka, (asura), 298, 581, 736 

Andhra: region searched by southern search party, 400 

Angada (monkey, son of Valin), 13, 26-27, passim; allows monkeys to drink honey-wine, 526; 
announces arrival of Laksmana, 389; arrives in Kiskindha, 397; attacks Ravana’s palace, 579; 
carries Laksmana to Lanka, 541; clatms Kumbhakarna is scarecrow, 621; consecration of, as crown 
prince, 380-81; considers Vibhisana suspect, 550; death of Valin and, 373-74, 377, 379; decides to 
fast to death, 416, 417; declares prowess in jumping, 424; despondency of, 416; duty of Tara 
toward, 375; escapes capture, 579; exhorts monkeys, 410, 423—24, 62 1—22;—-southern search party, 
410; fights and kills Kampana, 647-48; Hanuman exhorts, to remain loyal, 415; —Mahaparsva, 
682—83;—Narantaka, 632-33; fights Indrajit, 581, 583; grief of, 379, 389, 486; guards southern 
gate, 573-74, 577; Hanuman rebuffs, 415; —reports to, 518—19; humility of, 530; instructions of 
Tara to, 376-77; Jambavan discourages, from jumping, 424—25; kills asura, 409-10; kingly 
qualities of, 415; as leader of southern search party, 27, 400, 407; as messenger of Rama, 578-79; 
monkeys praise, 530; proposes killing Ravana and rescuing Sita, 525; raksasas capture, 579; Rama 
gives armlets to, 726; reports alliance between Rama and Sugriva, 367; reports Hanum4an’s success, 
525; and Sampati converse, 417-18, 420-23; Sampati tells, of meeting with Nisakara, 420-22; 
smashes pinnacle of Ravana’s palace, 579; son of Kaikeyi (Bharata) embraces, 722; strikes 
Dadhimukha, 528; struck down in battle, 643, 648; and Sugriva converse, 414, 415—16; Tara hears 
information from, 367; tells Sampati of fight between Jatayus and Ravana, 417—18;—story of 
Rama, 417-18; terror of, at arrival of Laksmana, 388-89; urges monkeys to fast to death, 414; and 
Valin, 372, 376; vows to fast to death, 414, 416 

Angada (son of Laksmana): consecration of, in Angadtya, 847 

Angadtya (city): Rama founds, 847 

Angaraka (shadow-catching raksasa woman), 401. See also Simhika 


Angiras, 280, 846; Gargya son of, 845; Nimi chooses, to perform sacrifice, 802 

Angirasas: curse Hanuman, 786 

Anila (raksasa): son of Malin, 734 

Anila (wind god), 427, 455, 505; Hanuman son of, 453, 564, 606, 624, 634, 635, 650 

animals: as raksasa mounts, 736, 765, 771; eating of five-clawed, 370; gods take on forms of, 754; of 
Ramayana, 24—26 

Afnyana: ability of, to take form at will, 425—26; an apsaras (Pufjikasthala), 425; infatuation of 
Maruta with, 426; mother of Hanuman, 426, 643, 783, 786; story of, 425—26; wife of Kesarin, 425, 
783, 786 

Afyjana (guardian elephant [diggaja]), 60, 733, 776, 778 

Afijana (mountain), 394 

another birth. See birth(s): reaping consequences of previous; reincarnation 

antelope skin. See black antelope(s): wearing of hide of 

anustubh (type of meter), 8 

apes (rksas), 189, 231-32, 243, passim; birth of, 70-71, 854; Dhumra leader of, 397, 559, 580, 622; 
gods take form as, 70-71; Jambavan as king of, 27, 540, 573-74, 591, 661-62, 658, 668, 672, 682, 
788; live in Ayodhya, 788; not native to Indian subcontinent, 46-47; number of, 393, 580; and 
Rama, 789, 792, 844, 845, 852, 853; Rama gives gifts to, 788; return to birth places, 854—55; seek 
protection of Valin, 377; Sugriva as lord of, 384, 486; Tara as protector of, 375, translation of rksas 
as, 46-47. See also langur(s); monkeys 

apsaras(es), 96, 125, 127, passim; Bharadvaja invokes, to entertain Bharata, 227, 228; danavas will 
not accept, 98; etymology of word, 98; Ghrtaci (see Ghrtaci); gods father sons on, 70; Hema (see 
Hema); Kumbhakarna devours seven, 743; Menaka (see Menaka); Paficapsaras lake of five, 274; 
produced from the churning of the ocean, 98; Pufyjikasthala, 425 (see also Aijana); Rambha (see 
Rambha); Urvast (see Urvasi) 

aptoryama rite, 68 

Araja (daughter of Usanas): as Bhargava girl, 827; Danda rapes, 827-28; Usanas Kavya curses, 8784 

Aranyakanda, 9, 24, 32, 44, 264-350; synopsis of, 12—13 

Aranyakaparvan, 36 

Arista (mountain): Hanuman’s return leap from, 516—18 

Aristanemin (sage), 837 

Arjuna Kartavirya: blocks flow of Narmada, 777; captures Ravana, 779; defeats ministers of 
Ravana,778; fells Prahasta in battle, 778; fights and defeats Ravana, 16, 26, 30, 777—78; as king of 
Haihayas, 775, 778, 780; ministers of, 775, 777-78; nonaggression pact of, with Ravana, 780, 
purohitas of (see purohita(s): of Arjuna Kartavirya); releases Ravana, 780; story of, 775-80 

army. See monkey army; rdksasa army; southern search party 

arrow(s): Agastya gives, to Rama, 278; Brahma gives, to Indra, 278, 298; extended simile of, of 
Rama, 628;—of Ravana, 605; —of Visnu, 737; Indra gives, 298;—to Agastya, 278; of Indrajit fell 
monkeys, 642—43;—-pierce Laksmana and Rama, 584-85, 654—55;—-serpent sons of Kadri 
become, 592; of Kama (see Kama: arrows of); Nila extracts, from Valin, 377; of Rama (see also 
Rama: arrow(s) of); Rama splits seven s@/a trees with, 53, 363-64; —recalled, 366, 393; of 
Satrughna enters Rasatala, 817; shape-shifting of, 583, 592, 690;—of Rama, 690, 853; of Visni, 
127-28, 817;—Rama gives to Satrughna, 810 

Arthasadhaka (minister of Dasaratha), 60 

Aruna (bird): father of Sampati, 281; Sampati son of, 486; son of Vinata, 280-81 

Aruna (mountain), 394 

Arundhatt: as exemplar of wifely obedience, 260; Sita compared to, 279, 481; Sita superior to, 701 

Aryaman (name of an Aditya), 158 


aryan civilization, 27—28 

Aryan clans, 35 

aryan conduct, 448, 452 

Aryan culture, 28 

Aryan kings, 133 

Aryan society, 40 

Asadha: month of, 383 

Asamanya, 122; Amsumant son of, 91; drowns children in Sarayi, 91, 170; father of Amsumant, 93; 
genealogy of, 152, 252; Sagara dispossesses, 170, 252; son of Sagara and Kesin1, 91 

ASaniprabha: Dvivida fights and kills, 581-82 

ascetic(s), 12, 54, 58, passim; abduction of Sita witnessed by, 324; appeal to Rama for protection, 12, 
258; ashrams of, in Dandaka wilderness, 264, 271, 274 (see also ashram(s)); austerities of (see 
austerities); Bharata as, 16, 23, 214; Bharata wears clothing of, 257-58, 718; brahmans as, 263, 
821, 845, passim; DaSaratha shoots, 198-99; Durvasas as, 799, 850; duty of, toward guests, 278; 
emerges from Nimi’s body, 805; fasting of, 264, 302, 348; fear raksasas, 273; forest devoid of, 
824; foretell Sabari’s meeting with Rama, 348; Garuda rescues 302-3; Hanuman vows to become, 
455; Kala in guise of, 848; Kumbhakarna as, 742; Lavana oppresses, 809; live near Ganges, 796;— 
in Janasthana, 838; Marica as, 307; Marica harrasses, 306; who mistreats guests eats own flesh in 
next world, 278, 825-26; Nisakara as, 42 1—22; practices of, 268-69; protection of, as duty of kings, 
264-65, 269 (see also duty: of king with advisors); raksasas kill, 269; Rama and Sita approached 
by, 264; Rama as, 144, 152, 175, 209, 237, 258, 306, 466, 566;—-gives donations to, 845;— 
protects, 269, 273;—-wears clothing of, 170 (see also barkcloth garments); Rama’s vow to, 
accomplished, 298; Ravana as false, 314-17; Sambiika as, 822; seats fit for, 807; seek Rama’s 
protection, 12, 258, 264-65, 269, 273; 807-9; show hospitality to Rama, 264—65; Sita desires to 
visit, 791; Vasistha as, 799; Vibhisana as, 742; visit Sutiksna, 269; in Yamuna region, 807. See also 
ajas or ajas 

asceticism (tapas), 29, 41, 51, passim; of Anasiiya, 259; of Bhagiratha, 94; of Bharadvaja, 717; of 
Bharata, 214, 718; black antelope skin as mark of, 752, 764; destroyed by possessing weapons, 
272; of Gautama, 101, 774; of Indrajit Meghanada, 661, 764, 773; of Mandakarni, 274; of Maya, 
412, 746; of Merusavarni, 403; of Nisakara, 421—22; practice of, and kshatriya class incongruous, 
272; of Ravana, 29, 511, 742-43; of Sabari, 347-48; of Sambiika, 18, 822; of Sarabhaiiga, 267; of 
Sita, 516; of Siva, 89; social class (varna) and yuga restrictions on, 821-22; of Suttksna, 270; of 
Svayamprabha, 413; of Vedavati, 752-53; of Visravas, 730-31; of Visvamitra, 41, 76; of women, 
797; Valmiki gains insight through, 797. See also austerities 

ascetic power, 277, 279; ability to kill raksasas with, 273; of Gautama, 101; of Indra, 502; of 
Mandakarni, 274; of sages at Pampa, 347; of Uma, 87-88 

ascetic practice (tapas): being underwater as, 765, 823; decapitation as, 299, 742; of the five fires, 
110, 115, 742; hanging upside down as, 822; heroic posture as, 742, living on air as, 730; living on 
water as, 730; raising arms as, 94, 115, 742, 836; sleeping upside down in water as, 365; standing 
without support as, 836; taking no sustenance as, 730-31; in water, 836 

ascetic women: live near Valmiki’s ashram, 797. See also Anasiiya; Parvati; Sabari; Svayamprabha; 
Vedavati 

ashram(s), 104, 113, 258, passim; of Agastya, 17, 18, 275, 276, 277, 278, 823-24; of Agastya’s 
brother, 275; of ascetic family, 199; of ascetics in Dandaka wilderness, 264, 271, 274, passim; of 
Atri, 259-63, 716; of Bali, 81-82; of Bharadvaja, 188-89, 221, 225-30, 255, 716; of Budha, 836— 
37; of courtesans, 62; of Cyavana, 814; of Durvasas, 850; of the great Dwarf (vamana) (see 
ashram(s): of Bali this entry); of Gautama, 100-101, 774, 802; of Gokarna, 742; on Gomati River, 
795; of Kama, 76-77; of Kubera Vaisravana, 730-31, 748; of Matanga on Rsyamtka, 363, 408; of 


Nisakara, 421; of Pulastya, 730; of Rama, 52, 189-90, 230, 236, 242-43, 281, 279, 284, 287, 304, 
309-10, 323-24, 720; of Sabari, 348; sages and Rama abandon, 258-59; of Sarabhaiiga, 267; of 
Siva, 77; of Sutiksna, 270, 274; of the Saptajanas, 365-66; of Tmabindu, 729-30; of Usanas 
Kavya, 827-28; of vaikhanasa ascetics in northern quarter, 405; of Valmiki, 6, 9, 17, 18, 19, 38, 
55, 794-98, 800;—Lava and Kusa live in, 57; —Satrughna hears recitation of Ramayana in, 818— 
19:—Satrughna visits, 18, 812—14;—Sita abandoned at, 795—98, 842;—Sita gives birth in, 813; of 
Vasistha, 104—5, 107-8, 110, 798-99; Vibhandaka, 62; of Visvamitra, 10, 13, 32, 40, 80, 82, 115, 
305 (see also Ashram of The Perfected Being); women of, 797; Yayati enters, 807 

Ashram of the Perfected Being, 81—86, 100, 103; Rama visits, 81—87 

Asmanagara (city): Ravana conquers, 761 

ASoka (minister of Dasaratha), 60, 204 

aSoka(s) (tree[s]), 281, 310, 330, passim; Sita clings to, 472—73, 482 

aSoka grove: description of, of Ravana, 456-58; etymology of word, 334; Hanuman devastates, 498; 
—searches, 456-58; of Rama, 725, 790-91; resembles young woman, 456 

astrologers: 65, 135; foretell Sita’s future, 588 

asura(s), 68, 75, 60, passim; Angada kills, 409-10; as buffalo (see Dundubhi); Jaya bore fifty sons 
called Samharas to destroy, 75; weapon-spells of, 685; etymology of word, 98; inhabit Patala, 432 

asvamedha (horse sacrifice), 18, 35, 356, 833; Agastya at Rama’s, 841; dear to Siva, 837; of 
Dasaratha, 61, 64-71, 238, 356;—Kausalya’s role in, 67; feeding of brahmans during, 66-67, 838; 
gods perform, for Indra, 832—33; of Ila, 837; Laksmana tells Rama to perform, 833; Mahesvara 
tells Rama to perform, 711; performed by Marutta, 837;—for obtaining sons, 61; purifies sin of 
brahmahatya, 830-33; of Rama, 18-19, 711, 726, 799, 837-45; of Sagara, 91-92 

ASvapati, 207; Bharata and Satrughna live with, 130 

ASvapati (father of Kaikeyt). See Kaikeyt: daughter of Asvapati 

ASvapati (maternal uncle of Bharata), 130, 206, 845 

ASvapati (Yudhajit): king of Kekaya, 206 

ASvins, 75, 100, 103, passim; Dvivida and Mainda sons of, 397, 525, 564 

Atibala (mantra): Visvamitra gives to Rama, 76 

Atikaya (raksasa), 547, 603, 628, passim; Aisika divine weapon of, 639; army of slaughtered, 635; 
battles monkey army, 637; Brahma grants boons to, 635-36; challenges Rama, 637; chariot of, 630, 
636-38; compared to Visnu, 635; description of, 636-37; joins battle, 637; eager for battle, 629— 
30; Kumbhakarna paternal uncle of, 628; Laksmana fights and kills, 637—40;— recalled, 715; leads 
raksasas into battle, 629-30; Rama questions Vibhisana about, 736; son of Ravana, 630; terrifies 
monkey army with sound of bow, 635 

atiratra (sacrifice), 67, 68, 645, 845 

Atri, ashram of, 259-63, 716; Durvasas son of, 798; Nimi asks, to perform sacrifice, 802; one of the 
seven great seers, 728 

auspicious glow, 791; as sign of life (vital glow), 586, 589, 824; as sign of pregnancy, 791 

auspicious omen(s): clockwise direction as, 641, 653; Hanuman observes, 515; presage victory for 
Rama, 478, 540-41; Sita observes, 478, 481; Trijata observes in dream, 376. See also inauspicious 
omens; omen(s) 

auspicious signs: of abducted women, 764; all were endowed with, 727; bindi as, 282, 325; children 
of Krodhavasa bear, 280; of Kusa and Lava, 57; Laksmana, one of, 179, 184, 332, 344, 383, 386, 
395, 485. 553, 655, 660, 662, 665, 671, 688, 792, 809, 822; of Prajapati’s servant, 69; Rama 
marked with, 51, 485—86;—observes, 693; of sacrifical horse, 837-38; Sita marked with, 588; of 
royal elephant, 160 

austerities, 10, 18, 69, passim; absence of, when dead as source of regret, 750; of ascetics, 268-69; of 
Bhagiratha, 94; of Bharata, 283; of Budha, 835, 836; of Dasaratha, 339; of Diti, 98-99; eating once 


a month as, 94; of five fires, 94; of Gautama and Ahalya, 100; javelin of Maya gained through, 
746; of Kubera Vaisravana, 730-31; of Kumbhakarna, 742; of Kusanabha’s daughters, 85; of 
Malin, Malyavan, and Sumalin, 733; performed underwater, 765, 823; as permissible for various 
social classes, 821—22; of Ravana 742-43; raising arms as, 94, 115, 742, 836; of Sambiika, 822; of 
Sarabhafiga, 268; of Siva and Uma, 87-88; of Suketu, 78; of Suttksna, 270; of Sveta, 825-26; of 
Trnabindu, 729; of Vaisravana related to Ravana, 748; of Valmiki, 797, 842; of Vedavati, 752-53; 
of Vibhisana 742; of Visvamitra, 107-17; of Vrtra, 831; women engaged in, 797. See also 
asceticism; ascetic practice 

auto-decapitation: Brahma stops Ravana’s, 299, 742-43 

autumn, 381, 382, 384. passim; commencement of, 385, 389; description of, 386 

avartini spell: Budha recites, 835 

avatara (incamation): theory of, 4-5, 5n, 21, 38 

avatara (incarnation) of Visnu: Buddha as, 21; to kill Ravana, 10; Krsna as, 35, 40; Narasimha (Man- 
Lion) as, 30; Rama as, 4, 5n, 9, 11, 35, 40; Rama Jamadagnya (Parasurama) as, 21; sons of 
Dasaratha as, 4 

avis ex machina, Garuda as, 24 

Ayodhya, 10, 36, 58-60, 128, 137-38, 206—7, 256-57; grief of, 174-75, 185, 191-92, 194 

Ayodhyakanda, 130-263; synopsis of, 9, 11-12 


Babhru (gandharva lord), 402 

Bahli/Bahlika, 204; horses of, 60; kingdom of, ruled by Ia, 833-37; western search party sent to, 
402, 404 

Bahlikas, 833 

bahusuvarnaka (sacrifice): of Indrajit, 764 

Bala (mantra): Visvamitra gives to Rama, 75 

Balakanda, 5\—129; synopsis of, 9-11 

bali (offerings): dogs eating, as inauspicious omen, 571 

Bali Vairocana (asura), 145, 335, 640, 649; and Indra, 768, 772, 779; Jambavan at sacrifice of, 424; 
Rama as Visnu at sacrifice of, 710; story of, 81-82; and Visnu (Narayana), 779 

bandins (panegyrists), 35 

banishment. See abandonment; exile 

bards (siitas), 137, 148, 159, passim; Lava and Kusa as, 6, 10, 17-19, 840—42, 844, 851-52 

barkcloth garments, 162, 198, 233, 262, 264, 270, 274, 276, 333, 348, 786; of Bharata, 224, 244, 258, 
718, 722, 809; of Kusa, 840; of Laksmana, 186, 222, 265, 286, 353-54, 482, 485; of Lava, 840; of 
Marica, 303; of Rama, 11, 144, 150, 155, 170, 182, 186, 208, 209, 222, 237, 242, 245, 265, 286, 
301, 307, 322, 353-54, 466, 485, 566, 717, 719, 809; of Sita, 170-71; of Svayamprabha, 412; of 
Valmiki, 54 

battle-standard(s), 234, 256, 289, passim; of Akampana marked with king of beasts, 603; of Bharata 
marked with kovidara tree, 220, 235; of Indrajit described, 664; of Kumbha marked with king of 
serpents, 604; of Ravana marked with human head, 685;—Nila perches on tip of, 606—7; of 
Prahasta, serpent, 600 

bear: Jambavan as, 27 

beheading: of charioteer of Indrajit, 669;—of Sumalin, 738; gods plead with Visnu for, of raksasas, 
118, 735; of Indrajit, 670—71; Indrajit threatens, of Laksmana, 665; of Kumbhakarna, 31, 628; 
of Mahakapala, 293; of Mahodara, 682; of Malin, 739; of monkeys, 643, 679; of Nikumbha, 582; 
of Prahasta by means of shattering, 602; of raksasas, 293, 739; Rama threatens, of Ravana, 692; of 
Ravana, 697, 742-43; Ravana falsely tells Sita of, of Rama, 565; of Sambiika by Rama 822-23; of 
Trisiras, 295, 635; of Vrtra (comparison), 628. See also auto-decapitation 


Bhadra (companion of Rama): tells Rama of rumors of Sita, 791-92 

Bhadra (one of the elephants who support the earth), 93 

Bhaga (god of marriage), 123, 734 

Bhaga (name of an Aditya/planet), 158, 278, 736 

Bhagavadgita, 15, 35, 38; relationship of, to Mahabharata, 15, 35; as Vaisnava work, 35 

Bhagiratha: ancestors of, flooded with water, 96, austerities of, 94; Brahma grants boon to, 95; 
genealogy of, 122, 252; offers funeral libations to sons of Sagara, 97 

Bhagirathi. See Ganges 

Bharadvaja (disciple): of Valmiki, 54—5S5 

Bharadvaja (sage): 237; ashram of, 188-89, 221, 225-30, 255, 716; audience of, with Rama, 52, 56, 
188—90, 716-17; Bharata and entourage visit, 225-31, 255-56; Devavarnint, daughter of, 730; 
directs Rama to Citrakita, 189-90; gives daughter as wife to Visravas, 730; as one of the seven 
seers, 728; as seer, 841 

Bharata: “Tale of the Bharatas,” 36 

Bharata (son of DaSaratha), 10. 11, 52, passim; accompanies Rama on final journey, 853; advises 
Rama not to perform rdjasiya, 830; agrees to serve as regent, 12; anger of Laksmana toward, 266; 
army of, battles gandharvas, 846—47; arrives at Ayodhya, 207; as Rama’s co-avatara, 4, 22; 
assembles allies to aid Rama, 787; ASvapati as maternal uncle of, 130, 206, 845; austerities of, 11, 
23, 224, 258, 283, 718, 722, 809; Ayodhya entrusted to, 822; Bharadvaja hosts, with army, 226-29; 
birth of, 71; character synopsis of, 23; childhood of, 72; consecration of, 316—17; crosses Ganges, 
224-25; curses himself, 211—12; decides to enter Dandaka, 249; departs for Citraktta, 229-31; 
describes Rama’s ideal kingdom, 790; dream of, 204—5; encamps at Ganges, 220—25;— on 
Citrakita 234-36; fondness of, for Satrughna, 10, 22—23, 72; founds Puskaravati and Taksasila, 
846-87; fraternal devotion of, 23; goes to forest, 12, 219-36; grief of, 208-11, 212-14, 217-18, 
221, 257, 713; hears recitation of Ramayana 58, 840;—story of Ia/Tla, 833-37; illusory deer would 
be source of wonder for, 311; implored to rule Ayodhya, 248—49; informs Rama of Dasaratha’s 
death, 241, 339; inner apartments of, 853; Kaikeyi, mother of, 71, passim; Kausalya reviles, 211; 
laments Rama and mourns Dasaratha, 213-14; learns of Dasaratha’s death, 207-8, 209;—of 
Rama’s exile 208-9; leaves Ayodhya for Nandigrama, 257-58; Mandavi wife of, 125; marriage of, 
123-25; meeting of, with Rama, 236-55; meets Rama on Citrakita, 52, 56, 236—55; orders 
building of road, 216-17; performs funeral rites for DaSaratha, 212—13; places Rama’s sandals on 
elephant’s head, 255;—on head, 255;—in position of honor, 718;— on throne, 12, 23, 52, 56, 718, 
722;— on Rama’s feet, 722—23; and Pratardana, 787; prepares for asvamedha, 838, proposes 
consecration of Lava and Kusa, 851; purohitas of (see purohita(s), of Bharata not named); Puskara 
and Taksa sons of, 846; Rama asks Bhadra about, 791; —consecrates, as prince regent, 726; — 
decides to consecrate, 851;—informs, of intention to abandon Sita, 792-94; Rama’s return to 
Ayodhya reported to, 829; reaches Citraktita 231; readies army to fetch Rama, 218-19; recalled 
fondly by Laksmana and Rama, 283, receives message, 205-6; rejects kingship, 12, 215—16, 218, 
851; as Rama’s co-avatara, 4, 22; returns to Ayodhya, 256-57, 788, 847; reviles Kaikeyt, 209-11; 
righteousness of, 370—71; reunion of, with Rama, 722—23; seers tell to agree to Rama’s request, 
254; Sita’s suspicion toward, 314, 333; story of Indra and Vrtra told to, 830-31; summoned back to 
Ayodhya, 12; takes Rama’s sandals, 52, 56, 255; threatens to fast against Rama, 253; tells Rama of 
victory over gandharvas, 847; urges Rama to be consecrated, 244-45, 247-48; Vasistha urges, to 
undergo consecration, 218; visits Bharadvaja’s ashram, 225—3 1;—maternal uncle’s, 11, 130; wants 
to kill Lavana, 809; wedding of, 125; wives of, 853; Yudhajit as maternal uncle of, 124, 845—46;— 
takes, to his home, 130 

Bharata (son of Dhruvasandhi), 122, 252 

Bharatas: vedic clan associated with the Mahabharata, 35-36 


Bharatas, northern quarter location of country of, 404 

Bhargava: Araja as daughter of, 827; Cyavana as, 807-8, 814, 841; Devayani as daughter of, 805-6; 
USanas Kavya as, 541, 805—6, 827-28; Valmiki as, 840. See also Bhrgu 

Bhasakarna (Ravana’s field marshal): Hanuman fights and kills, 503 

Bhattikavya (Ravanavadha), 41 

Bhava. See Siva 

Bhaya (sister of Kala): Heti marries, 732 

Bhiksu (gandharva lord), 402 

Bhogavati (city of serpents), 237, 299, 401, 437, 439, 760 

Bhrgu: Cyavana son of, 837; grants Sagara a boon, 90; lineage of, 786; makes Nimi’s consciousness 
return to his body, 804—5; Nimi chooses, to perform sacrifice, 802; Visnu kills wife of, 79. See also 
Bhargava 

Bhrgus: curse Hanuman, 786; Cyavana delight of, 814 

Bhiti (goddess of prosperity), 315 

Bible, 3 

Big Bang theory, 37 

Big Crunch theory, 37 

bija (heart), Sundarakanda as, of Ramayana, 15 

binary, characters of Ramayana constructed as, 20 

birth(s): attendants during, 813; of Agastya from a pot, 804; of apes, 70-71, 854; of Asamafija, 91; of 
birds, 280; of daityas, 280, 744; of Dundubhi and Mayavin, 746; expiation of misdeeds in former, 
329; of gods, 280, 744; of Hanuman, 425—26, 783; of Indrajit (Meghanada), 747; of Janaka from 
Nimi’s body, 805; of Kaikasi’s sons, 741; of Kubera Vaisravana, 730; of Kumbhakarna, 28-29, 
741; of langurs, 70-71; of Lava and KuSa, 17, 813; of Malin, Malyavan, and Sumalin, 733; of 
Maruts, 99; of monkeys, 70-71, 854; of Nimi, 804; of Piru from Sarmistha, 805; of Puritiravas 
from Ila, 836; of raksasas, 731-32; of Rama and brothers, 69—71, 844; of Ravana, 28-29, 741; 
reaping consequences of previous, 171, 188, 473, 753, 763, 802, 820; rites of, 813; of Sambiika as 
Sstidra, 822; of Sarama, 747; of Sita from a furrow, 21, 118, 261, 461, 753-54, 843; of sixty 
thousand sons to Sagara, 91; of sons as sign of perfect kingdom, 790; of Sukesa, 732-33; of 
Sirpanakha, 28-29, 741; of Vasistha from a pot, 804; of Vasistha from semen of Mitra and Varuna, 
803; of Vedavati, 753; of Vibhisana, 28-29, 741; of Vidyutkesa, 732; of Visravas, 730; of Yadu 
from Devayani, 805; of Visnu (Narayana) to slaughter raksasas, 740. See also reincarnation 

birthday of Valmiki: restricted holiday, 5 

black antelope(s): wearing of hide of, 239, 286, 301, 303, 307, 382, 412, 718, 722, 752, 764 

bodhisattva, Rama as, 5n 

bodily signs, of Rama, 484-85; of Sita of, 587-88 

body, preservation of, in vat of oil, 202, 822 

books (kandas), of Ramayana, 9 

boon(s), 32, 107, 133, passim; Bharadvaja grants, to Rama, 717; Bhrgu grants, to Sagara, 90; Brahma 
grants, to Bhagiratha, 95;—, to Hanuman, 426, 508, 786;— to Indrajit, 583, 773-74;—1o Dvivida 
and Mainda, 525;—to Kabandha, 344;—to Kubera Vaisravana, 73 1;—to Kumbhakarna, 743—44;— 
to Malin, Malyavan, and Sumalin, 733, 735—36;—to Maya, 412;—to Ravana, 10, 24, 68-69, 74, 
327, 742-43, 760;—to Sarabhaiiga, 268;—to Vibhisana, 743;—to Viradha, 266; Cyavana grants, to 
son of Kalindt, 252; Dasaratha grants, to Kaikeyi, 11, 23, 141, 144; Dharma grants, to crow, 755; 
gods grant, to animals, 754-55; —to Hanuman, 785—86;—to Nimi, 805;—to Rama, 53, 721, 823; 
—to Satrughna, 817; granted to Dundubhi, 362;—the Nivatakavacas, 760; Hema grants, to 
Svyamprabhi, 412; Indra grants, to Hanuman, 426, 785—86;—to peacock, 754—55;—to Rama, 
712-13, 722; of Kaikeyi, 316, 417; Kubera grants, to Hanuman, 786;—1o lizard, 755; Nisakara 


grants, to Sampati, 421; Rama grants, to ascetics, 269; of Ravana, 742-43, 745, 768, 772; Siva 
grants, to Hanuman, 786;—to Indrajit, 764;—to Madhu, 808-9, 811;—to Sukesa, 733;—to 
Visvamitra, 107; Sirya grants, to Hanuman, 786;—to Mount Sumeru, 783; Uma grants half of, to 
Ila, 834;—to raksasa women, 733; Varuna grants, to hamsa, 755;—to Hanuman, 786; Vasistha 
grants, to Mitrasaha, 813 (see also Mitrasaha Saudasa); Visvakarman grants, to Hanuman, 786;—to 
Nala, 554; Yama grants, to Hanuman, 786 

bow(s), 223, 229, 234, passim; Agastya gives, to Rama, 278; of Indrajit, 507, 764; of Janaka, 83, 
117-19; of Malin, 738; of Siva, 11, 117-19, 127; of Visnu, 126-28, 278, 295-96. See also horn 
bow; kshatriya(s): bow of, compared to kindling 

Brahma (Prajapati), 68, 72, 76, passim; ashrams of Dandaka resemble abode of, 264; asks Indra to 
recall his evil deed, 774; asks Rama to return to essential Vaisnava form, 854;—to return to heaven, 
849, 854; as boar, 251; boons of unfalsifiable, 760; calls Rama “Visnu,” 849; calms fears of 
divinities, 816—17;—of Rama, 844; creates Ahalya, 774;—all people as identical, 774;—-earth with 
sons, 251; —Lake Manasa, 77;—rdksasas and yaksas, 732;—10d of Kala, 760;—the waters, 732; 
“Creator” as part of Trimurti, 34-35; denies immortality to Indrajit, 773;—to Ravana, 743; 
weapons and weapon-spell of, 482, 493, 507-8, 523, 639, 641-42, 654, 655, 661; explains Sveta’s 
hunger, 825-26; father of KuSa (2), 84;—of Pulastya, 729, 780; foretells deeds of Hanuman, 786; 
as four-faced god, 55, 733, 785-86; gives Ahalya to Gautama, 774; —his arrow and quivers to 
Indra, 278; —Maya’s wealth to Hema, 412;—-Puspaka to Kubera, 73 1;—-Ravani epithet “Indrajit,” 
773; gods approach, for refuge, 68, 784-85; gods and, propitiate Vayu, 785; as granter of boons, 
107, 133, 148, 171, 268, 270, 279, 733, 776, 786, 834; grants boon(s) to Bhagiratha, 95;—to 
Dvivida and Mainda, 525;—to gods, 678—79;— to Hanuman, 426, 508, 786;—to Hema, 412;—to 
Indrajit, 583, 773-74; to Kubera, 73 1;—to Kumbhakarna, 743-44; to Malin, Malyavan, and 
Sumalin, 733, 735-36;—to Maya, 412;—1to Ravana, 10, 24, 68-69, 74, 327, 742-43, 760;—to 
Suketu, 78;—to Vibhisana, 743;—to Viradha, 266; grants brahmanhood to Visvamitra, | 16—17;— 
daughter to Suketu, 78; —heavens to Rama’s followers, 854-55; —long life to Kabandha, 344;— 
poetic inspiration to Valmiki, 9, 55; instructs Valmtki to compose Ramayana, 55; Kala as 
messenger of, 848—49; makes Kubera world guardian, 731; ordains Vasistha’s birth from semen of 
Mitra and Varuna, 803; orders gods to incarnate, 70—71; pronounces Visvamitra a brahman-seer, 
116—17;—-great seer; 115;—1oyal seer, 109;—-seer, 114-15; proposes alliance between Ravana and 
Nivatakavacas, 760-61; protects Ravana from Yama’s rod, 760; provokes quarrel between Siva and 
Visnu, 127; Rama submits to weapon-spells of, 642; reminds Rama of his incarnation as Visnu, 
844;— of true nature, 849; restores Ravana’s heads, 743; revives Hanuman, 785; sires lineage of 
Iksvaku, 121, 251; stops Ravana’s auto-decapitation, 299, 742-4; tells gods to give boons to 
Hanuman, 785;—Rama to listen to Ramayana, 844;—Ravana to release Indra, 773;—-Sarasvati to 
become Kumbhakarna’s speech, 31, 743—44;— Sveta he must eat his own corpse, 825—26; — 
Valmiki to compose Ramayana, 9, 55; —Vasistha to enter semen of Mitra and Varuna, 803;— 
Yama not to strike Ravana with rod, 760; tricks Kumbhakarna under pretext of boon, 743—44; 
Vasistha as son of, 802-3; Vasistha requests a new body from, 803; Vayu worships, 785; visits 
Valmiki, 9, 55; witnesses abduction of Sita, 324; world of (see Brahmaloka). See also Prajapatis 

Brahmadatta: husband of Kusanabha’s daughters, 86; son of Somada, 85—86 

Brahmahatya (personification): demands residence outside of Indra, 832—33; dwells in four places, 
833 

brahmahatya (slaying of a brahman), 77, 154, 276, 370, 391; Indra suffers sin of, 832; sin of, purified 
by asvamedha, 830 

Brahmaloka (world of Brahma), 99, 104, 247, 406, 622, 733; Ila attains, 837; Manu attains, 826; next 
to Santana, 854; Rama will go to, 54, 799; Sarabhaiga ascends to, 268; Sveta attains, 825; 
Visvamitra attains, 109 


brahman(s), 57, 59, 61, passim; Agastya as foremost of, 775; born from the mouth of Manu, 280; 
Brahmahatya possesses killers of, 833; cautionary tales about, 800—7; child of, restored to life, 18, 
823; churn corpse of Nimi, 805; cows and, 78-79, 290, 709; curse Hanuman, 783, 786-87; —Nrga, 
801; death of son of, 18, 820-21; eating of five-clawed animals by, 370; feeding of, during 
asvamedha, 66-67, 838; Ilvala as, 275; Ilvala and Vatapi kill, 275—76; in list of social classes, 40, 
65, 219, 240, 280, 821, 842; live on Yamuna’s banks, 807-8; meat offered to, 812; Nalaktbara as, 
767; Nimi’s body preserved by, 804; Nrga gives cows to, 800;—ignores, 801; power of, greater 
than kshatriyas, 106, 108-9; propitiate Siva, 837; raksasas slaughter, 269; Rama gives wealth to, 
11, 165-66; Ravana as, 314-17; role of, in the yugas, 821; Sabala (cow) of, 800-801; Samaga as 
type of, 383; and story of Nrga, 800-802; summoned to asvamedha, 838. See also ascetic(s) 

brahman-killing. See brahmahatya 

brahman rdksasas, 64, 463 

braid. See Sita: braid of 

breaking of jaw (hanu). See Hanuman: jaw of, broken 

Brhaspati, 137, 158, 159, 244, 484, 550, 780, 845; Kusadhvaja son of, 752; as lord of speech, 481, 
483; as purohita of gods, 339; as purohita of Indra, 723; restores gods to life, 591-92; Samvarta 
son of, 754; wisdom of, 131, 388, 415, 752-53 

bribery, 438, 616, 636, 660, 744; and conciliation, as means of cooperation, 394 

bride price: of Sita, 118, 120, 123 

bridge to Lanka, 538-39, 572, 590; monkeys and Nala construct, 15, 27, 53, 56, 554-55, 716-18, 
721; monkeys cross, 555, 721; Rama constructs, 703; Ravana asks about, 556 

Buddha: as avatara (incarnation) of Visnu, 21; as offshoot of Iksvakus, 36 

Buddhism, 5n, 34, 36-7, 39 

Buddhist canon, 35 

Budha: and story of Ila/Ila, 834-37 

buffalo asura. See Dundubhi 

burrow(s). See cave; Nrga: burrows of 


Cakravan, Mount: Visnu kills Paficajana on, 403 

Cakravartin (Universal Emperor), 35 

candala (outcaste): Trisanku becomes, 41, 110 

Candra (moon god), 36, 640, 735; enemy of Rahu, 256 

Candra (mountain in ocean of milk), 592 

Candrakanta (city): founded in Malla by Rama, 847 

Candraketu (son of Laksmana): consecration of, in Candrakanta of, 847 

Candravamsa (Lunar Dynasty). See Lunar Dynasty 

cannibalism (eating of human flesh), 812—13; of Kumbhakarna, 743; of Lavana, 814; of Ravana, 29, 
754; of ministers of Ravana, 778. See also eating: of own corpse; flesh; flesh-eating 

captivity: of Indra, 772—74; of Ravana, 779-80. See also Sita: captivity of 

carriage(s): 175, 213 219, passim; Dasartaha orders Sumantra to convey Rama, 171; Laksmana takes 
Sita to forest in, 794; people of Ayodhya follow Rama’s, 177; Rama orders Laksmana to take Sita 
to forest in, 794-96; Rama, Sita, and Laksmana go to forest in, 173-74, 178-80; —abandon 
carriage, 184. See also chariot(s) 

cautionary tales, 17, 18, 24, 41, 800-807 

cave (cavern), 147, 210, 237, passim; as dwelling of Rama and Laksmana, 380-81; Hanuman born 
in, 426; Kabandha directs Rama and Laksmana to, 347; Kiskindha as, 53, 378-79, 381, 385, 390; 
of Kumbhakarna, 610; of Maya, 412, 414, 418; —southern search party in, 411-14, 418; of Nrga 


(see Nrga: burrows of), of Rksa, 56; of Sampati, 416, 422; Sita takes recourse in, 291; 
Svayamprabha rescues southern search party from, 413; Valin battles Mayavin in, 360-61, 408 

cavern. See cave 

chapter (adhyaya): of Mahabharata, 9n 

chapter(s) (sarga[s]): of Ramayana, 9,10, 45 

character synopsis: of animals, 24—25; of Bharata, 23; of Dasaratha, 23; of Hanuman, 26-27; of 
Indrajit, 31-32; of Kaikeyi, 24; of Kausalya, 23-24; of Kumbhakarna, 31; of Laksmana, 22; of 
lesser monkeys, 27; of major characters, 20; of minor raksasas, 32; of Rama, 20-21; of raksasas, 
27-28; of raksasa women, 32-34; of Ravana, 28-30; of Satrughna, 23; Sita, 21-22; of Sugriva, 25; 
of Valin, 25—26; of Vibhisana, 30-31 

chariot(s): of Atikaya, 636-38; battle of Ravana with Rama, 689-98, 695-98; chariot of, fashioned 
through power of illusion, 320; of Brahma, 733; of Dhtmraksa yoked with donkeys, 594; flying, 
854-55; of Indra, 267-68, 770, 772; of Indrajit Ravani, 507, 655, 764, 772;—-destroyed by Angada, 
581; 772; of Khara, 289; of Ravana, 302, 320, 693-94, 748, 765, 771-72; Siva gives, to Indrajit, 
764; of sons and grandsons of Varuna, 761; steered by owners’ will, 761, 764; of Sumalin, 769; 
Surya as, of Rahu, 784; of Yama, 758-60. See also flying chariot(s); Puspa/Puspaka(vimana) 

child(ren): abandonment of, 477, 732; of brahman restored to life, 823; death of, 18, 820-21; killing 
of, 18;—by Asamafya, 170; killing of unborn (see feticide); never predeceases parent, 18; unable to 
conceive, 88 

childbirth. See birth(s) 

childhood, of Hanuman, 16, 426, 561, 783-87; of sons of Dasaratha, 10 

children, killing of, by Asamafija, 170 

Christian colonist, 42 

Christianity, 37, 39 

churning of the ocean. See ocean: churning of 

Cinas: northern quarter location of country of, 404 

cirajivin (long—lived one): Hanuman as, 27, 853; Vibhisana as, 31, 743, 853 

Citrakita, 52, 56, 226, 269, 270, 348, 492, 532, 714, 716, 719; Bharadvaja directs Rama to, 189-90; 
Bharata and army encamp on, 234—36; Bharata departs for, 229—3 1;—meets with Rama on, 236— 
55;— reaches, 231; crow incident takes place on, 533; description of, 232—33; Rama establishes 
ashram on, 190-91 

Citraratha, advisor and charioteer of Rama, 166 

co-avataras, 22. See also avatara (incarnation) 

Cola, 400 

comic figure: monkeys as, 24 

commander: as wife of army, 425 

composite bow. See horn bow 

conch (sankha), of Visnu, 403, 735, 737, 738 739, 740 

conciliation, 339, 369, 375, 394, 415, 438, 497, 616, 636, 660, 744; and bribery, as means of 
cooperation 394 

conciliation, of Sugriva by Laksmana, 393 

confrontation: of Rama with Rama Jamadagnya, 11, 56, 126-28 

consecration. See ritual consecration; royal consecration 

construction of bridge. See bridge to Lanka 

corpse(s), 269, 286, 341, passim; brahmans churn, of Nimi, 805; condemned to eat own, 278, 824— 
25; headless, as evil omen, 290, 594; of Jatayus, 341; preservation of, of Nimi, 804; in vat of oil, 
202, 822; Rama kicks, of Dundubhi, 53; Sveta condemned to eat his own, 824-25. See also 
cannibalism; flesh-eating; preservation: of bodies of Nimi 


cosmic cycles (kalpas), 4, 37. See also yuga(s) 

cosmic destruction: Rama threatens, 337—38. See also universal destruction 

cosmic eras ( yugas), 37-38; Dvapara, 821; Kali, 821; Krta, 729, 753-54, 808, 821, 826, 843; Treta, 
753-54, 821, 824 

cow(s): Ambarisa offers, in exchange for Sunahgepha, 113 ; Bharata gives, to brahmans, 213;— 
promises to give, to Hanuman, 719; and brahmans, 78—79, 290, 709; Dasaratha gives, to priests, 68, 
356; exalted state of those who give a Sitathousand, 200; as gift to brahmans, 68, 800; gomedha, 
sacrifice of, 764; Janaka gives, to daughters, 125; Kausalya gives, to Rama’s friends, 150; Nrga 
gives, to brahmans, 800; Rama has Laksmana give, to Suyajfia, 166;—-gives, to the learned, 54;— 
to brahmans, 124, 726;—to Trijata Gargya (see Trijata Gargya), 166; Rohini bears, 280; Sabala as, 
of brahman (Nrga story), 800—801;—-of Vasistha 105—7; Sita vows to give, to brahmans, 186-87; 
Surabhi as, pours forth milk for ocean of milk, 761; Visvamitra offeres, in.excnhange for Sabala, 
105-6; wish-fulfilling, of Vasistha, 105-7. See also Sabala; Surabhi (Surabhi) 

creation, 37 

cremation: of Jatayus, 53, 342; of Kabandha, 345; of Ravana, 702; of Valin, 378—79. See funerary 
rites 

crow(s), 318, 723; Dharma (Yama) grants boon to, 755; foretells abduction of Sita, 352; Yama (god 
of death) becomes, 754; second path in sky that of, 419 

crow episode, Hanuman recounts, 532-34; Sita recounts, 492—93, 496 

cudamani. See hair ornament 

Culin: grants son to Somada, 85—86 

curse(s): of abducted women on Ravana, 16, 29-30, 762-63; of Agastya on Marica, 78;—on Tataka, 
32-33, 78; of Anaranya on Ravana, 16, 756; of Bharata on those approving of Rama’s exile, 211— 
12; of blind sage on Dasaratha, 200-201; of Brahma on Kumbhakarna, 614; of brahmans on Nrga 
801-2; on celestial beings to become raksasas, 32; Durvasas threatens, on Laksmana, 40, 849-50; 
exhaust powers of asceticism, 753; freedom from, through bathing in Ganges, 96; of Gautama on 
his Ahalya and Indra, 101, 774; of Matanga on Valin, 408; of Mitra on Urvast, 804; as motif of 
Ramayana, 16, 32-33, 40; of Nalaktbara on Ravana, 16, 767-68; of Nandin/Nandisvara on 
Ravana, 16, 24, 751-52; of Nimi on Vasistha, 803; of Pulastya, 729; of sages on Hanuman, 783, 
786-87; of Sthilasiras on Kabandha, 344; Sirpanakha as victim of, 33; Trnabindu recognizes 
Pulastya’s, 730; of Uma on gods and earth, 88-89; of USanas Kavya on Araja, 828;—on Danda, 
828;—on Yayati, 806—7; of Vaisravana on Tumburu, 266—67; of Valmiki on Nisada hunter, 9, 54; 
of Vasistha on Mitrasaha Saudasa, 813;—on Nimi, 803; of Vasistha’s sons on Trisanku, 110; 
Visravas exempts Vibhisana from, 29, 741-42; of Visravas on his children, 28—29, 741;—on 
Kaikast1, 28-29, 741;—on Ravana, 16, 29, 750; of Visvamitra on his sons, | 14;—-on Mahodaya, 
111; of-on Rambha, 116; —on Vasistha’s sons, 111 

Cyavana: as Bhargava, 807-8, 814, 841; ashram of, 814; asks Rama for protection from Lavana, 
808-9; grants Kalindt boon of son, 252; leads delegation of brahmans, 807; as son of Bhrgu, 837; 
tells story of Lavana and Mandhatr, 814—15;—-of Madhu, 808 

cyclical time, 37. See also cosmic cycles; cosmic eras 


Dadhimukha (monkey), 564, 642; Angada attacks, 528; conciliates Angada, 530; monkeys assault, 
526-28; reports devastation of Madhuvana to Sugriva, 528-29 

daitya(s), 90, 96, 398, passim; Diti gives birth to, 280, 744; Indra as slayer of, 831; inhabit Rasatala, 
760; Kaitabha and Madhu as, 817; Kalakeyas a clan of, 763; Maya as lord of, 746; monkeys similar 
to, 560; Nivatakavacas as class of, 760; Rama kills, 322; Ravana abducts daughters of, 762—63;— 
invulnerable against, 612, 743;—kills, 761, 763;— takes delight in harming, 574; Sambhu as king 
of, 753; Sarmistha as, 805; Visnu kills, 490; worship Visnu, 854 


danava(s), 69, 74, 92, passim; Atikaya defeats, 636-37; battle between gods and, 591—92, 652, 670, 
761, 768; Brahma grants Ravana boon of invulnerability to, 742-43; Dundubhi as, 408; fear 
Ravana, 509; Hayagriva as, 403; Kabandha as, 344; —foremost among, 343; live in ocean, 437; 
live in Patala, 423, 554, 577, 697; Maya as, 405, 412, 545; monkeys similar to, 560, 398;—-Naraka 
as, 403; pose no threat to Ravana, 612; Rama kills, 322, 551; Ravana abducts daughters of, 762— 
63;—as enemy of, 609, 629, 649; —invulnerable against, 69, 422, 605, 677, 700, 743;— takes 
delight in harming, 574; Timidhvaja’s son as king of, 177; Valin slayer of, 373; Vidyujjihva as, 29, 
33, 746; wander three worlds, 677—78; will not accept apsarases, 98; worship Visnu, 854 

danda (punishment). See punishment 

Danda (raksasa): son of Sumalin, 734 

Danda (son of Iksvaku): Agastya tells story of, 826-28; cursed by Usanas Kavya, 828; as a dullard, 
827; etymology of name of, 827; kingdom of, becomes Dandaka forest, 828; purohita of (see 
purohita(s): —of Danda); rapes Araja, 827—28; youngest son of Iksvaku, 827 

Danda (weapon): celestial discus, 80; divine weapon, 108 

Dandaka forest, 12, 32-33, 793, 798, passim; ashrams of, 264, 271, 274; Bharata decides to enter, 
219; description of, 162; Janasthana in, 828; Kaikeyl asks that Rama be exiled to, 144, 150; Khara 
and Disana protect, 763-64; kingdom of Danda becomes, 828; Marica feeds on flesh of seers in, 
305; raksasas inhabit, 273; Rama enters, 12, 52, 56, 264, 304, 413, 434;—-exiled to, 144, 150, 152, 
168-69; makes safe for sages, 300;—-vows to protect seers of, 271, 273;—-wants to enter, 249; 
Rama’s exile to, recalled, 208-9, 245, 434, 510, 519-20; Ravana abducts Sita in (see abduction: of 
Sita by Ravana); Ravana sends Sirpanakha to, 33, 763-64; sages of, 271, 273, 296; Sirpanakha 
lives in, 287, 764; Viradha lives in, 265-66; ViSvamitra’s ashram in, 305 

Danu: cursed by Sthilasiras (father of Kabandha), 344; as son of Sri, 355. See also Kabandha 

Dani (wife of Kasyapa), 280 

Dardara (mountain): Hanuman swears by, 489; Vinata, troop leader of monkeys, from, 558 

Dardura (mountain), 227 

Darimukha, 541, 565; arrival of, in Kiskindha, 397 

Dasagriva, “Ten-necked.” See Ravana 

Dasaratha, 12, 53, 61, passim; accedes to demands of Kaikeyt, 11, 143—45; actions of, raise ethical 
questions, 12, 23, 143, 187; alliance of, with Romapada, 63—64; as role model, 12; attains heaven, 
224, 230, 245, 254; becomes blind, 201; blind ascetic curses, 200-201; boons of, to Kaikeyi, 141, 
143-44, 150, 160, 248, 316; breaks prenuptial promise, 23, 248; cancels Rama’s consecration, 
149-51; character synopsis of, 23; curses Kaikeyi, 170; death of, 11, 201—2;—-Rama learns of, 241; 
debt of, 135, 233 249, 254; decides to consecrate Rama, 11, 23, 52, 131-33; descriptions of, 23, 59, 
480; designates Rama as prince regent, 133-35; embalmment of, 202; ensnared by Kaikeyt’s wiles 
and her two boons, 143-44; exiles Rama, 11, 22, 149-51; faints from grief, 168; final audience of, 
with Rama, 167-72; as foil for Rama, 23; friendship of, with Jatayus, 13, 279, 281, 417;—-with 
Sampati, 423;—-with Valmiki, 796; funeral libations of wives of, 213; funeral rites of, 212-13, 242; 
genealogy of, 121—22; gives earth to brahmans, 68; grief of, for Rama, 52, 144-46, 149, 151, 168, 
174, 184, 192, 201, 203, 209, 719; grief of wives of, 192;—over death of, 243—44; hears prophecy 
of 799; hears tale of RSyasrnga, 61;—-of son of Sagara, 170; heavenly form of, appears, 711—12; 
inner apartments of, 149, 151, 168; journeys to Mithila, 119-20; Kaikeyt as cause of death of, 187; 
—saves twice, 141; —speaks for, 150-51; Kausalya reviles, 195—96; kills ascetic boy, 198— 

99; Laksmana wants to imprison; 659;—to seize control of government from, 157, 163; Manthara 
reviles, 139; marriage of sons of, 11, 125; ministers of, 60, 63, 64, 203-4, 724; model of righteous 
kingship, 12, 23; orders consecration of Rama, 134; people curse, 171, 181;—-praise, 138; performs 
birth and naming rites for sons, 71—72; permits Bharata to depart for Rajagrha, 130; pleads with 
Bhargava Rama, 126; promise to, cannot be rendered false, 253; purohita(s) of (see purohita(s): of 


Dasaratha not named); questions Durvasas, 799;—Sumantra, 192—93; Rama criticizes, 187 favorite 
son of, 130, 510; —questions Bharata about, 238; receives and distributes celestial porridge, 69— 
70; relationship of Kausalya with, 23; remembers evil deed, 197; repudiates Bharata and Kaikeyt, 
145; returns to Ayodhya, 125—28; reunited with wives in heaven, 845; reviles Kaikeyt, 144-45, 
175; Rsyasmmga as sacrificial priest of, 10, 63-68; rules kingdom, 10, 59-60; sacrifice (asvamedha) 
of, 61, 64-71, 238, 356; sacrifice (rdjasiiya) of, 238, 356; sacrifice (son-producing [putrakamesti]) 
of, 10, 68-70; sacrificial priests of, 60; sends Rama with Visvamitra, 73—75, 305; shoots by sound, 
197-98; Sita daughter-in-law of, 797; sons of, born, 71; subordination of royal duty to sexual 
infatuation by, 12, 23, 143, 187; suffers for lack of a son, 61, 64; Sumantra delivers Rama’s 
message to, 192—94; unable to speak because of grief, 149-51; under power of Kaikeyi, 143; 
Vasistha as sacrificial priest of, 64—-68;—as purohita of, 64, 75, 136, 203, 214, 225; visits 
RSsyasmga, 63; Visnu chooses, as his father, 10, 69; ViSvamitra requests aid of, 10, 72—75, 305; 
wants Rama to be accompanied by army, 169; wives of, adorn Sita, 724; women of inner 
apartments of, 60, 70, 173-74, 192-93, 246 

dasavatara (ten incarnations) of Visnu, 21 

dasyabhava (devotional service to chosen deity) in Vaisnava theology, 26 

date of Ramayana, 3, 8, 34 

daughter(s): Anala, of Sundari and Malyavan, 734; Anala, of Vibhisana, 489; as alms, 730; Bala and 
Atibala as, of Brahma, 76; death as punishment for man who lusts after, 371; Devavarnini, of 
Bharadvaja, 730; Devavatt, of Sukesa, 733; Devayani, of USanas Kavya, 805; Ganges, of Himalaya 
and Mena, 87; Jaya and Suprabha, of Prajapati Daksa, 75; Kaikas1, of Sumalin, 28, 740-41; 
Kaikeyt, of ASvapati, 141, Kesint, of king of Vidarbha, 90; Kumbhinasi (the elder), of Sumalin, 
734; Kumbhinasi (the younger), of Visvavasu and Anala, 808; Mandavi and Srutakirti, of 
Kusadhvaja, 123, 125, 128; Mandodari, of Maya and Hema, 746; Manthara, of Virocana, 79; 
Mena, of Meru, 87; ja@naki, janakatmaja translated as, of Janaka,46; of Kusanabha, story of, 84-86; 
Parvati (Uma), of Himalaya and Mena, 87; of Prajapati Daksa, 280-81, of Tmabindu, 729-30; 
Saci, of Puloman, 490; Salakatafkata, of Sandhya, 732; Santa, of Romapada, 61, 63; Sarama, of 
Sailiisa, 747; Sarmistha, of Vrsaparvan, 805; Sita, of goddess of earth, 11, 19; Sita, of Janaka (see 
Sita); Somada, of Urmila (gandharva woman), 85-86; Sumati, of Aristanemi, 90; Stirpanakha, of 
Kaikasi and Visravas, 29, 741; Tara, of Susena, 376; Tataka, of Suketu, 78; unmarried, as source of 
trouble, suspicion, 741, 746; Urmila, of Janaka, 123; Varuni, of Varuna, 98; Vedavati, of 
KuSadhvaja, 752-53; Vedavati rebom as, of virtuous man, 21 

death: as punishment, 371, 414, 513, 562, 850; by execution, 247; by fasting (see fast to death); not a 
punishment for emissaries, 512; untimely, as sign of wrongful conduct of king, 820 

debt: to ancestors, 127, 248; of Dasaratha, 135, 233 249, 254; to gods and seers, 248 

deer. See Marica: becomes a golden deer 

description(s): of asoka grove of Ravana, 456—-58;—of Rama, 725, 790-91; of auspicious marks of 
Rama, 484—85;—of Sita, 588-89; of autumn, 386; of battleground, 582; of Citrakiita, 232—33; of 
directions, 398—406; of eastern quarter, 398-400; of end of rainy season, 386; of feats of Ravana, 
299; of forces of Rama, 563-64; declares impossibility of spying on Rama’s forces, 563; of 
friendship, 358, 359; ideal kingdom of Rama, 790; of Hanuman, 26—27, 379, 406, 425, 431; of 
Kailasa, 405; of Kiskindha, 390-91; of Kumbhakarna’s sleeping chamber, 610, 747; of Lanka, 319, 
437-50, 575-76, 734; of Lanka and defenses, 539; of rainy season, 382—83; of Mandakini River 
(Ganges), 233-34; of northern quarter, 404—6; of ocean, 543; of palace of Ravana, 443-46; of 
Pampa 346-47, 349-52; of Paficavati, 28 1—82; of Puspaka, 445-46, 714; of rainy season, 382-83; 
of raksasa wardresses, 462, 469; of raksasas, 440-42; of Rama (see Rama: description of); of 
Ravana (see Ravana: descriptions of); of Sita (see Sita: description of); of social classes in yugas, 


821-22; of southern quarter, 400-402; of Sugriva’s abode, 391; of Valin (see Valin: description 
of); of wives and courtesans of Ravana, 446-52; of western quarter, 402-4 

destiny: as all powerful, 850; forces Rama’s exile, 155; previous actions determine, 850. See also fate 

destruction. See cosmic destruction 

Devantaka: fights Angada, 633-34; Hanuman fights and kill, 634; Kumbhakarna paternal uncle of, 
628; leads raksasas into battle, 629-30; looks like Visnu, 630; Valin fights, 634 

Devarata, in lineage of Janaka, 122; Siva gives bow to, 118, 127 

Devavarnint: daughter of Bharadvaja, 730; mother of Kubera Vaisravana, 730; wife of Visravas, 730 

Devavatt: daughter of Gramant, 733; mother of Malin, Malyavan, and Sumalin, 733; wife of Sukesa, 
733 

Devayant: daughter of USanas Kavya, 805; mother of Yadu, 805; threatens suicide by poison, 806; 
wife of Yayati, 805 

Dhanyamalint: Atikaya son of, 636; diverts Ravana from Sita, 470 

Dharant (earth goddess): takes Sita back, 843. See also Madhavi; Vasudha 

Dharma (god of righteousness), 52, 75, 755; as father of Susena, 563, 581; grants boon to crow, 755; 
Rama as a second, 719; taken for weakness, 553; weapons of, 80, 108 

dharma (righteousness), 4—5, 18, 20, 27, 40; discourse on (see discourse(s): on righteousness); in 
Ramayana, 20; in yuga theory, 37; translation of word, 46. See also rajadharma; righteousness 

Dharmabhrt: tells story of Paficapsaras, 274 

Dharmaraja (god of death), 200. See also Kala; Krtanta; Mrtyu; Vaivasvata; Yama 

Dharmaranya: Adhirtarajasa founds, 84 

dharmasdastra: Ramayana as, 5 

Dhatr (the creator), 158, 278; Diti bears, 230 

Dhrsti (minister of Dasaratha), 60 

Dhimaketu (minister of Ravana), 769 

Dhimaketu (planet), 464 

Dhimra (leader of apes): arrival of, in Kiskindha, 397, 559, 622 

Dhimra (mountain), 394 

Dhimraksa: battles monkeys, 594-96; Hanuman fights and kills, 596; Manibhadra/Manicara strikes 
down in battle, 750; one of Ravana’s six ministers, 749, 776-77, 778; son of Sumalin and 
Ketumati, 734 

digging of ocean. See ocean 

Dilipa, 122, 200, 218, 252; father of Bhagiratha, 94; son of Amsumant, 94; unable to bring Ganges to 
earth, 94, 96 

disciple(s): Bharadvaja as, of Valmtki, 54-55; Kusa and Lava as, of Valmiki, 6, 10, 17-18, 57, 839— 
41 (see also Kusa; Lava); of Bharadvaja, 225—26; of sages, 728; of Siva, 77; of Usanas Kavya, 
828; of Vasistha, 104, 107; of Visvamitra, 111;—are images of Rama, 840;—-Rama recognizes as 
sons, 842 

discourse(s): on righteousness (dharma), 238, 272, 369-70, 571-72, 658-60, 850; on fate of Rama, 
378; on righteousness of Rama to Valin, 370—72; on statecraft (nitisastra), 104, 203, 239-241,488, 
510-12, 547-546, 571-72, 677; of Kumbhakarna to Ravana, 31, 615—16, 619;—of Rama to Valin, 
370-72; of Valin to Rama, 369-70 

discus (cakra): of Dharma, 108; of Kala, 108; of Visnu, 80, 108, 290, 299, 403, 449, 644, 645, 709, 
735, 736, 737, 739, 740, 768 

Diti: austerities of 98—99; gives birth to daityas, 280, 744;—to Maruts, 99; Indra serves, 98;— 
smashes fetus of, 99; sons of, 97-98; wife of Kasyapa, 98, 280, 744 

divine weapon-spell(s). See weapon-spells 

divinity/divinities: Hanuman as, 27; of Hinduism, 4. See also god; gods 


dove: exemplary story of, 551-52 

dream(s): as prophecy, 475; beliefs about, 205, 311, 347, 481, 483; of Bharata, 204-5; of Dasaratha, 
135; of Laksmana, 670; of Marica, 307; about monkeys inauspicious, 481, 483; of the raksasas, 
571; of Sita, 483; of Trijata, 33-34, 56, 475-76 

drinking ground/hall of Ravana 56, 450—53 

drinking wine or liquor, 169, 196, 228-229, 257, 318, 363, 379, 387, 394, 428, 430, 444, 447, 449, 
451, 462, 472, 476, 527-29, 542, 611, 613, 617, 646, 788; atonements for, 391 

Drona (mountain in ocean of milk), 592 

Dundubhi: as asura, 363; boon of, 362; as buffalo demon, 362; challenges ocean to fight, 362;— 
Himalaya to fight, 362; —Valin to fight, 362-63; as danava, 408; description of, 362; fights Valin, 
363; Mayavin as son of, 360-61; Rama kicks skeleton of, 53, 363; son of Maya, 746; Valin kills, 
363, 408 

Durdhara (field marshal of Ravana): Hanuman, fights and kills, 503 

Durvasas, 837, 841; ashram of, 850; curse of, 40; DaSaratha questions, 799; demands freshly cooked 
meal, 850; fasting of, 850; foretells future to Dasaratha, 799; Laksmana announces arrival of, 850; 
son of Atri, 798; threatens curse, 849-50; in Vasistha’s ashram, 788—89; visits Rama, 849-50 

Diusana (general of Khara’s army), 32, brother of Khara, 284, Khara addresses, 289; made chief of 
Khara’s army, 763; protects Dandaka forest, 763-64; rallies raksasas, 293; Rama fights and kills, 
52, 293; Rama fights and kills recalled, 300-301, 303, 327, 461, 480, 564, 585, 652, 677, 697, 716; 
Ravana sends, to Dandaka forest with Khara, 763-64; Stipanakha tells Rama about, 284 

dust storm as curse, 828 

Dutt, Madhusudana, 32 

duty: dereliction of, by Sugriva, 387-88; of king with advisors, 307—9;—10 ascetics, 264—65;—in 
behavior toward others’ wives, 321;—in hunting, 311;—Jatayus on, 321;—as protector of people, 
264-65, 269;—for Rama, 264—65:—Siirpanakha on, 299-300 

Dvapara Yuga, 38, 821 

Dvivida, 380, 390, 440, passim; arrives in Kiskindha, 397; boon of, from Brahma, 525; cut down in 
battle, 565; declares prowess in leaping, 424; drinks nectar of immortality, 525, 560; fights and 
kills Asaniprabha, 581-82; gods create, 787; in southern search party, 400, 411; invulnerability of, 
525; number of troops of, 397; participates in Sugriva’s consecration, 380; Rama gives gifts to, 
726; son of the ASsvins, 397, 525, 564; takes picket duty, 543. See also Mainda 

dwarf: rdksasa woman as, 462 

dwarf incarnation of Visnu (vamanavatara): story of, 81-82 


earth: entering of, by Sita, 19, 843 

earth goddess. See Dharan1; Madhavi; Vasudha 

eastern quarter: description of, 398—400; dispatching of search party to, 398-400, 407 

eastern search party: dispatching of, to northern quarter, 398—400, 407; failure of, to find Sita, 408-9; 
Vinata as leader of, 398, 407 

eating: of dogs’ flesh forbidden, 114; of five-clawed creatures, 370; of lizard by brahmans and 
kshatriyas, 370; of meat, 187, 227-29, 451, 611, 788, 812, 791; of own corpse, 278, 824-25. See 
also flesh; flesh-eating; flesh of humans 

Ekaksipingala (epithet of Kubera Vaisravana): etymology of name of, 748 

ekaveni (single braid). See Sita: braid of 

elements, fear Ravana, 315, 318-19; grieve for Sita, 325 

elephants who support the earth: sons of Sagara encounter, while digging up the earth, 92-93. See 
also Bhadra; Mahapadma; Saumanasa; Viripaksa 

elixir of immortality. See nectar of immortality 


embalming. See corpses, preservation of; preservation, of bodies 

emendations: based on manuscript evidence, 6n 

emic history of Ramayana, 34, 37-40 

epics: historicity of, 37; of Aryan society, 40 

etic history of Ramayana, 34 

etymology: of “Ahalya,” 774; of “apsaras,” 98; of “asoka,” 334; of “asura,” 98; of “Ayodhya,” 240; 
of “Danda,” 827; of “Ekaksipingala,” 748; of “Hanuman,” 426, 561, 784; of “Janaka,” 805; of 
“Jataripa,” 90; of “Manasa,” 77; of “Maruta,” 99; of “Mithi,” 805; of “Paficapsaras,” 247; of 
“putra,” 249; of “raksasa,” 732; of “Ravana” 768; of “Sarama,” 747; of “Sarayt,” 77; of 
“Satrughna,” 815; of “Sita,’” 118; of “Skanda,” 90; of “sloka,” 55; of Tripathaga, 88; of “yaksa,” 
732 

exemplary story/stories, Budha tells, to Ila, 836; of dove offering own flesh, 551—52; Laksmana tells, 
of Indra, 830—33; Rama tells, of Ila, 833-37. See also cautionary tales 

exile: of Asamafija, 97; of Laksmana (see Laksmana: Rama banishes); of Rama (see Rama: 
Da§Saratha exiles); of Sugriva (see Sugriva: Valin exiles) 


falcons: fourth path in sky that of, 419 

fasting: of Agastya, 277; of ascetics, 264, 302, 348; of Bharata, 722; Bharata threatens, against Rama, 
253; of Durvasas, 850; of Kausalya, 230; of Marica, 303; as a means of death, 414, 454; of Rama, 
223, 251, 306; of Sita, 459, 465, 483, 518, 521, 544, 655, 796; of Svayamprabha, 412; of wives of 
DaSsaratha, 223 

fast to death: Angada urges monkeys to, 414; decision of Angada to, 416, 417; decision of southern 
search party to, 14, 414, 416-18, 454, 486; of Tara, 375, 377; of wives of Valin, 375 

fate: passim; as Kala, 343; contrasted with human action, 110, 659, 156; Rama reflects upon, 852; 
Rama relies on, as well as human effort, 488; Ravana under the power of, 329, 489, 693, 756; Sita 
blames, for her suffering, 469, 704, 802; Sita’s abduction ordained by, 469; for what cannot be 
explained, 155; wife must follow her husband’s, 161. See also destiny 

feeding: of Bharata and his army by Bharadvaja, 226-29; brahmans and guests at asvamedha, 55-67, 
838-39 

feticide, 209-10, 263; Indra attempts, 99; poison as a means of, 252; by surgeon, 477 

fire, passim; as witness, 346 356, 359, 523. See also Agni, as witness 

fire ordeal. See ordeal by fire 

five-clawed creatures: eating of, 370 

five-headed serpents, 388, 431, 449, 509, 511, 684-85 

flesh: Agastya eats, of Vatapi (rakssasa), 275—76; battleground thick with, 580, 715; birds and beasts 
that eat, as inauspicious omens, 290, 600; body of Dundubhi heavier with, 363, carnivorous beasts 
gorge on, 679; carrion birds gorge on, 286, 599-600, 652; crow as hungry for, 492; demons as 
eaters of, 613; dove offers own, 551; eating of dogs’ forbidden, 114; Garuda eats, of tortoise and 
elephant, 303; Kumbhakarna craves, 626; Kumbhakarna drenches earth with, 624; lions as eaters 
of, 196; malignant spirits crave, of gandharvas’ sons, 845; marks Narantaka’s path, 632; Mustikas 
as eaters of dogs’, 111; of black deer fit for sacrifice, 191; of gazelles, 342; of goats given 
to brahmans, 212-13; of monkeys forbidden to brahmans and kshatriyas, 370; of Sarabhafiga 
consumed by sacrificial fire, 268; of stag eaten by tiger, 373; offering of, for eating, 812-13; Sveta 
eats own, 825; TriSiras as eater of raw, 303; vultures become eaters of, 419 

flesh-eating: by beasts, 196, 290, 330, 758, 846; by raksasas, 83, 196, 290, 332, 334, 441, 474, 521, 
587, 613, 732, 780; by spirits, 846. See also cannibalism; eating: of meat 

flesh of humans: ascetics who mistreat guests destined to eat own, 278; ferocious creatures eat, 158— 
59; eating of, 812—13; illusory cook offers, to Saudasa, 812; Marica eats (of seers), 305-6; raksasas 


as eaters of, 28, 83, 87, 273, 276, 288, 327, 332, 334, 346, 587, 603, 612, 732, 780; raksasa women 
as eaters of, 330, 462, 472, 475, 521; Saudasa cursed eat, 813; Sveta cursed to eat his own, 825; 
Vasistha offered, 813; Vatapi and Ilvala eat, 276; Viradha eats, 256 

floral garland, 25, 137, 166, 320, 380, 391, 448, 465, 646, 650; of Sugriva, 25, 365 (see also 
gajapuspi garland) 

floral offerings, 176, 265, 264, 275, 278, 282, 348, 356, 395, 446, 451, 583, 641, 703, 776, 790 

flying chariot(s): of Brahma, 733; of Dasaratha; 711—12; of the gods, 609, 702, 708, 713, 845, 
passim; of Indra, 267;—-Rama uses, 689-90; returns to heaven, 702; of Indrajit, 32, 764 (see also 
Indrajit); of Ravana, 302, 309, 320, 701;—Jatayus destroys, 322—23. See also chariots; 
Puspaka(vimana) 

framing narrative: of Ramayana, 9 

fraternal conflict: as theme of Mahabharata, 26;—of Ramayana, 24—28. See also sibling rivalry 

full-moon day, 107, 149, 682, 788; of Asadha, 383 

full-moon night, 138, 176, 485 

full-moon rites, 106 

funerary libations, 56, 93, 94,95, 97; for Jatayus by Rama 342;—by Sampati, 420; for Valin by 
Sugriva, 360. See also water-offerings 

funerary rites, 202, 208, 209, 222, 241, 812, 820, for DaSaratha, 212-13; for Ravana, 28, 30, 34, 702, 
for Valin, 378-79 


Gadhi (king), 755; son of Kusanabha, 86, 104; Visvamitra son of, 72, 104, 105, 108 

Gaja (monkey troop leader), 390, 411, 541, passim; fights and kills Tapana, 581; leader of one 
hundred million monkeys, 560; marches before the army, 540; member of southern search party, 
400; participates in Sugriva’s consecration, 380; prowess in jumping of, 424; one of the five sons 
of Vaivasvata, 564 

gajapuspi garland: as distinguishing feature, 364; Laksmana gives to Sugriva, 364-65 

Gandhamadana, 574, 580, 587, 641, 643, 788, passim; exhaustion of, 410, 411 413; arrival of, in 
Kiskindha, 397; declares prowess in jumping, 424; launches attack on Indrajit’s horses, 669; 
marches on left flank of army, 540; member of southern search party, 400; number of monkey 
troops of, 397; one of the five tigers among monkeys, 623;—-sons of Vaivasvata, 564; participates 
in Sugriva’s consecration, 380 

Gandhamadana (monkey troop leader), 380; advises southern search party, 410, 424, ; declares 
prowess in jumping, 424; leads left flank of army, 540; member of southern search party, 400, 411; 
number of troops of, 397; one of five sons of Vaivasvata, 564;—“tigers among monkeys,” who 
rush Kumbhakarna, 623 

Gandhamadana (mountain), 189, 458 

Gandhara (name of a region), 847 

gandharva(s) (class of semi-divine beings), 52, 57, 68, passim; armies of, battle Bharata’s army, 846— 
47; Babhru as, 402; Bharadvaja invokes, to entertain Bharata, 227—28; Bhiksu as, 402; of gods, 
227; Gopa as, 228; Gramant as, 402; Haha as, 227; Huhu as, 227; king(s) of, 228;—-Rama as image 
of, 133, 170;—and Laksmana as images of, 286; lords of, 228, 402; Narada as, 228; Parvata as, 
228; Rohitas as class of, 402; Sailiisa as, 402, 747; Subhra as, 402; Suryavarcasa as, 228; Tumburu 
as, 228; 266; Visvavasu as, 435; weapon-spell of, 705 

gandharva woman/women (class of semi-divine beings): Alambusa as, 228; gods father sons on, 70; 
Misrakesi as, 228; Narmada as, 734; Pundarika as, 228; Somada as, 85, 101—2; Vamana as, 228; 
Vasuda ass, 734 

Gandhi: on Ramarajya, 42 


Ganges (name and personification of river) (Jahnavi, Bhagtrathi, Mandakin1, Tripathaga), 182, 184, 
745, 755, 766, 776, 778; as Bhagiratht, 96, 186, 188, 222, 298, 795; Bharata encamps at, with 
army, 220—24;—ferries across, 224—25; birthplace of Agni, 732; daughter of Himalaya, 87-88; 
descent of, to earth, 94-97; as Jahnavi, 14, 77, 84, 87, 184, 217, 259, 79-97, 811; as Mandakini, 
745, 766; Rama fords (Mandakini), 186-87; —has Laksmana abandon Sita on banks of, 794-97; 
role of in Skanda’s birth, 89-90; Siva checks fall of (Mandakini), 95;— releases, into Lake Bindu, 
95; Sita makes vow to, 186—87;—-wishes to visit (Mandakin1), 791; as Tripathaga, 88 

Gargya (son of Angiras): guru and messenger of Yudhajit, 845-46 

Gargya Trijata. See Trijata Gargya 

garland(s). See floral garland; gajapuspi garland; gold garland; gold necklace 

garuda (name of a military formation), 563 

Garuda (Vainateya, Suparna), 159, 266, 307, 329, 368, 593, 736, 778, passim; advises AmSumant, 
93-94; ascetics rescued by, 302-3; as avis ex machina, 24; drives off raksasas, 737, 740;—-serpent 
weapons of Indrajit, 592-93; as enemy of snakes, 23, 24, 175, 373, 427, 430, 468, 499, 506, 592— 
93, 609, 624, 629, 633, 644, 779, 781; fights Malin, 738-39; forced to retreat by Malin, 738-39; as 
Garutmant second life breath of Rama, 592; genealogy of, 280-81; Hanuman as celebrated as, 425; 
heads toward Meru, 644; heals serpent wounds of Rama and Laksmana, 592; one of three who can 
cross ocean, 495, 535, 537; power of, 427, 782;— of, to cross ocean, 495, 535;—of vision of, 419; 
Rama’s arrow fletched with feathers of, 698; ravages Nisada realm, 303; sister of Sumati, 91, son 
of Vinata, 280; steals nectar, 302—3; uncle of Amsumant, 93; as Vainateya drives off Malyavan, 
740; Visvakarman constructs residence of, 399; weapon spell of, 690; weapon spell of, 690 

Gautama: and Ahalya, 100—102; asceticism of, 774; ashram of, 100, 774, 802; Brahma gives Ahalya 
to, 774; cures Indra, 774; curses Ahalya, 101, 774;—Indra to lose testicles, 101; husband of 
Ahalya, 774; one of the seven seers, 728; performs sacrifice for Nimi, 802 

Gavaksa (langur), 390, 400, 573, passim; arrival of, in Kiskindha, 397; declares prowess in jumping, 
424; fights Kumbhakarna, 623; and Gavaya march in lead, 540; joins fight against Mahaparsva, 
682; king of langurs, 397; leads seven million monkeys, 558; langur, 560, 580, member of southern 
search party, 400; one of five sons of Vaivasvata, 564;—“tigers among monkeys,” who rush 
Kumbhakarna, 623; participates in Sugriva’s consecration, 380; troop leader of the langurs, 559 

Gavaya (monkey), 390, 540, 574, passim; and Gavaksa, march in lead, 540; brings golden vessel of 
camphor and sandalwood paste, 725; declares prowess in jumping, 424; leads seven million 
monkeys, 558; member of southern search party, 400, 411; participates in Sugriva’s consecration, 
380; son of Vaivasvata, 564; surrounded by one hundred million monkeys, 560 

gender transformation: of animals 833; of Ila and his attendants, 833-34; of Siva, 833 

genealogy: of creatures as narrated by Jatayus, 280-81; of Garuda, 280-81; of Iksvakus, 121—122, 
303-4; of Janaka, 122-23; of raksasas, 16, 729-35; of Ravana and his siblings, 16, 740—42; of 
solar dynasty, 251-52; of Visvamitra, 103. See also lineage 

Ghrtact, (apsaras): attachment of Visvamitra to, 392; mother of hundred daughters of Kusanabha, 84 

Girivraja (city): founded by Vasu, 84, 204. See also Rajagrha 

Go (unidentified): fights Ravana, 761; goes forth with Puskara, 761 

god: of craft (see Visvakarman); of death (see Dharmaraja; Kala; Mrtyu; Vaivasvata); of fire (see 
Agni); of love (see Kama); of marriage (see Bhaga); of ocean (see Sagara; Varuna); of rain (see 
Parjanya); of righteousness (see Dharma); of sun (see Strya); of waters (see Varuna); of wealth 
(see Kubera Vaisravana); of wind (see Vayu) 

Godavari (river), 279, 281-84, 342, passim; fears Ravana, 315; Rama questions, 336; Sita implores, 
for aid, 32 1;— threatens to drown herself in, 314 

goddesses. See individual names 


gods: Aditi gives birth to, 744; age of, 267; ask Visnu to kill sons of Sukesa, 735; assembly of, 
witness Sita’s oath, 842; Brahma calms fears of, 816—17; Brhaspati as purohita of, 339; drive off 
raksasa army, 771; fight raksasas, 769-73; grant boons to Laksmana, 817;—to animals, 754; —to 
Hanuman, 785-86; honor Hanuman, 436; Indrajit breaks army of, 770; Malin battles, 738-49; 
perform asvamedha for Indra, 832; plead with Visnu to incarnate, 10, 68-69; remind Brahma of 
Kumbhakarna’s crimes, 743; seek aid of Agastya, 276; and seers, take refuge with Siva, 735; 
shrines to, at Agastya’s ashram, 278; as sons of Aditi, 97-98, 280, 744; stop Brahma from granting 
boon to Kumbhakarna, 743; Sumalin battles, 739-40; supplicate Brahma for relief, 784-85; take on 
forms of animals, 754; take refuge with Siva (Mahesvara), 735; test Hanuman, 434-35; visit 
ashram of Agastya, 823; worship Laksmana as fourth part of Visnu, 851. See also individual names 

golden deer. See Marica: becomes a golden deer 

golden image: of Sita, 18, 838 

golden tree. See omens 

gold garland: of Indra (Vasava), 784; of Valin, 376-77, 781 (see also gold necklace) 

gold necklace: Indra has Vayu give Rama, 725; of Sugriva, 561; Valin receives, from Indra (Sakra), 
263, 368-69. See also gold garland 

Gomati (river), 181, 206, 557, 718, 722, 795, 799, 838 

gomedha (cow sacrifice), 764 

Gomukha (son of Matali), 770 

gosava (name of sacrifice), 845 

gosirsa sandalwood, 390 

Govinda. See Visnu 

Gramani (gandharva lord), 402; Devavatt daughter of, 733 

grammar: Hanuman learns, 787 

grief: of abducted women, 762—63; of Angada (see Angada: grief of); of Ayodhya (see Ayodhya: 
grief of); of Bharata (see Bharata: grief of); of brahman father of dead child, 820; of Dasaratha (see 
Dasaratha: grief of, for Rama); of DaSaratha’s wives (see DaSaratha: grief of wives of); destroys 
everything, 197; of Devayant, 806; of the forest, 194-97; of Hanuman (see Hanuman: grief of); of 
Ila (see Ila: grief of); impossible to withstand unexpected, 197; as inspiration for the Ramayana, 
54-55; of Janaka (see Janaka: grief of), 202; of Kausalya (see Kausalya: grief of); of Laksmana 
(see Laksmana: grief of); of Madhu, 808; of Malin’s brothers, 739; of Mandodari, 700-701; as 
metaphor of, as ocean, 214, 288; of monkey women (see monkey women: grief of); of monkeys 
(see monkeys: grief of); of mothers of slain raksasas, 501; of no use to the dead, 378; of parents of 
slain ascetic, 199-201; of the people of Ayodhya, 11, 168, 170-72, 174-75, 180, 259, 315, 326-30, 
332, 515, 815; of Rama (see Rama: grief of); of Ravana (see Ravana: grief of); of Sampati (see 
Sampati: grief of); of Satrughna (see Satrughna: grief of); of Sugriva (see Sugriva: grief of); as a 
sea, 214; of Sita (see Sita: grief of); of Sumantra (see Sumantra: grief of); of Surabhi, 210-11; of 
Sirpanakha (see Sirpanakha: grief of); of Tara (see Tara: grief of); of raksasa women (see raksasa 
women: grief of); sight of Rama will allay, 219; of the women of Ayodhya, 174, 180, 201-2; of 
women abducted by Ravana, 762—64; of wounded ascetic, 198; vitiates efforts, 538 

guardian elephants (diggajas). See Afijana; Mahapadma; Padma; Vamana 

guest-offering(s) (arghya[s]), 55, 62, 72, 77, 102, 182, 126, 189, 225, 226, 278, 717, 757, 780, 797, 
812, 818, 848 

Guha (1), 41, 191, 194, 238, 605, 717-18; extends hospitality to Bharata, 220—25, 236;—to Rama, 
182-86; extols virtues of Laksmana to Bharata, 221—22; ferries Bharata and army across Ganges 
River, 224—25; Rama dismisses, 186 

Guha (2). See Skanda 

guhyakas, 291, 628, 638, 785; with Kubera on Mt. Kailasa, 405 


Haha (gandharva lord), 227 

Haihayas, 252, 775, 778, 780; Arjuna Kartavirya king of, 775, 778-79, 780 

hair. See Sita: braid of 

hair ornament: of Sita, 56, 494, 497, 532, 534 

hamsa(s), 87, 95, 159, passim; Puspaka yoked to, 825; sixth path in sky that of, 419; Varuna grants 
boon to, 755; yearning of, to live on Lake Manasa, 382 

hanging: as a means of suicide, 454; Sita threatens, 314, 478 

Hanuman: ability of, to leap the ocean, 426, 437; adoptive son of Kesarin, 397, 428; advises Sugriva, 
384-85, 389-90; Agastya praises, 787; Afijana mother of, 426; announces Rama and Laksmana to 
Sigriva, 356; arrives in Lanka, 436-39; asks permission to kill S1ta’s wardresses, 704; attacks and 
bums Lanka, 14, 27, 514-15, 540, 544, 782-83; attacks and is driven back by Indrajit, 656; 
attempts to devour Airavata, 784; battles raksasas, 499-506, 513—14;— recalled, 782-83; bears 
Sita’s message to Rama, 704—5; Bharata gives gifts to, 719; birth of, 425-26, 487, 783; boons of, 
426, 508, 785-86; Brahma revives, 785; brahmans curse, 786; breaks free of bonds, 514; brings 
healing herbs for Laksmana, 645, 688;—-water for Rama’s consecration, 725; broods, 438-42, 445, 
452-55, 460, 515, 688; carries Laksmana from battlefield, 608; challenges Indrajit to combat, 663; 
character synopsis of, 26—27; childhood of, 16, 426, 560-61, 783-87; consoles Sita, 14, 487-90, 
495-96, 516; commits offenses against the seers, 786; confidence of, 427-28; confidence of Rama 
in, 407; —of Sugriva in, 406—7; considers pros and cons of accosting Sita, 478-80; consoles Tara, 
375; contemplates killing Ravana, 455;—-suicide, 455; counselor of Sugriva, 13, 27, 356, 390; 
crushes Mount Arista, 516—17;—Mount Mahendra, 428-30, 517; —mountains in leaping, 644; 
decides on language to address Sita, 479;— to assault raksasas, 498; describes Lanka and defenses, 
539;—Rama to Sita, 483-85; descriptions of, 26-27, 379, 406, 425, 431; destroys armies of 
Ravana’s field marshals, 503; devastates Lanka, 14, 540, 544; as devotee of one’s lord, 5; —of 
Rama. 27, 31;—of Rama and Sita, 26, 789; did not know his own strength, 783; divinity of, 27; 
does not follow Rama to heaven, 27, 853; dragged before Ravana, 508; elation of, 440, 450, 460, 
463, 526; eloquence of, 353-56, 479, 550; encounters Indrajit, 506—9;—Mount Mainaka, 432-34, 
716;—Surasa, 434-35; encounters and kills Simhika, 436; enters the asoka grove, 456; epithets of, 
45; essential actor in S1ta’s rescue, 494; etymology of name of, 426, 561, 784-85; exhorts Angada, 
415;—monkeys, 625, 657; fears consequences of his failure, 454;—he has killed Sita, 515; feats of, 
27, 782-83, passim;—Rama recounts, 783-84; fetches mountain of healing herbs, 644-45, 688; 
fights and is stunned by Kumbhakarna, 623—24;—by Ravana, 605-6; fights and kills Akampana 
(1), 597-98;—Aksa, 504—5;—Bhasakarna, 503;—Devantaka, 634;—-Dhimraksa, 594-96 ;— 
Durdhara, 503;—Jambumilin (1), 500-501; —Jambumalin (2), 58 1;—-Nikumbha, 650-5 1;— 
Praghasa, 503;—rdaksasas, 499-506;—-seven sons of minister, 501—2; —Trisiras, 634—35;— 
Virtpaksa, 503; —Yupaksa, 503; fights and stuns Ravana, 608; finds and consoles Sita, 14, 459— 
97; fire does not burn, 514; flatters Sita, 481; flees Kumbhakarna, 622; friendship of, with Sugriva, 
787; gives signet ring of Rama to Sita, 14, 27, 487, 522;—Sita’s hair ornament to Rama, 532; gods 
grant boons to, 785—86;—honor, 436; greatest leaper, 426-27; grief of, 453, 455, 656-57; history 
of, recounted by Agastya, 18, 783-87; Indra grants boons to, 785—86; Indrajit fights and captures 
with divine weapons, 14, 32, 56, 507—-8;—pierces with arrows, 666; informs Sugriva of safety on 
Mount Rsyamika, 408; introduces Rama and Laksmana to Sugriva, 356; Jambavan instructs, to 
bring healing herbs, 27, 643-44, 688;—-praises, 426-27; —questions, 519;—-sees, as only hope for 
survival, 643; jaw of, broken, 426, 784; kills a hundred palace guards, 500;—Aimkaras, 499-500; 
—Simhika, 436; kindles fire to solemnize pact, 356; Kubera grants boons to, 786; as langur 
(Semnopithecus entellus) 47; leader of Sugriva’s companions, 359; leads monkeys into cavern of 
Svayamprabha, 411—12; leaping of, 14, 53, 56, 429-37, 516-18, 547, 561, 706;—to mountain of 
healing herbs, 644-45, 688;— to sun, 426-27; learns grammar, 787; length of life of, 789, 853; life 


span of, as “long-lived one (cirajivin),” 25, 27, 853; Mainaka provides resting place for, 432; mauls 
Rahu, 784-85; meets Rama and Laksmana, 13, 53, 56, 354-56;—-Sita, 480-97, 516-17; member of 
southern search party, 13, 400, 410; messenger of Rama, 482-83, 486, 510-11; —of Sugriva, 510; 
mind of, undisturbed by sight of Ravana’s women, 452; mistakes Airavata for fruit, 784;— 
Mandodari for Sita, 450;—the sun for fruit, 783; monkey nature of, 450, 515; monkeys delighted at 
success of mission of, 518; mourns fallen Rama and Laksmana, 585; never lies, 355; observes 
raksasa women, 462;—Ravana, 14, 448-49, 463-64;—-Ravana’s women in the drinking hall, 446— 
48;— the raksasas, 440—52;—Sita, 462-65; offers to carry Sita back to Rama, 14, 490-92; paraded 
through Lanka with tail on fire, 513; participates in consecration of Sugriva, 380; plans to console 
Sita, 479;—kill raksasa champions, 498; power of, to leap ocean unique, 14; Prahasta interrogates, 
509-10; praises Rama to Sita, 483-85; prepares to leap ocean, 427—28; questions Svayamprabha, 
412; raksasas bind, 508—10;—set tail of, on fire, 513-14; Rama asks Agastya history of, 782-83; 
—dispatches, to tell Sita of victory, 34, 703; —dispatches, to Ayodhya as messenger to Bharata, 
717-19;—gives gifts to, 788-89; —gives, pearl necklace, 789;—-gives, signet ring as token of 
recognition, 14, 407;—orders Sugriva and, to care for Laksmana, 687;—-orders Vibhisana and, to 
remain on earth, 853;— praises, 537, 782—83;—questions, about Sita, 533;— tells Vibhisana and, to 
remain alive, 853; ravages asoka grove and domed palace, 498, 500; Ravana falsely reports, as 
slain, 565; Ravana orders execution of, 511;—kimkaras to capture, 499;— tail of, set on fire, 513; 
—sentences to death, 512; reassured by auspicious omens, 515—16; rebukes Sugriva for negligence, 
389-90; recounts adventures in Lanka to monkeys, 519—24;—to Rama, 531-32; reflects on 
propriety of observing Ravana’s women, 452;—Sita’s history and appearance, 460-61; relationship 
of, to Sagara, 433;— to Vayu, 432; released from Brahma’s weapon, 508; remains alive as long as 
Ramayana remains current, 853; replaces mountain of healing herbs, 645; reports adventures of 
Rama to Bharata, 719—21;—-adventures to Rama and Sugriva, 14-15, 53 1—32;—-apparent murder 
of Sita to Rama, 658;—on Lanka’s defenses, 539-40;—Rama’s return to Bharata, 719;—-Rama’s 
return to Guha, 717—18;—Rama’s victory to Sita, 703; —to monkeys on his mission, 518—24; —to 
Rama on his meeting with Sita, 53 1-36; requests release from cave (cavern) of Maya, 413; resolves 
to leap the ocean, 429; retells adventures of Rama and the monkeys, 485—86;— exile of Rama to 
Ravana, 510—11;—-Sita of Rama’s exile, 480, 485-86; reviles Indrajit, 656; Sagara seeks rest for, 
on Mount Mainaka, 432; sanctions monkeys’ assault on Madhuvana, 14, 527; searches asoka 
grove, 455—59;—for healing herbs, 27, 645, 688;—for Sita in Lanka, 14, 439-59, for Sita in Lanka, 
recalled, 531-32, 782; —Ravana’s inner apartments, 56, 452-53, 520, 531—32;—-Ravana’s palace, 
442-45; seeks refuge with Svayamprabha, 413; seers curse, 786; serves as Rama’s mount, 540, 
608; sets fire to Lanka, 14, 27, 514-15; shaken by power of Ravana, 464; Simhika seizes shadow 
of, 436; Sita begs, to stay in Lanka, 495;—denies knowing, 498-99; —exhorts, 494—95;—fears, 

48 1-83;—-gives gifts to 726;—-gives, hair ornament, 494, 497;—-gives, hair ornament, recounted, 
532;—-gives, her message to Rama, 496—97;—gives, pearl necklace, 726;—prays to Agni for fire 
not to burn, 513—14;—-questions, about Rama and Laksmana, 487—89;—refuses offer of, to rescue, 
14, 490-92; tells, of Rama’s banishment and her abduction, 48 1—82; —tells, the crow episode, 
492-93; —thinks, is Ravana, 482; Siva grants boons to, 786; size of, changeable, 412, 427, 429— 
30, 435-36, 438-39, 455-56, 490, 497-98, 514, 517, 534; son of the wind god, 27, 355-56, 427, 
passim; sows dissension among monkeys, 415; speaks in favor of accepting Vibhisana, 551; — 
Sanskrit, 479; speed of, 430-31, 435, 644; stationed at Lanka’s western gate, 574; submits to the 
power of Brahma’s weapon, 508; Sugriva instructs, to find Sita, 406;— orders, to summon 
monkeys, 394;—praises, 529;—-sends, to meet Rama and Laksmana, 353-54; Surasa asked to 
create an obstacle for, 434; surveys Lanka, 437-42, 513; Stirya does not burn, 432, 783;—-grants 
boons to, 786; Susena instructs, to bring healing herbs, 27, 688; takes form of a mendicant, 354; 
takes on human form, 718; Tara rejects advice of, 375; tears off peak of mountain of healing herbs, 


645, 688; tells Rama S1ta’s message, 532; tells Ravana to return Sita, 511-12; —Svayamprabha of 
search party’s adventures, 413; terrorizes S1ta’s raksasa wardresses, 498-99; tries to devour 
Airavata, 784;— the sun, 426-27, 783; unable to find healing herbs, 645, 688; unburnt through 
S1ta’s truth-act, 513-14; urges monkeys to drink honey-wine, 527; Varuna grants boons to, 786; 
Vayu as divine father of, 426, 783; Vibhisana and, searches for survivors, 642-43; Vibhisana 
dissuades Ravana from executing, 512—13; Visvakarman grants boons to, 786; warns Ravana of his 
destruction, 511-12; witnesses murder of illusory Sita, 655—56; wreaks destruction among the 
raksasas, 663, 668; Yama grants boons to, 786 

Hara. See Siva 

Hara (monkey troop leader), 558, 574 

Hara (raksasa son of Malin), 734 

harem. See inner apartments 

Hari. See Visnu (Hari) 

harisyama sandalwood, 402 

Haritas (tribal clan): produced from wish-fulfilling cow, 107 

Harivamsa, 21 

Hastinapura, 35-36, 204 

Hayagriva (danava): Visnu kills, 403 

healing herbs, 27, 430; Brhaspati restores danavas with, 591-92; Hanuman fetches, 644-45, 688; 
mountain of, 643, 645; on Mount Candra, 592; on Mount Drona, 592; mrtasamjivani, “restorer of 
life,” 592, 643; samdhani, “joiner of limbs,” 643; samjivakarani, “restorer of life,” 592, 643; 
sauvarnakarani, “restorer of the golden glow,” 643; Susena recounts story of, 591-92; 
visalya(karani), “healer of arrow wounds,” 159, 592, 643 

hedgehog: eating of, 370 

Hema (apsaras): Brahma grants boon to, 412; friendship of, with Svayamprabha, 412; mother of 
Mandodari, 746; relationship of, with Maya, 412; wife of Maya, 746 

herb(s): for healing, 27, 430;—Brhaspati restores danavas with, 591—92;—-Hanuman fetches, 644— 
45, 688;—mountain of, 643, 645;—on Mount Candra, 592;—on Mount Drona, 592;— 
mrtasamjivani, “restorer of life” as, 592, 643;—samdhani, “joiner of limbs” as, 643; 
samjivakarani, “restorer of life” as, 592, 643; sauvarnakarani, “restorer of the golden glow” as, 
643; Susena recounts story of, 591-92; visalya(karani, “healer of arrow wounds” as, 159, 592, 643; 
for protection, 630 

Heti: founds lineage of raksasas, 732; marries Bhaya (sister of Kala), 732 

Himagiri (mountain): simha birds live on slope of, 402 

Himalaya (mountain personified): Dundubhi challenges to fight, 362; father-in-law of Siva 
(Saiikara), 362; gives Ganges to gods, 87; in northern quarter, 404; refuses to fight with Dundubhi, 
362; takes form as cloud, 362 

Himalayas (mountain or mountain range), 27, 30, 51, passim 

Hinduism, 37; cosmic cycles in, 4 (see also yuga[s]), 4; cyclical time in, 37 (see also yugal[s]); 
divinities of, 4; in religious history of Mahabharata and Ramayana, 40; Vaisnavism as movement 
of, 34 

historical narrative (itihasa): Ramayana as, 4, 36-37, 39 

historicity: of epics, 37; of Ramayana, 36 

histories of the Ramayana, 34-41 

history: concepts of, differ, 34; contestation over Mahabharata as, 37; of discus of Visnu, 403; of 
Ramayana, 19; of Ramayana as emic, 34, 37-40;—as etic, 34; of Sirpanakha, 33; of Valin, 26; 
Uttarakanda tells, of raksasas and Ravana, 16 

homa (rite), 105 


Homer, 3 

honey-wine (madhu), 220, 394, 444, 542, 546, 647; drinking of, as sign of success, 529; as honey, 
528; as honeycomb, 527; monkeys drink, 526-30; Rama does not drink, 489; voided as urine, 529— 
30. See also Madhuvana 

horn bow (sarvga): of Visnu, 709, 737-38 

horse-faced fire: with mare’s head, 399 

House: of the Bhargavas, 126; of Iksvaku, 51, 63, 95, 121-23, 329, 356, 432, 480, 515, 521, 532, 
660, 711, 724, 756; of Janaka, 119, 454; of Kosala, 36, 690; of Kusa, 86; of Raghava, 74, 202, 216, 
262, 316, 358, 433, 812; of Raghu, 537; of Ravana, 445 

household priest. See purohita(s) 

Uri (goddess of modesty), 69, 315, 734, 853 

Hrsikesa. See Visnu 

Huhu (gandharva lord), 227 

human effort: compared with fate, 706; destroys a person, 659; good for nothing, 110; one should 
devote oneself exclusively to, 659; righteousness as auxiliary to, 659; Trisanku attempts to 
overcome fate through, 110. See also manly effort 

human flesh. See cannibalism; flesh of humans 

hunchback: rdksasa woman as, 462. See also Manthara 

hunter(s). See Nisada(s) 

hunting: of Dasaratha, 198; of Ia, 833; of kings, 311-12, 372; of Kumbhakarna, 627; for golden deer, 
312-13; of Laksmana, 191; of men, 372; of Rama, 72, 181-82, 312-13, 316, 480; of Rama and 
Laksmana, 187, 342; of Ravana, 746; of Saudasa, 812; for Sita, 346, 399, 403-4; for Sita and 
Ravana, 400, 413 


ideals: of Aryan culture, 27—28 

ideal wife (pativrata): Kausalya acts against norms of, 23—24; Sita as, 5, 22 

Iksvaku (son of Manu, first king of Ayodhya), 121—22, 251; Danda youngest son of, 827; fathers sons 
by means of sacrifices, 826-27; Nimi son of, 802; as son of Manu, 802, 826 

Iksvakus, 71, 109-10, 132, passim; ancestor of Rama, 36; Buddha as offshoot of lineage of, 36; 
Dasaratha as lord of, 60; genealogy of, 121-22, 251-52; lineage of, 16, 36, 121-22, 170, 
Ramayana tale of descendants of, 58. See also House: of Iksvakus; House: of Raghava 

Ila: asvamedha sacrifice of, 837; attains Brahmaloka, 837; boons of, 834; founds Pratisthana, 837; 
Kardama father of, 833, 837; renounces kingdom, 836; transformed into woman, 833-34 

Ila: gives birth to Purtiravas, 836; Budha transforms attendants of, into Aimpurusa women, 835; 
propitiates Uma, 834; recovers manhood through asvamedha, 837 

Ila/Ila: story of Siva and Parvati and, 833-34; story of, and Budha, 834-37 

Iliad, 3 

illusion (maya). See power(s) of illusion 

Ilvala (asura): Agastya eats, 276; and Vatapi killed by Agastya, 276; and Vatapi story of, 275—76 

inauspicious omens: appear at birth of Ravana, 29, 741;—during fight between Rama and Ravana, 
690; charioteer of Ravana turns back because of, 693; golden trees presage death, 318, 326, 341; 
Kala brings about, 736; Laksmana observes, 314; Malyavan Bharata observes observed in 
Ayodhya, 207; observed in dreams, 205; presage abduction of Sita, 314, 324, 330-31, 333; presage 
abandonment of Sita, 794; presage death of king, 135; —of Ravana, 677; presage defeat of 
Akampana, 596;—of Dhimraksa, 594; —of Khara, 289—91;—of Kumbhakarna, 621;—of 
Mahaparsa, 679;—of Makaraksa, 65 1;—of Prahasta, 600;—of Ravana, 695; presage destruction of 
Lanka, 474;—of raksasas, 37, 542, 571, 736-37; presage encounter with Kabandha, 342;—with 
Rama Jamadagnya, 125—26. See also auspicious omen(s); omen(s) 


incarnation. See avatdra entries; co-avataras 

India, manuscript tradition in, 6 

Indra (Mahendra, Saci’s lord, Sakra, Vasava), 26, 32, 59, passim; abducts Hiranyakasipu’s wife, 466; 
asvamedha of, 832-33; Bali Vairocana defeats, 81; becomes a peacock, 754; Brahma asks, to recall 
his evil deed, 774; Brahma asks Indrajit to release, 773—74;—gives arrow to, 278, 298; breaks 
Hanuman’s jaw, 426; Brhaspati as purohita of, 723; carries off horse from Sagara’s sacrifice, 91; 
casts Trisanku from heaven, 112; chariot of, 267-68, 770; crow son of, 493, 533; cuts off 
mountains’ wings, 433; deforms Kabandha, 344; disguised as a raksasa, 91; earth suffers drought 
in absence of, 832; enemy of Ravana, 69; enters Diti’s body, 99; father of Valin, 71, 345, 368;— 
Jayanta, 770; fights Ravana, 771-72; foretells great feat of Rama, 267—68; Gautama curses, 101, 
774; gives arrow, 298;—arrow and quivers to Agastya, 278; food to Sita, 422; Hanuman epithet, 
785; and gods, ask Visnu to kill Vrtra, 831;—, fear Mandhatr, 814; gods and seers purify, 77; 
golden garland of, 784; grants boon to Hanuman, 785—86;—to peacock, 754—55; grants Diti’s 
request, 99; —Mainaka immunity, 434; horses of, 267; in story of sword-wielding ascetic, 272; 
Indrajit defeats, 31-32, 772—73;— releases, 773-74; and the killing of Manthara, 79; and the killing 
of Vrtra, 77, 830-32; kills Maya, 412;—-Puloman, 397;—-sons of Diti, 98;—Vrtra, 830-32; king as 
fourth part of, 264; Maruts and, engage Krttikas, 90; orders capture of Ravana, 772;—-Vayu to give 
Rama golden necklace, 725;—pearl necklace, 725; performs vaisnava sacrifice, 775; Rama sees, 
267; Rama’s killing of Tataka pleases, 79; rapes Ahalya, 774; requests Visnu to kill Ravana, 768; 
searches for Indrajit on Airavata, 772; seduces Ahalya, 100-101; seeks Hanuman on Airavata, 784; 
—Ravani on Airavata, 772; seizes sovereignty of the worlds, 98; sends Rambha to tempt 
Visvamitra, 115—16;—-weapons, chariot, and Matali to Rama, 689; sin of brahmahatya taints, 77, 
832; as slayer of daityas, 831; smashes Diti’s fetus, 99; spares Sunahsepa, 114; steals Ambarisa’s 
sacrificial victim, 113; story of, and Diti; 97-99—, and Ahalya, 100-102, 774—75; strikes 
Hanuman with vajra, 426, 784; vajra of, 339, 354, 449, passim; Valin son of, 71, 345, 368; Valin’s 
gold necklace as gift from, 368-69; weapon-spell(s) of, 108 (Aindra), 628, 670; as wielder of 
vajra, 71, 157, 199, 210, 266, 268, 278, 456, 481, 506, 556, 617, 659-60, 697, 701, 722, 778, 832; 
as world guardian, 731 

Indrajanu (monkey): arrival of, in Kiskindha, 397 

Indrajit (Ravani, Meghanada), 5, 15, 506, passim; Angada fights, 581, 583; arrows of, strike and fell 
monkeys, 641—43;—-serpent sons of Kadri become, 592; asceticism of, 661, 764, 773; asks 
Brahma for immortality, 773; battles monkey army, 585, 641—43; binds and captures Hanuman, 14, 
27, 32, 507-8; binds Rama and Laksmana with serpent arrows, 24, 32, 584-85; birth of, 747; boons 
of, 583, 654, 764, 773-74; bow of, 507, 764; Brahma asks, to release Indra, 773;—denies 
immortality to, 773;—-grants boons to, 583, 773—74;—grants epithet, “Conqueror of Indra,” 773;— 
grants powers to, 32; breaks army of gods, 669-770; chariot of, 507, 655, 764, 772; character 
synopsis of, 5, 15, 31-32; chariot of, destroyed by Angada, 581; creates simulacrum of Sita, 655— 
56; divine weapons and weapon-spells of, 508, 525, 584, 641-42, 661, 764; encounter of, with 
Hanuman, 506-9; exhorts Ravana, 640; fights and captures Hanuman, 14, 27, 32, 507-8; fights and 
captures Hanuman, recalled, 523; fights and captures Indrajit, 31-32, 772-73; fights Angada, 58 1— 
82; —Vibhisana, 667—68; Indra searches for, on Airavata, 772; invisibility of, 5, 583-85, 654, 664, 
772; kills six hundred and seventy million monkeys, 643; Laksmana fights and kills, 22, 665—71; 
Meghanada birth name of, 747; monkey army attacks, 662-63, 668; mount of, dolphin, 476; 
pierces Rama and Laksmana with arrows, 584-85, 642, 654—-55;—with serpent weapons, 583-85; 
power of illusion of, 5, 572, 583, 588-89, 592, 641, 655-56, 661-62, 729, 772; Rama dispatches 
monkeys to find, 584; Rama hears of death of, 671;—-sends Laksmana to fight, 661; Ravana hears 
of death of, 672; releases Indra, 774; reports death of Rama and Laksmana, 586; sacrifice(s) 
(agnistoma; asvamedha; bahusuvarnaka; mahesvara; rdjasitya; vaisnava) of, 32, 764; — 


interrupted, 663;—to be interrupted, 660—61;—in Nikumbhila grove, 641, 653-54, 657-58, 764; 
serpent weapons of, 24, 32, 583-85; serpent weapons of, Garuda drives off, 592; sets forth to 
capture Hanuman, 507; Siva gives chariot to, as boon, 764;—power of illusion to, 764; power of 
illusion of, called tamasi, 764 

infanticide, 209. See also feticide; child(ren): killing of 

inherent nature, 29, 554; as a translation of dharma, 46; force of, 378; of women, 701 

inner apartments (antahpuram, women’s quarters), 246, 784, 853; Agni testifies Sita pure while in, 
710; gazing upon, of another breach of propriety, 452; gendered politics of, 12; guard dogs of, 206; 
of Dasaratha, 64, 70, 143, 149, 151, 168, 173-74, 192-93;—-women of, 173-74, 192-93, 246; 
Indrajit born in, 747; of Kausalya, 151; of Rama, 147, 311, 791, 853; of Ravana, 33, 327, 328, 450, 
452, 466, 470, 471, 472, 572, 699, 765, 782; —Hanuman searches, 56, 452-53, 520, 531-32, 546; 
—for Sita in, 327, 328, 532; —Vibhisana enters to find Sita, 705; of Romapada, 63; of Valin, 362, 
367-68, 380, 391 

Islam, 37, 39, 42 

Islamic prince: Rama as ideal of, 5n 

istadevata (chosen divinity), 40 

itihasa. See historical narrative 


Jabali (minister of Dasaratha), 64, 120, 203, 251, 255, 725, 821, 837, 841; encourages Rama to 
accept kingship, 249-51 

jackals. See inauspicious omens 

Jahnavi. See Ganges 

Jain canon, 35 

Jainism, 34, 37; cyclical time in, 37 

Jain versions: of Ramayana, 5n, 36 

Jamadagni (one of the seven seers), 728 

Jamadagnya. See Rama Jamadagnya 

Jambavan, 390, 415, 318, 788, passim; advises against Angada’s plan, 525;—-Rama to view 
Vibhisana with suspicion, 550; and other monkeys struck down in battle, 643; Angada discouraged 
by, from jumping, 424—25; as bear, 27; declares youthful prowess, 424; directs Hanuman to bring 
healing herbs, 27, 643-44, 688; dissuades monkeys from plan to rescue Sita, 525; fights 
Mahaparsva, 682; gives monkeys leave to drink honey-wine, 526; guards rear of army, 541; 
Hanuman seeks out, on battlefield, 643; as king of apes (rksas), 27, 540, 573-74, 590-91, 658, 
658, 661-62, 672, 682, 788; member of southern search party, 400, 411; participates in Rama’s 
coronation, 725;—in Sugriva’s consecration, 380; questions Hanuman, 519; —Suparsva, 419; ; 
Rama sends forth, to battle, 658, 661;—-sends forth, to battle Kumbha, 648; renders aid to Indra, 
559; smashes Mahanada with boulder, 601; son of Gadgada, 563; struck in battle, 565; summons 
the monkeys, 518; troops of, attack raksasa army, 668; urges Hanuman to jump, 425—27 

Jambumalin (raksasa) (1), 443, 506, 769; Hanuman fights and kills, 500-501 

Jambumalin (raksasa) (2): Hanuman fights and kills, 581; Ravana orders out, 522 

Janaka, 11, 21, 99, 336, passim; attends Dasaratha’s asvamedha, 65; birth of, from Nimi’s body, 805; 
bow of, 83, 117-19; breaks siege of Mithila, 118; etymology of name of, 805; finds Sita while 
ploughing, 21, 118, 843; first king of Videha, 805; genealogy of, 122—23; grief of, 202; invites 
Dasaratha to Mithila, 119—20; kills Sudhanvan, 123; sacrifice of, 83, 102, 117; S1ta daughter of (see 
Sita) 

Janaki. See Sita 

Janamejaya, 200 

Janapada: as historical period, 35-37; meaning of word, 35 


janapada(s): Aryan clans of, 35; of Kosala, 36 

Janardana. See Visnu 

Janasthana, 52, 286, 288, passim; ascetics dwell in, 258; Jatayus falls into, 422; located in Dandaka 
forest, 828; Rama battles army of fourteen thousand raksasas from, 292—94; Ravana dispatches 
eight raksasas to, 327-28; Sita implores, for aid, 320; See also Dandaka forest 

Jatartpasila (mountain), 399 

Jatayus: age of, 322; ally of Kosalan court, 24; attempts to save Sita, 13, 24, 52, 322—23; battle of, 
with Ravana described, 417—18; cremation of, 53, 342; death of, 341; falls into Janasthana, 422; 
flies into sun, 418, 421—22; friendship of, with Dasaratha, 13, 279, 281, 417; funerary libations for, 
342, 420; genealogy of creatures narrated by, 280-81; lineage of, 280-81; mortal wounding of, by 
Ravana, 13, 24, 323; on behavior toward others’ wives, 321; Rama and Laksmana meet, 279-81; 
—see, mortally wounded, 340; Rama asks, to protect Sita, 312; Rama tells, of S1ta’s abduction, 
340-41; rebukes Ravana 321-22; evidence of battle of, with Ravana, 337; fights Ravana, 322— 
23; reassures Rama, 341; Sampati and, make wager on Kailasa, 421; Sampati discovers death of, 
417; Sita’s cries heard by, 321; story of, and Sampati, 418, 421—22; younger brother of Sampati, 
14, 281, 416, 417 

javelin(s) (sakti[s]), 47, 80, 289, passim; of Indra given to Rama, 689; Laksmana freed from, by 
herbs, 688; of Malyavan pierces Visnu, 740; of Maya given to Ravana, 746; Rama removes and 
breaks Ravana’s, 687;—-shatters lance of Ravana with, of Indra, 691; of Ravana forged by Maya, 
686;— strikes down Laksmana, 686-87; Skanda as wielder of, 740; Skanda as wielder of, 740 

jaw (hanu), Hanuman breaks, falling, 426, 561, 784; from vajra, 785 

Jaya (father of Viradha), 266 

Jayanta (minister of Dasaratha), 60, 204 

Jayanta (son of Indra), fights Indrajit, 770; not slain, 775; Puloman carries from battlefield, 770; 
Puloman grandfather of, 770; son of Saci, 770 

jewel: Agastya gives, to Rama, 824 

jewelry, 58, 67, 564, passim; Anasiiya gives Sita, 261; in disarray, 324; Hanuman sees, of Mandodart, 
450; Kaikeyi discards, 140, 142-43;—-gives Manthara, 139, 142; of Manthara discards, 140;— 
shattered, 215; Ravana demands Sita wear, 465-66; —promises, to Sita, 327; of Sita, 56, 224, 286, 
791; in dissarray, 324;—dropped, 326-27, 357;—monkeys find, 357;—-shown to Rama, 357. See 
also hair ornament; ornament(s); signet ring 

Judeo-Christian religions, 37 

jumping. See leaping 

jump of Hanuman. See leaping: of Hanuman 

Jyotirmukha (monkey): son of Stirya, 564 

Jvotistoma (rite), 68 


Kabandha: describes Pampa, 346—47; description and history of, 343-44; directs Rama and 
Laksmana to Pampa, 347; —Rama to Sabari, 346-47; encounter of, with Rama and Laksmana, 32, 
53, 56, 343-47; recalled, 460, 564, 627, 677, 697, 716, 717, 720; Laksmana cremates, 345;—-cuts 
off left arm of, 343; Rama cuts of right arm of, 343 

Kadrt/Kadruka: mother of snakes, 280-81; sister of Surasa, 280-81; sons of, hold up the earth, 281; 
—become Indrajit’s arrows, 592 

Kaikast: curse of Visravas on, 28-30, 741; daughter of Sumalin, 734, 740-41; inspires Ravana with 
sibling envy, 29, 742; mother of Ravana, Kumbhakarna, Vibhisana, and Sirpanakha, 741; 
relationship of, with Visravas, 28, 741 

Kaikeyt: 811, 830, 845, passim; achieves desired goal, 265, 320, 332; Bharata reviles, 209-11; 
boon(s) of, 11, 23, 265, 316-17; boons of, as cause of misfortune, 417; character synopsis of, 24; 


claims boons from Dasaratha, 143-44; Dasaratha accedes to demands of, 11, 143-45; Dasaratha 
reviles, 144-45, 175; daughter of Asvapati, 141, 164, 210; eats celestial porridge, 70; exile of 
Rama ordered by, 24; gives birth to Bharata, 71; informs Bharata of Dasaratha’s death, 207-9; — 
Bharata of Rama’s exile, 208—9;—-Rama of impending exile, 150; Kausalya reviles, 202; Laksmana 
criticizes, 283; Manthara incites, 11—12, 24, 138-43; Manthara maidservant of, 11, 23, 24, 41; as 
middle mother, 265, 283; orders Rama to wear barkcloth garments, 170—71; Rama asks Bhadra 
about, 791; as Rama’s mother, 155, 186, 244, 283, 589, 791; receives boons from Dasaratha, 141; 
receives new brides, 128; recounts story of sons of Sagara to Dasaratha, 170; scheming of, 12, 23; 
story of, as cautionary tale, 24; travels to Citrakiita with other mothers, 219; as treacherous wife, 24 

Kailasa (mountain), 77, 89, 125, passim; description of, 405; Kubera lives on, 405, 545, 766; location 
of, in northern quarter, 405; Mandodari and Ravana took enjoyment on, 701; Puspaka comes to 
Rama from, 789; Ravana fights Kubera on, 29, 299, 545, 749-5 1—and yaksas on, 299; Ravana 
goes to, 299, 545, 749-51; Sampati and Jatayus make wager on, 421; Sugriva instructs Satabali to 
search foothills of, 405; Visravas tells Kubera to found a city on, 745 

Kaitabha: and Madhu, 732, 759, 810, 817, 849 

Kakutstha. See Rama 

Kakutstha (father of Raghu), 122, 252 

Kala (god of death), 74, 320, 330, passim; Bhayéa as sister of, 732; Brahma creator of rod of, 760; 
Brahma sends, to Rama, 848—49; brings about bad omens, 736-37; cannot be withstood, 338; 
created by creative power of illusion (maya), 848-49; discus of, 108; Heti marries Bhayé sister of, 
732; in guise of ascetic, 848; noose(s) of, 73, 80, 292, 298, 321, 323, 326, 512, 548, 574, 664, 760, 
846; overtakes Ravana, 330; power of, 343, 587-88; Rama’s son in previous existence, 848—49; 
Ravana fights, 757—60; rod of, 749, 759-60, 769; samvartastra (samvarta) as weapon of, 846. See 
also Dharmaraja; Krtanta; Mrtyu; Vaivasvata; Yama 

Kalakeyas (clan of daityas), 763; four hundred killed by Ravana, 761 

Kalaratri, 583, 634; Sita as, 511, 566 

Kalindi (mother of Sagara), 252 

K4lindi (river), 190, 398 

Kali Yuga, 37, 38, 821. See also Tisya 

Kalmasapada. See Mitrasaha Saudasa 

kalpas. See cosmic cycles 

kalpasiitra, 67 

Kama, god of love (Ananga, Kandarpa, Madana, Manmatha), 80, 115—16, 274, 284, 300-301, 315, 
319, 445, 459, 464-65, 470, 483, 496, 521, 676, 735-36, 753, 777, 804, 827, 835, passim; arrows 
of, pierce Ravana, 301, 315, 319, 328; history of ashram of, 76-77; Siva burns, 76 

Kambojas: northern quarter as location of country of, 404; produced from wish-fulfilling cow, 107 

Kampana (raksasa), 668; Angada fights and kills, 647-48 

Kampilya (capital city of Brahmadatta), 86 

Kaficana (purohita of Satrughna), 852 

Kandarpa. See Kama 

Kandu (ascetic), advice of, 552; curses forest, 409; kills cow, 154; obeys father’s commands, 154; 
son of, perishes in forest, 409 

Karapatha (region), 847 

Kardama Prajapati: father of Ila, 833, 837; proposes asvamedha dedicated to Siva, 837 

Karnapravaranas (name of a people), 399 

Kartavirya. See Arjuna Kartavirya 

Kartika: month of, 380 

Kartikeya/Karttikeya. See Skanda 


Kasi: Pratardana lord of, 787: Purtiravas king of, 804 

Kasyapa, 121, 134, 203, 251 

Kasyapa, 154, 791 

Kasyapa: Aditi wife of, 280, 744 

Kasyapa: brahman seer, 64, 120, 203, 725, 728 (Kasyapa), 821, 841 

Kasyapa: Diti wife of, 98 (Kasyapa), 280, 744. See also Marica Kasyapa 

Kasyapa: one of the Prajapatis, 280, 744 

Kasyapa: one of the seven seers, 728 

Kasyapa: patronymic of Rsyasriga, 62; performs Dasaratha’s asvamedha, 64 

Kasyapa: Rama Jamadagnya gives earth to, 126-28 

Kasyapa: son of, Vibhandaka, 61 

Kasyapa: son of Marici, 121, 251. See also Marici Kasyapa 

Kasyapa: Vivasvant son of, 122, 251 

Kasyapa (brahman seer), 837 

Kausalya, 71, 76, 140, passim; asks to follow Rama into exile, 23—24, 157-58; at death of DaSsaratha, 
201-2; blesses Rama, 158—59; character synopsis of, 23—24; eats celestial porridge, 70; fasting of, 
230; gives amulet to Rama, 159; gives birth to Rama, 71; goes to the forest with Bharata, 219; goes 
to Nandigrama to meet Rama, 721; grief of, 152-54, 157-59, 174-77, 188, 192, 195-96, 201-2, 
209, 211-12, 223, 230, 242-44; ideal maternal figure, 23; implores Rama to remain in Ayodhya, 
153-54; inner apartments of, 151; learns of Rama’s consecration, 135-36; meets Bharadvaja, 230; 
meets with Rama on Mount Citrakita, 243-44; mother of Rama, 12, 23, 266, 332, passim; 
participates in asvamedha, 67;—in DaSaratha’s funerary rites, 213; Rama greets, upon return, 723; 
—informs, of his impending exile, 152;—reminds, of wifely duty, 24, 157-58; receives new brides, 
128; relationship of, with Dasaratha, 23; reviles Bharata, 211;—-Dasaratha, 195—96;—Kaikeyl1, 202; 
sees Rama’s offerings for Dasaratha, 243; Sumantra consoles, 195; Sumitra consoles, 177; supports 
Dasaratha, 175—76 

Kausambi: Kusamba founds, 84 

Kausika (patronymic of Visvamitra). See Visvamitra 

Kausiki (river), 115, 398; rescued from Patala, 494; sister of Visvamitra, 86 

kavi (seer or poet), 39 

kavya (poetry), 4 

Kavya, USsanas. See USanas Kavya 

Kerala, 400 

Kesarin (monkey): adoptive father of Hanuman, 397, 428, 783; Atjana wife of, 425, 783; Anjana, 
Vayu, and, try to restrain, 786; arrival of, in 397; kills Sambasadana, 487; troop leader, 541, 560, 
590 

KeSava: sleeping of, 383. See also Visnu 

Kesint1 (mother of Asamafija), 91 

Ketumati (mother of Dhtmraksa), 734 

Khara (brother of Ravana; raksasa), 32—33; dispatches fourteen raksasas, 286;—fourteen thousand 
raksasas, 289; doom of, presaged by omens, 289-91; Diisana general of, 289; Rama admonishes, 
296; Rama and, mock each other, 297-98; Rama battles and destroys army of, 12, 287-88, 291-94; 
—Khara, 52, 56, 295—98;—Khara recalled, 300-301, 303, 307, 314, 321-23, 327, 329, 460-61, 
480, 547, 564-65, 585, 627, 677, 692, 697, 700, 716;— told about activities of, 258; Ravana sends, 
to Dandaka forest, with Diisana, 763-64; Siirpanakha taunts, 288; —tells, of death of fourteen 
raksasas, 288; —tells, of disfigurement, 286;— tells Rama about, 284 

kimkaras: Hanuman battles, 499-500 

kimpurusas (class of semi-divine beings), 835 


kimpurusa women: Budha transforms I1a’s attendants into, 835 

kinnaras, 313 

kinnara women, 71,143, 301; Budha transforms [1a’s attendants into, 835 

Kiratas (name of a people), 399 

Kirti (goddess of fame), 69, 315, 734 

Kiskindha, 14, 20, 24, passim; arrival of monkeys in, 397-98; as cave, 53, 373, 378-81, 385, 390, 
561; departure of Sugriva with Laksmana from, 395; description of, 390-91; Laksmana enters, 
388; moral and ethical tone of, 14; Rama will not enter, 379-80; summoning of monkeys to, 393— 
95 

Kiskindhakanda, 361-428; synopsis of, 13-14 

Kosala: Ajatasatru defeats janapada of, 36; Ayodhya capital of, 10; consecration of Kusa in, 85 1—52; 
country of, 58 

Krathana. See Skanda 

Kraufica (forest): Rama and Laksmana encounter Kabandha in, 342 

Kraufica (mountain): birds pass through, 738; inaccessible opening in, 405 

kraunca(s) (bird): killing of, by Nisada, 54; third path in sky, that of, 419 

Krsna: as avatara (incamation) of Visnu, 21, 35, 38, 40; Rama as, 709, 710 

Krtanta, 153. See also Dharmaraja; Mrtyu; Vaivasvata; Yama 

Krta Yuga, 21, 54, 729, 753-54, 808, 821, 826, 843; mountains had wings during, 433; sons of Diti 
powerful in, 97 

Krsasva’s sons: divine weapons, 75; Indra tells Visvamita to bestow on Rama, 79; take on form at 
will, 81; ViSvamitra intones mantras for, 81 

Krttikas (Pleiades): provide milk for Skanda, 90 

ksatriyadharma (warrior code), 20 

kshatriya(s), 11, 54, 84, passim: ascetics in Treta Yuga, 821; born from the breast of Manu, 280; bow 
of, compared to kindling, 272; code of, inapropos to forest life, 272; come to be of equal power to 
brahmans in Krta and Treta Yugas, 821; code of, 127; eating of five- clawed animals by, 370; 
extermination of, 127; Iksvakus as, 266; in list of four social classes, 40, 65, 219, 240, 280, 821, 
842; power of brahmans greater than, 106, 108-9; Rama asks Sambika if he is, 822; Ravana 
oppresses, 752; role of, in the yugas, 821; Sita’s oath witnessed by, 842 

Kubera Vaisravana: acquires Puspaka from Brahma, 446; ashram of, 730-31; austerities of, 730-31, 
748; becomes a lizard, 754; birth of, 730; Brahma gives Puspaka to, 731;—-grants boons to, 731; — 
makes world guardian, 731; curses Tumburu as Viradha, 266-67; curses Tumburu to become 
Viradha because of Rambha, 267; Devavarnini mother of, 730; dwelling of, 468;—built by 
Visvakarman, 405;—in Lanka, 437, 73 1;—on Mt. Kailasa, 405; evacuates Lanka, 745; founds 
Lanka, 731; friendship of, with Siva, 748; genealogy of, 729-31; grants boon to Hanuman, 786; — 
to lizard, 755; half-brother of Ravana, 29, 74, 318-19, 329, 341, 637, 674, 700, 742, 744, 747, 754, 
767, 789; heavenly forest of, 227; history and etymology of epithet Ekaksipingala, 748; king of 
yaksas, 405; left eye of burned by gazing at Parvati, 748; mount of, elephant Sarvabhauma, 405; 
pleases Siva, 748; Puspaka belongs to, 731, 742; Ravana fights and defeats, and yaksas, 29, 299, 
749-5 |;— recalled, 545;—-conquers, 299, 446, 545, 749-5 1;— envious of, 29; —seizes Puspaka of, 
318, 751; Ravana’s enmity with, 29, 742, 744-51; son of Visravas, 730; Visravas tells, to found a 
city on Kailasa, 745; as world guardian, 545, 731 

kulingas: first path in sky, that of, 419 

Kumara. See Skanda 

Kumbha (son of Kumbhakarna), 604, 647, 668; fights Angada and Dvivida, 648; Sugriva fights and 
kills, 649-50;— recalled, 751 


Kumbhakarna (brother of Ravana): agrees to attack Rama and the monkeys, 617; Angada claims, is 
scarecrow, 621; army of, fights army of monkeys, 620-27; assaults gods, 771; austerities of, 742; 
birth of, 28—29, 741; Brahma curses, to perpetual sleep, 609-10, 614;—-orders Sarasvati to take 
over speech of, 31, 743-44; tricks under pretext of boon, 743-44; brother of Ravana, 15; 
cannibalism of, 743; captures and releases Sugriva, 625—26; cave of, as dwelling, 610; characters 
synopsis of, 31; comically grotesque figure, 5; craves flesh, 626; decimates monkey army, 624; 
devours allies, 626; —monkeys, 624;—-seven apsarases, 743; —thousands of beings, 613; 
discourse of, on statecraft (nitisastra) to Ravana, 31, 615-16, 619; drenches earth with flesh, 624; 
driven by fate, 621; dwelling of, sleeping chamber, 610, 747; episode of, 610—28; feats of, 613-14; 
fights and dazes Hanuman, 623-34; Gavaksa fights, 623; gods remind Brahma of crimes of, 743;— 
stop Brahma from granting boon to, 743; hunting of, 627; inauspicious omens follow, 621; 
intoxication of, 613—14; Kaikasi mother of, 741; Kumbha and Nikumbha sons of, 647; Mahodara 
rebukes, 617—19; monkeys terrified of, 613, 621-22; Rama fights and kills, 626—28; Ravana orders 
awakening of, 610; sleep of, 31, 610, 744, 747; Sugriva tears off ears and nose of, 625—26; 
Vajrajvala wife of, 746-47; Visravas father of, 28-29; waking of, 610-11; Yupaksa informs, of 
siege of Lanka, 612 

Kumbhinast (1): daughter of Sumalin, 734 

Kumbhinast (2): Anala mother of, 765, 808; Madhu abducts, 764-65; wife of Madhu, 545, 765, 808; 
Visvavasu father of, 808 

Kufyjara (mountain): Visvakarman builds palace for Agastya on, 401 

Kutus: northern quarter location of country of, 404; vedic clan and region of, associated with 
Mahabharata, 35, 36, 227, 233, 404, 406 

KusSa (companion of Rama), 791 

KusSa (son of Brahma/Prajapati): attains Brahmaloka, 86; father of Kusanabha, 103; founder of 
Kausambti, 84; Visvamitra descendant of, 86 

KusSa (son of Rama), 6, 17, 18-19; consecration of, in Kosala, 851—52; lives with mother (Sita) in 
exile, 6; Rama founds KuSavati for, 852;—recognizes as son 10, 842; recites Ramayana, 6, 10, 17, 
19, 57-58, 839-41; Sita gives birth to, 17, 813; Valmiki gives amulet to, 813;—-names, 813; wears 
barkcloth garments, 840. See also disciple(s): of Valmiki 

kuSa (type of grass),98, 101, 137, passim; Valmiki creates amulet for Kusa from, 813 

KuSadhvaja (father of Vedavatt), 752 

Kusadvaja (brother of Janaka), 121 

Kusamba (son of KuSa): founds Kausambi, 84 

Kusanabha, 84-87; father of Gadhi, 86, 104; founds Mahodaya, 84; hundred daughters of, 84-86; 
son of Kuga, 84, 103-4 

Kusavati: Rama founds, for Kusa, 852 

kiitasalmali tree, 399. See also salmali 


Lake Manasa. See Manasa 

Lake Pampa. See Pampa 

Laksmana, passim; accepts advice of Tara, 393; accompanies Rama into exile, 11, 52, 174-723;—on 
joumey with Visvamitra, 9, 75—129; Agastya tells Rama and, to go to Paficavatt, 279; alarm of 
Sugriva at anger of, 389; Angada as mount of, 541; anger of, at exile of Rama, 11, 151;—toward 
Bharata, 266;— toward Sugriva, 387-90, 392; announces arrival of Durvasas, 850; annoints 
Vibhisana as king of the raksasas, 552; apologizes to Sugriva, 393; arrives at Lake Pampa, 351; 
ascetics show hospitality to Rama and, 264-65; asks and is denied permission to exterminate 
raksasas, 655; asks to use weapon-spell of Brahma, 655; assigned to breach Lanka’s northern gate, 
574; begs permission to fight Ravana, 605;—of Rama to take him to forest, 164-65; beheads 


Ravana’s charioteer, 685—86; bids farewell to his mother, 172; birth of, 71; breaks Viradha’s left 
arm, 266; brings wood for Jatayus’ cremation, 342; builds a pyre for fire ordeal of Sita, 708;—hut 
for Rama and Sita in Paficavati, 282; challenges Indrajit, 664; chides Rama for fainthearted speech, 
266, 689; childhood of, 72; claims the weak and cowardly submit to fate, 156; co-avatara with 
brothers, 4, 10, 22, 70-71, 608; conciliates Sugriva, 393; consecrates Vibhisana as king of Lanka, 
702-3; consoles Rama, 335, 338-40, 381-82, 386, 658-60, 800; cremates Kabandha, 345; 
criticizes Kaikeyi, 283; cuts off Kabandha’s left arm, 343; cuts Ravana’s javelin to pieces, 686; 
dejection of, 799; delivers critique of dharma (righteousness), 658—60; departs from Kiskindha 
with Sugriva, 395; describes ascetic life of Bharata, 283;—-winter season, 282—83; descriptions of, 
22, 354, 561; desolate, 153, 155, 799; on destiny, 339; devotion of, to Rama, 72, 355; diverts 
Siirpanakha to Rama, 285; dons the clothing of an ascetic, 170; dwells apart from Rama for a year 
in Angadtya, 847; embraces fainting Rama, 658; emotional foil to Rama, 11, 22; enters abode of 
Sugriva, 391; —Dandaka forest with Rama, 12, 263-64; —heaven in earthly body, 851;—-yogic 
trance, 851; exhortation of, 381, 386-87; fights Ravana, 607-8; fights and kills Atikaya, 638—40;— 
Indrajit, 665-71; —Virtipaksa (son of Ravana), 581; finds Rama in forest, 331; fourth part of 
Visnu, 851 (see also Laksmana: co—avatara); Garuda heals wounds of Rama and, 592; gives away 
his wealth, 166;—gajapuspi to Sugriva, 364-65; gods grant boon to, 817; grief of, 313, 482, 491, 
497, 658, 765-96, 799-800; guards door for Rama, 848; —Sita, 312; Hanuman able to lift, 608; — 
introduces Rama and, to Sugriva, 356; hears of Durvasas’ prophecies from Sumantra, 799;— 
recitation of Ramayana, 58;— tales of Nrga, Nimi and Yayati from Rama, 800-807; holds regalia 
for Rama’s planned consecration, 148; ideal younger brother, 5, 22; Indrajit binds Rama and, with 
serpent weapons, 24, 32, 584-85; Indrajit reports death of Rama and, 586; joins Rama in battling 
Ravana, 685—86; Kabandha freed from curse by;—learns of Raghavas’ identities from, 344;— 
relates history to Rama and, 344;—-seizes Rama and, 343; Kaikeyi orders, to wear barkcloth 
garments, 170—71; kills Indrajit, 670—71;—-Mahaparsva, 715; learns of Rama’s planned 
consecration as prince regent, 135-36; leaves Ayodhya with Rama, 173;—Sita unprotected, 13, 
314, 331; lives with Rama in cave during rainy season, 380-81; marries Urmila, 123-25; monkeys 
announce arrival of, 388;—and, interrupt Indrajit’s sacrifice, 662—63; mutilates Siirpanakha, 12, 
285-86; on nature of women, 314; only human ally of Rama, 24; opposes Rama’s exile, 153; 
paired constantly with Rama, 10, 72; pierces Kumbhakarna with arrows, 626; Rama and, encounter 
Viradha, 265-67; —break Viradha’s arms, 266;—meet Jatayus, 279-8 1;—meet Sugriva, 391; — 
rescue Sita, 267;— tease Sirpanakha, 285; Rama banishes, 19, 851—52;—-calms, 387—88;— 
confides in, 187—88;—-could never find brother or companion like, 589; —directs, to find Sugriva, 
350;—dwells with, in Paficavati, 12, 28 1—84;—-goes to Paficavatt with;—279;—-grieves for (see 
Laksmana: Rama laments for);—informs, of intention to abandon Sita, 792-94; —instructs, to 
arrange asvamedha, 837-38; —laments for, 22, 589-90, 688;— lectures, on righteousness, 154;— 
offers to share sovereignty with, 136;—orders banishment of, 850;—orders, to abandon Sita, 794— 
97;— orders, to guard door, 848; —prevents, from exterminating all raksasas;—tebukes, 33 1-33; 
—sends, into hiding with Sita, 291;—-sends, to warn Sugriva, 386—-87;— tells, to call off the 
consecration, 155;—and, visit Agastya, 52,276—79;—-and, visit Agastya’s brother, 52, 275—76; 
Ravana pierces with Brahma’s javelin, 608;—-strikes down, with javelin, 686—87;—unable to lift, 
608; reaches Pampa, 348; recalls he is inconceivable portion of Visnu, 608; recommends rdjastiva 
to Rama 830; reconciliation of, with Sugriva, 393; refusal of, to gaze on Sita, 21; rejects 
Sirpanakha, 285; rejoins battle between Rama and Kumbhakarna, 626; relationship of, with Rama, 
72, 493-94, 589; reports to Rama on abandonment of Sita, 800; resists Sita’s request to follow 
Rama, 313-14; reviles DaSaratha, 153;—-Sugriva, 391-92; rides on Angada, 540; Sabari welcomes 
Rama and, 348; sacrifices life for Rama and family, 22, 40; saves Vibhisana, 686; second life 
breath of Rama, 2, 22, 72, 136, 561; sees inauspicious omens, 314; senses Rama’s intentions, 708; 


sets out for battle with Indrajit, 662;—for Mount Rsyamitika, 352; shoots arrows at Ravana, 683; 
shreds Ravana’s battle standard, 685; Sita accuses, of treachery, 13, 313—14;—laments for Rama 
and, 587—88;—left alone in ashram by, 314;— left alone in ashram by recalled, 356;—rebuked by, 
314;—requests, to rescue Rama, 313;—-sees Rama and, wounded, 587;—sends, to rescue Rama, 
313; son Angada consecrated in Angadtya, 847; son Candraketu consecrated in Candrakanta, 847; 
son of Dasaratha and Sumitra, 122; and Sugriva accept advice of Vibhisana, 553; Sumantra 
consoles, 799; Sumitra instructs, on conduct, 173;—-urges submission to Rama, 172-73; 
Sirpanakha describes, to Ravana, 301; Susena frees, with healing herbs, 27, 688; suspects golden 
deer is a raksasa, 311; Sutiksna directs Rama and, to visit ashrams of Agastya and Agastya’s 
brother, 275; tells Rama exemplary story of Indra, 830—33; terror of Angada at arrival of, 388-89; 
threatens to slay Bharata and Kaikeyi, 234—35; twin brother of Satrughna, 71; urges Rama to defy 
order of exile, 156—to kill Ravana, 688-89; —to proceed with consecration, 156; urges search for 
Sita, 335; virtues of, extoled by Guha to Bharata, 22 1—22; visits Sarabhafiga, 268;—Sutiksna, 269— 
71, 274-75; vital glow of, 586, 589; vital points (vitals) of, pierced by Indrajit’s arrows, 584-85; 
vows to accompany Rama into exile, 153, 164—65;—to avert fate by manly action, 156;—to 
dethrone Dasaratha, 157; warns Rama of arrival of Bharata’s army, 234-36; wears barkcloth 
garments, 11, 482, 485 

Laksmi (goddess of wealth and fortune), 315, 445, 561, 568, 710, 843 

Lamba (mountain): Hanuman’s leap to, 436-37, 439; Lanka located on, 439. See also Arista; Trikita 

lament: of abducted women, 762-63; of Bharata for Dasaratha, 208, 213-14; of brahman for child, 
820; of Dasaratha for Rama, 52, 56, 144, 171, 173, 175-77, 194-95; dead person derives no benefit 
from, 378; of Hanuman for Sita, 460; of Kausalya for Dasaratha, 202, 211;—Rama, 153-54, 176— 
77, 192; of Mandodari for Ravana, 33, 700-701, 716; of raksasa women for Ravana, 699-700; of 
Rama for his exile, 187—88;—Jatayus, 53, 56, 340-41;—-Laksmana, 89-90, 688;—-Sita, 13, 56, 
334-36, 341, 351-52, 357, 385, 543-44; of Ravana for Indrajit, 672-73; —Kumbhakarna, 629;— 
raksasas, 677-78; of Sita, 473-75, 477-78, 567, 587-88, 674; —over simulacra of Rama’s head 
and bow, 566-67; of Tara for Valin, 56, 374-77, 379; true men do not, 629; of Vibhisana for Rama 
and Laksmana, 591; of wives of Dasaratha, 213, 217;— the raksasas, 676-78; —the townsmen, 
180-8 1;—Valin, 374-75 

lance(s) (sila[s]), passim; history of Lavana’s, 808-9, 814; Lavana fights Satrughna with, 814-17; of 
Lavana returns to Siva (Rudra), 817; Rama shatters Ravana’s, with javelin of Indra, 691; Siva 
grants, to Madhu as boon, 808, 811 

langur(s) (Semnopithecus entellus), 189, 280, 381, 396, 712; Gavaksa as king of, 397; gods take birth 
as, 70-71; numbers of, 393, 559, 580, 583; rksas identified as, 47 

Lanka, 4, 13, 15, passim; compared to a woman, 437-38, 440;—to Amaravatt, 319; description of, 
319, 437-50, 539, 575-76, 734; Hanuman arrives at, 437, 439;—attacks and burns, 14, 27, 514-15, 
540, 544, 782-83;—fights raksasas in, 782—83;—leaps to, 429-37, 782;—-searches, 437, 439-59, 
513, 782; impregnability of, 440, 474, 539, 734, passim; inauspicious omens in, 736-37; Kubera 
(Vaisravana) dwells in, 437, 73 1;—-evacuates, 745;—on peak of Trikita (=Lamba), 437, 439, 538, 
575; monkeys burn, 645—46;—lay siege to 579-80; Nala and monkeys build bridge to, 554—55; 
number of rdksasas in, 392; raksasas abandon, 731, 740, 744;—flee to, 737-38, 740;—live in, 
731, 734-36, 738-740, 744-45; Rama crosses bridge to, with army, 555;—positions monkey chiefs 
to attack, 577—78;— tells Vibhisana to rule, 789; Ravana brings abducted women to, 763;— 
positions raksasa chiefs to defend, 572;—takes possession of, 744—46;— takes Sita to, 328; Sita 
predicts doom of, 474; Siirpanakha goes to, 298-99; Vibhisana consecrated as de facto king of, 14, 
702-3; Visvakarman builds, 437, 731, 734 

Lava (son of Rama), 6, 17, 18-19; consecration of, in Sravati, 851—52; lives with mother (Sita) in 
exile, 6; Rama founds Sravati for, 852;—tecognizes as son 10, 842; recites Ramayana with Kusa, 


6, 10, 17, 19, 57-58, 839-41; Sita gives birth to, 17, 813; Valmiki gives amulet to, 813;—-names, 
813; wears barkcloth garments, 840. See also disciple(s): of Valmiki 

Lavana: arrow that kills, enters Rasatala, 817; cannibalism of, 814; Cyavana asks Rama for 
protection from, 17-18, 808—9;—+ells story of Mandhatr and, 814-15; disregards ancestors of 
Satrughna and Rama, 815; fights and kills Mandhatr, 814—15; history of, 808—9; lance of, 809, 811, 
814-17; Madhu gives lance to, 809, 811; oppresses ascetics, 809; Rama sends Satrughna to kill, 
17-18, 809-11; Satrughna fights and kills, 17-18, 23, 32, 815-17; story of, 17-18, 809-17 

leaping: of Hanuman, 14, 53, 56, 429-37, 516-18, 547, 561, 706;—to mountain of healing herbs, 
644-45, 688;— to sun, 426-27; of ocean, discussion of, by monkeys, 423—25;—from Mount Arista 
by Hanuman, 516—18;—from Mount Mahendra by Hanuman, 429—37;—Vayu assists in, 432;— 
preparation by Hanuman for, 427—28, 516-17; prowess of monkeys in, 424—25 

legacy of the Ramayana, 41-43 

lifting of mountain by Ravana, 30, 752 

lineage: and adventures of Ravana, 74, 728-82; of Angirasas, 786; of Bhrgus, 786; of Dasaratha, 
121-22; Heti founds, of raksasas, 732; of Iksvaku, Brahma sires, 121, 251; of Janaka 122-23; of 
Jatayus, 280-81; of Kubera, 729-31; of Paulastya, 74; of raksasas, 740-42; of royal epic dynasties. 
See also genealogy; Lunar Dynasty; Solar Dynasty; vamsa(s); vamsdavali(s) 

linga: Ravana worships, 30, 776 

lives, previous. See birth(s): reaping consequences of previous; reincarnation 

lizard: eating of, by brahmans and kshatriyas, 370; Kubera becomes, 754;—grants boon to, 755; 
Nrga cursed to become, 801-2 

Lohamukhas (name of a people), 399 

lord of Saci. See Indra 

love in separation, 351—52, 382-83 

Lunar Dynasty (Candravamsa), 36 


Madana. See Kama 

Madhava. See Visnu 

Madhavi (earth goddess), 19, 843. See also Dharani; Vasudha 

maddhavi (type of creeper), 352 

Madhu: and Kaitabha, 732, 759, 810, 817, 849; Visnu as crusher of, 137;—killer of, 128, 709 

Madhu (asura or danava lord): as ally of Ravana, 765-66; bestows lance on Lavana, 808-9; carries 
off and marries Kumbhinast (2) 545,764-65; Cyavana tells story of, 808; father of Lavana, 808, 
intent on righteousness, 808; receives lance from Rudra, 808, 811; Satrughna consecrated in city of, 
809-10 

madhu (type of wine), 390. See also honey-wine 

Madhupuri (city of Madhu). See Madhura 

Madhura: Rama sends messengers to, 852; Rama sends Satrughna back to, 18, 820; Satrughna 

founds, as capital of the Siirasenas, 18, 23, 817-18 

Madhusidana. See Visnu 

Madhuvana (honey-wine grove) (1): guarded by Dadhimukha, 526; Rksarajas prohibits entrance into, 

528; southern search party destroys, 14, 525-32; Sugriva protects, 526-31 

Madhuvana (honey-wine grove) (2): Lavana kills Mandhatr in, 814—15; the region around Madhura, 

809, 814 

Magadha: Ajatasatru king of, 36; region of, 84, 399 

Magadhi (river), 84 

magic. See power(s) of illusion 

magical weapons. See weapon(s); weapon-spells 


Mahabharata, 4, 21, 21n, 35-39; adhyayas (chapters) of, 9n; comparison of Ramayana with, 20; 
fraternal conflict as theme of, 26; “Great Tale of the Bharatas,” 36; as history, 37; as itihasa, 4; 
metrical style of, 8; number of casualties in war in, 39; relationship of, to Bhagavadgita, 13, 35; in 
religious history of Hinduism, 40; sister epic of Ramayana, 47; takes place in Dvapara Yuga, 38; 
theme of, 20; as Vaisnava work, 35 

Mahadeva. See Siva 

Mahakapala (raksasa general): Rama fights and kills, 291—93 

Mahapadma (one of the elephants who support the earth), 92, 635, 776. See also Padma 

Mahaparsva (minister of Ravana): Angada fights and kills, 682—83; joins assault on the gods, 769; 
riddles Angada, Jambavan, and Gavaksa with arrows, 682; among ministers who kill and devour 
ministers of Arjuna Kartavirya, 777—78; wreaks havoc on Angada’s forces, 682 

Mahaparsva (younger brother of Ravana): Rsabha fights and kills, 635 

mahaprasthana (departure from the world): of Rama recounted, 853-85 

Maharaja (Great King), as title, 35 

Mahasena. See Skanda 

mahayuga (great cosmic cycle), 37 

Mahendra (god). See Indra 

Mahendra (mountain), 542; Hanuman climbs and crushes, 427—30;—leaps from, 429-36; Hanuman’s 

association with, 517; placed on southern shore by Agastya, 401; vidyadharas fly up from, 430 

MaheSvara: sacrifices to, 395, 744, 754, 764; See also Siva 

mahesvara (sacrifice): of Indrajit (Meghanada), 764; of Marutta, 744 

Mahodara (minister of Ravana): advises Kumbhakarna to seek Ravana’s advice, 612; battles sons and 
grandsons of Varuna, 762; charges Angada, 633; fights Sugriva, 681—82; mounts the elephant 
Sudarsana, 630; Nila kills, 634; one of Ravana’s six ministers, 749, 776—78; proposes a ruse to 
induce Sita to submit, 618-19; rebukes Kumbhakarana, 617—19 

Mahodaya (brahman): Visvamitra curses, 111 

Mahodaya (city), 111; Kusanabha founds, 84 

Mainaka (mountain) (1): addresses Hanuman, 433; barrier against asuras, 432; granted immunity by 
Indra, 434; Hanuman caresses, 517; encounter of Hanuman with, 432-34; hidden beneath the 
ocean, 432; Indra grants immunity to, 434; resting place for Hanuman, 432-34; rises out of ocean, 
432; Vayu saves, 433 

Mainaka (mountain) (2): home of the horse- faced women, 405; lies beyond Mount Kraufia, 405, 
palace of Maya located on, 405 

Mainda (monkey troop leder), 380, 390, 440, passim; arrives in Kiskindha, 397; boon of, from 
Brahma, 525; cut down in battle, 565; declares prowess in jumping, 424; drinks nectar of 
immortality, 525, 560; fights and kills Vajramusti, 581—82; in southern search party, 400, 411; 
invulnerability of, 525; Kaikeyi embraces, 722; knows good and bad policy, 550; number of troops 
of, 397; participates in Sugriva’s consecration, 380; Rama gives gifts to, 742; son of the Asvins, 
397, 525, 564; takes picket duty, 543. See also Dvivida 

maireya wine. See wine: maireya 

Maithili. See Sita 

Makaraksa (son of Khara): inauspicious omens of, 651; Rama fights and kills, 652-53; Ravana 
orders to command army, 651; reviles Rama as killer of Khara, 652 

Malaya (mountain[s]) (1): Agastya seated on, 401, Hanuman announces Rama and Laksmana to 
Sugriva on, 356;—swears by, 489, 496; monkey army marches through, 542; southern mountain of 
spices, 227, Valin fights and kills Dundubhi in cave of, 408 

Malaya (mountain[s]) (2): Hanuman tears off summit of, 625;—sees, on approach to Lanka, 436; of 
Lanka, 496, 536 


Malin (great uncle of Ravana): account of, 734-39; austerities of, 733; battles gods, 738-49; boons 
of, 733, 735-36; bows of, 738; Devavati mother of, 733; fights Garuda, 738-39; sons of, become 
ministers of Vibhisana, 734; strikes Garuda with mace, 738; Visnu fights and kills, 738-39. See 
also Malyavan; SukeSa: sons of, attack the world of the gods; Sumalin 

Malla: Rama founds Candrakanta in, 847 

Malyavan (great uncle of Ravana), 765; account of, 734-39; as Anala daughter of, 734; as Anala, 
granddaughter of, 765; austerities of, 733; battles gods, 739-40; boons of, 733, 735-36; chides 
Visnu, 739; Devavati mother of, 733; discourse on statecraft of, 570-71; eldest son of Sukesa, 735; 
flees to Lanka, 739; foretells destructions of raksasas, 570—72; Garuda drives off, 740; husband of 
Sundart, 734; lectures Ravana. 571; paternal uncle of Ravana’s mother, 570; Ravana accuses, of 
treachery and humiliates him, 572; strikes Visnu with lance, 740; urges Ravana to make peace with 
Rama, 570-72; Visnu pierces, with javelin, 740. See also Malin; SukeSa: sons of, attack the world 
of the gods; Sumalin 

Malyavan (mountain): meeting of Sugriva on, with Rama, 395—96; Rama lives on, 382. See also 

Prasravana 

MaAanasa (lake): Brahma creates, 77; etymology of name of, 77; flooding of, 747; hamsas yearn to live 

on, 382; and Sarama, 747 

Manasa (mountain), 405 

Mandakarni (ascetic): asceticism of, 274; creates Paficapsaras, 274 

Mandakint (river), 269; description of, 233-34. See also Ganges 

Mandara (mountain), 193, 318, 388, passim; gods and demons churn, 97-99, 469, 620; Hanuman 
swears by, 489; monkeys summoned from, 394; Salakatankata gives birth on, 732; twin peaks of, 
449; Visvakarman grants Nala’s mother boon on, 554 

Mandavi: marriage of, to Bharata, 125 

Mandehas (name of a clan of raksasas), 399 

Mandhatr (ancestor of Rama), 122, 252; Indra and gods fear, 814; Lavana fights and kills, 814-15; 
punishes mendicant, 371 

Mandodari (wife of Ravana), 33; diverts Ravana, 521; gives birth to Meghanada Indrajit, 747; 
Hanuman mistakes, for Sita, 450; Hema mother of, 746; laments Ravana, 33, 700—701, 716; 
marriage of, to Ravana, 746; Maya father of, 746 

Manibhadra/Manicara (vaksa): strikes down Dhtmraksa in battle, 750 

manly effort, 156, 494, 659, 706 (action). See also human effort 

Manmatha. See Kama 

Manthara (daughter of Virocana): Indra kills, 79 

Manthara (maidservant of Kaikeyi), 23, 41, 214, passim: incites Kaikeyt, 11-12, 24, 138-43; 

instigates Rama’s exile, 138-42; Satrughna assaults, 23, 215 

Mantrapala (minister of Dasaratha), 60 

Manu: builder of Ayodhya, 58; Iksvaku son of, 802, 826-27; son of Vivasvant (Vaivasvata), 121, 251 

manuscript(s): evidence from, as basis for emendations, 5n; materials of, 8; of northern recension, 9n; 
of Ramayana, 7-8; sargas in, 45; tradition of in India, 6; perishability of, 8 

Marica (raksasa minister of Ravana): 56; abandons golden deer form at death, 312—13; admonishes 
Ravana, 304; agrees to command of Ravana, 309; attempts to dissuade Ravana, 52, 304-7; 
becomes a golden deer, 13, 32, 309-313;—recalled 720; captivates Sita, 13; character of, 32; cries 
out for help in Rama’s voice, 13, 313; description of, as golden deer, 309-10; fasting of, 303; fears 
Rama, 307; feasts on flesh of seers, 305; fights yaksas, 749—S0; flees battle, 750—51; flies to 
Rama’s ashram with Ravana, 309; foretells destruction of Ravana and rdksasas, 306, 309; 
Laksmana suspects true identity of, deer as, 311; lures Rama off, 13, 32, 52, 309-10, 312; obstructs 
Visvamitra’s sacrifice with Subahu, 10, 73-74, 82-83, 306; one of Ravana’s six ministers, 744, 


749, 751, 769, 776-78; power of illusion of, 325—26; praises Rama, 304; Rama kills, 13, 32, 56, 
312—13;—kills recalled, 627, 697, 717, 720;—pursues 13, 312;—-stuns, 10, 83, 306;—-vows to 
capture, for Sita, 311—12; Ravana admonishes, 307—8;—asks, for aid, 13, 52, 303;— orders, to 
become golden deer, 303-4, 308;—-orders, to obstruct sacrifices, 74;—rejects counsel of, 307—8;— 
recounts previous encounter with Rama, 305—7;— tells, of killing of Khara, Disana, and Trisiras, 
303;—1ells, plan to abduct Sita, 303—4;— threatens, 308;—-visits, 303; recalls past encounters with 
Rama, 305—7; roams Dandaka forest, 30; Samyodhakantaka fells, 749; son of Tataka, 78; strikes 
fear into all the world, 305; takes forms at will, 13, 330; Tataka gives birth to, 78; transformed into 
raksasa by Agastya’s curse, 78 

Marica Kasyapa: husband of Diti 98, like Rama, has every virtue of a son 132 

Marici: ancestor of Rama, 121—22; father of Kasyapa, 121, 251, 280; one of the Prajapatis, 280; son 
of Brahma,121, 251 

Mar'ici: a city in the western quarter, 402 

maricipas (class of ascetics), 268, 302, 303 

marriage: Bhaga as lord of, 734; of Bharata to Mandavi, 123-25; of Bhaya to Heti, 732; of 
Devavarnini to Visravas, 730; of Devavati to Sukesa, 733; fathers’ concerns about daughters’, 741, 
746; of Kaikast to Visravas, 28; of Kaikast, 741; of Kumbhakarna to Vajravala, 746-47; of 
Kumbhinasi to Madhu by abduction, 764—65; of Laksmana to Urmila, 123—25; maidens without, as 
a liability, 785; of Mandodari to Ravana, 746; Narmada (gandharva woman) gives daughters in, 
734; of Parvati to Siva, 88; of Pulastya with Trnabindu’s daughter, 730; of Rama to Sita, 11, 123— 
25:—tecalled, 261; of Satrughna to Srutakirti, 123-25; of Siva to Uma, 88; of sons of Dagaratha to 
daughters and nieces of Janaka, 11; of Sirpanakha to Vidyujjihva, 746; Tmabindu gives daughter 
to Pulastya in, 730; Vedavati’s hand sought in, 753; of Vibhisana to Sarama, 747 

Martanda. See Stirya 

Maruta (god of wind): etymology of name of, 99; infatuation of, with Afijana, 426; son of Aditi, 785. 

See also Vayu 

Marutas, 99 

Maruts, 76, 79, 95, 101, 133, 158, 248, 199, 316, 385, 389, 403, 423, 455, 456, 481, 493, 506, 534, 

699, 724, 768, 770, 771, 772, 842, 854; Diti gives birth to, 99; etymology of name of, 99 

Marutta: asvamedha performed by, 837; mocks Ravana, 754; sacrifices to Siva (Mahesvara), 744; 
Samvarta restrains from fighting Ravana, 754; sets out to battle Ravana, 754; story of, 754-55 

masas (class of ascetics), 302, 303 

Matali (charioteer of Indra), 173; ascends with chariot to the sky, 702; brings Rama Indra’s chariots, 
689;—Indra’s javelin, 691; drives chariot for Indra, 770-72; drives Rama into battle, 694; 
Gomukha son of, 770; Indra dismisses, 772; Rama pays homage to, 702; Ravana riddles with 
arrows, 690; reminds Rama that he must use Brahma’s divine weapon, 698; unfazed by arrow 
wounds, 697 

Matanga (sage): ashram of, 41, 363;—on RsSyamika, 408;—blood drops fall on hermitage of, 363; 
curses Valin, 363, 408; forest of, 348; Kabandha tells Rama of, 347; Pampa as residence of 
students of, 347; pond of, 349 

Matangt: daughter of Krodhavasa, mother of the elephants, 280 

Matarisvan. See Vayu 

Mathura. See Madhura 

maxims. See proverbs 

Maya: immemorial consort of Rama, 854 

Maya (asura or danava): architect of danavas, 412; asceticism of, 746; boon to, from 412; Brahma 
gives wealth of, to Hema, 412; cave of, 418; creates forest and mansion of Hema, 412; forges 
javelin of Ravana, 686; gives Mandodari to Ravana in marriage, 545, 746; gives infallible javelin 


to Ravana, 746; Hema wife of, 746; Hema’s relationship with, 412; Indra kills, 412; javelin of, 
gained through austerities, 746;—-strikes down Laksmana, 746; lord of daityas, 746; Mayavin and 
Dundubhi sons of, 746; mountain stronghold of, 414; palace of, located on Mainaka, 405; powers 
of illusion of, 327; unaware of Visravas’s curse, 746 

Mayavin (1): son of Maya, 746 

Mayavin (2): son of Dundubhi, 360; Valin fights, kills, in cave, 360-61 

mead, 451 

meat: Bharadvaja provides to Bharata’s army, 228—29; fit for sacrifice, 187, 812-13; Vasistha 
demands illusory, 812; in Ravana’s drinking hall, 451; Kumbhakarna eats, 610—11; Nisadas offer, 
to Bharata, 220; raksasa in the form of Vasistha demands, 812; raksasa women want to eat Sita’s 
organs, 472;—-addicted to, 462; Rama eats, 791;—-and Laksmana eat, 187;—-gives up, 152, 489;— 
takes, 313;— tells Guha that he subsists on fruits and roots, 182; Rama, Sita and Laksmana eat, 
187; Sampati and his son seek, 372; vultures, seek, 420. See also cannibalism; flesh-eating 

medicinal herbs. See healing herbs 

Meghanada (birth name of Indrajit), 747. See also Indrajit 

Meghnad Badh Kavya, “The Killing of Meghanada,” 32 

Mena (daughter of Meru): daughter of Meru, 87; mother of Ganges and Parvati, 87; wife of 

Himalaya, 87 

Menaka (apsaras): infatuates Visvamitra, 115 

mendicants. See ascetic(s) 

Meru (mountain), 133, 147, 173, passim; ashram of Trnabindu on slopes of, 729; deities resort to, 40; 
divine beings come to in evening, 403; Garuda heads toward, 644; Hanuman brags he can fly 
around one thousand times, 427; Hanuman swears by, 489; Mena daughter of, 87; monkeys are to 
search, 402; sons of Sukesa perform austerities on, 733 

Merusavarni (sage): asceticism of, 403; Svayamprabha daughter of, 412 

metaphor, extended (samastavasturtipaka), 214, 288, 441, 601—2, 650, 683 776; of asokavana as 
ravaged woman, 456-57; of battle as an ocean, 595; of battlefield as a river, 601-2, 771; of grief as 
an ocean, 214, 288; of Lanka as a woman, 437-38; of Narmada as a woman, 776; of Ravana as a 
storm cloud, 448; Rama, as refuge of the grief—stricken, 359 

meter(s): anustubh type of, 8; of Mahabharata, 8-9; of Ramayana, 8-9; sloka type of, 8, 55 

minister(s): of Arjuna Kartavirya, 775, 777—78; of Dasaratha, 60, 63, 64, 203-4, 724; Hanuman as, of 
Sugriva, 27; of Rama, 800, 820-21, 853;—-consulted, 850-51; of Ravana 744, 749, 751, 752, 758, 
761, 765, 769, 776, 778, 781-82;—bathe in Narmada, 776;—eat ministers of Arjuna Kartavirya, 
778;—Hanuman fights and kills sons of, 501—2; of Romapada, 61—62; Tara as, of Valin, 731; of 
Vibhisana, 573 

Misrakesa (gandharva woman), 227 

Mithi: etymology of, 805. See also Janaka 

Mithila (city): besieged by angry kings, 118; Janaka returns to, 125; kings assemble in, 118; lord of 
(see Janaka); Rama accompanies Visvamitra to, 10-11, 100, 102; Sudhanvan lays siege to, 123; 
Yudhajit arrives in, 124 

Mitra: curses Urvasi to marry Purtravas, 804; story of Urvasi and, and Varuna, 803—4; Vasistha 
enters semen of, and Varuna, 803 

Mitrasaha Saudasa (Kalmasapada): boon of, 813; kills one of two raksasas, 812; sacrifice of, 812; 
Valmiki tells story of, 812—13; Vasistha curses, to eat human flesh, 813;—purohita of, 812-13 

Mlecchas: northern quarter is country of, 404: produced from wish-fulfilling cow, 107 

monkey army: Akampana battles, 597; Angada exhorts, 410, 423-24; Angada exhorts, to fast to 
death, 414; assails Dadhimukha, 526-28; attacks Kumbhakarna, 623; attacks raksasas fleeing fire, 
646; attempts to revive Rama, 658; battles Akampana’s forces, 601; battles raksasas’ army, 580— 


81, 582-83, 595, 597, 647, 651-52, 657, 662, 668, 675, 679-80; bites and claws Kumbhakarna, 
623-24; burns Lanka, 645-46; cheers Hanuman’s return with herbs, 645; crosses the ocean on 
bridge, 555; despair of, at prospect of crossing the ocean, 543; flees 656—57; flees at sight of 
Kumbhakarna, 613, 621—23; flees in dejection at apparent killing of Sita, 556; flees in fear of 
Atikaya, 635—36;—of Makaraksa, 652; —of Narantaka, 632;—of Ravana, 683; —of Vibhisana, 
590-91; flees to Rama for refuge from Kumbhakarna, 624, 626-27; flighty nature of, 450, 490, 
515, 722; healed by herbs, 645; Jambavan rallies fleeing, 591; lays siege to Lanka, 577—79; leaders 
of, debate Vibhisana’s intentions, 549-5 1;—-showered with gifts, 726; marches toward south, 540— 
42; mourns Rama and Laksmana, 585; Nala and, build bridge to Lanka, 15, 554-55; night battle 
between raksasa army and, 582-83; placement of, 573; plans to rescue Sita, 525—26; protects 
Rama and Laksmana, 586-87; Rama dispatches, to find Indrajit, 584;—-meets with leaders of, on 
Mount Suvela, 574—76;—positions leaders of, to attack, 577-78; Ravana scorches, with Tamasa 
weapon-spell, 683; rejoices at death of Indrajit, 671; rejoices at revival of Rama and Laksmana, 
593; reports on S1ta’s condition, 531—32; routs remaining ra@ksasas, 699; scales the walls of Lanka, 
580; seeks refuge with Rama, 605; sets fire to Lanka, 645—46; slain warriors of, restored to life, 
713; Sugriva assembles, 385; Sugriva commander of, 398; surveys Lanka from Suvela, 575; unable 
to extract javelin from Laksmana, 687; Vibhisana ralllies, 586, 590; weapons of, 525 

monkeys: announce arrival of Laksmana, 388; arrive at Madhuvana, 526; assemble in Kiskindha, 
393, 397-98; behavior of, 450, 518; birth of, 70-71, 854; board the Puspaka flying palace, 715; 
bring water for consecration, 725; as comic figures, 24; Dadhimukha tries to restrain, 526; 
delighted at Hanuman’s return, 518; devastate Madhuvana, 525-28; in dreams as inauspicious 
omens, 481, 483; drink honey-wine, 526-28; drunken behavior of, 526-27; eating of prohibited, 
370; except Hanuman, accompany Rama to heaven, 852-53; failure of search, for Sita of, 408-409; 
fasting to death of, 416, 417, 418, 454; fear Rama, 373; gods take birth as, 70—71; grief of, 379, 
428, 454, 486, 789; Hanuman encourages, to drink honey-wine, 527; invade the Madhuvana with 
permission of Angada and senior, 526; number of, 385, 393, 580; praise Hanuman, 518; return to 
divine source, 855; return to Prasravana, 408; revile Dadhimukha, 526-27; search for Sita, 408-23; 
seek protection of Valiln, 377; of southern search party, 411; Sugriva dispatches, to search for Sita, 
13, 402—7;—orders Nila to muster, 13, 385; —orders Hanuman to summon, 394; —summons, to 
Kiskindha, 394—95; summoned to asvamedha, 838; Susena as physician of, 27; 
Svayamprabha questions, 412; take on forms at will, 373, 560, 788, 852, 853; Tara as protector of, 
375; translation of words for, 46; vedic gods incarnate as, 10; void honey wine as urine, 529-30; 
wish to attend Rama’s consecration, 715; with Sugriva at Pampa and Rsyamika, 345, 346, 347, 
349; witness Sita’s abduction, 326—27 

monkey women: grief of, 368, 454 

morning rites, 284 

mountain(s): Candra and Drona in the sea of milk, 592; fear Indra, 431; gods terrified of, 433; had 
wings in Krta Yuga, 433; Indra severed wings of, 433; lifting of, by Ravana, 30, 752; of healing 
herbs (see healing herbs: mountain of) 

Mount Afyana. See Anjana 

Mount Aruna. See Aruna 

Mount Citrakiita. See Citrakiita 

Mount Dardara. See Dardara 

Mount Dhumra. See Dhtmra 

Mount Himalaya. See Himalayas 

Mount Kailasa. See Kailasa 

Mount Mahendra. See Mahendra 

Mount Malyavan (Prasravana). See Malyavan; Prasravana 


Mount Mandara. See Mandara 

Mount Meru. See Meru 

Mount Prasravana. See Malyavan; Prasravana 

Mount Prasravana. See Prasravana 

Mount Rsyamtika. See Rsyamuka 

Mount Suvela. See Suvela 

Mount Vindhya. See Vindhya 

Mrtyu (god of death), 246, 298, 318, passim; accompanies Yama in battle against Ravana, 759-60; 
asks to kill Ravana, 759; cannot be withstood, 338; destroys entire triple world. 759; noose of, 285, 
290, 293, 297, 737; war hammer of, 759; Ravana fights, 759-60; vows to kill asuras, 759. See also 
Dharmaraja; Kala; Krtanta; Vatvasvata; Yama 


Nahusa, 200, 252; father of Yayati, 122, 136, 805-86; Rama equal to, 218; son of Ambarisa, 122, 
252, 339 

Naimisa forest, 838 

Nala (architect of the monkeys), 15, 27, 390, 540, 560, 564, 576, 580, 587, 597, 614, 683, 787-88; 
Angada exhorts to return to battle, 621; arrival of, in Kiskindha, 365; arrows of Indrajit strike and 
fells, 642-43; charges Ravana, 605; equal in skill to his father, 554; fights Pratapana, 581; and 
monkeys build bridge, 15, 27, 53, 56, 554—55;— recalled, 716-17, 721; number of troops of, 397, 
558-60; participates in Sugriva’s consecration, 380; Rama has, build bridge, 53; son of 
Visvakarman, 554; takes counsel with other monkeys, 573; Visvakarman grants boon to, 554 

Nalakibara (son of Kubera): confirms Rambha’s story, 767; curses Ravana, 767—68 

Nandana (divine weapon-spell) of the vidyadharas, 80 

Nandana (minister of Dasaratha), 204 

Nandana garden (Indra’s garden), 228—29, 236, 299, 311, 347, 384, 458, 478, 498, 526, 575, 742-43, 

747, 772, 790; Kubera revived in, 751; Ravana destroys, 748—49 

Nandi(n). See Nandisvara 

Nandigrama: Bharata lives in, 52, 54, 56, 257-58, 721, 809; Hanuman reaches, 718 

Nandisvara, 283: curses Ravana, 16, 24, 751—5; orders Puspaka turned back, 752 

Narada (divine seer): alerts Nrga to danger facing him, 801; entertains Bharata, 228; goes to heaven 
with Vaivasvata, 760; Kausalya invokes, 158; narrates history of Rama to Valmiki, 9-10, 18, 38— 
39, 51-55; praises Ravana’s valor in battle, 756; returns to heaven with Viavasvata, 760; warns 
Ravana about following Yama’s path, 756-57; warns Yama of Ravana’s intentions, 757-58 

Narada (king of gandharvas), 228 

Narada (minister of Dasaratha): describes practices of social classes in yugas, 82 1—22; explains 
untimely death of child, 18, 821, reasons that a sidra is practicing asceticism in Rama’s realm, 
821-22 

Naraka (danava): lives in Pragjyotisa, 403; son of Kalaka, 280; Visnu kills, 629, 759, 768 

Narantaka (raksasa troop leader), 601, 604; Angada fights and kills, 632—33; death of, recalled, 635, 
668, 715; flesh marks path of, 632; knocks Angada unconscious, 633; Kumbhakarna paternal uncle 
of, 628; leads rdksasas into battle, 629-30, 632 

Narasimhavatara (Man-lion), 30 

Narayana. See Visnu 

Narmada (gandharva woman): gives daughters in marriage, 734 

Narmada (river), 400, 559, 778; Arjuna Kartavirya blocks flow of, 777;—-sports in, 775; Ravana and 
ministers bathe in, 776 

necklace. See gold necklace; pearl necklace(s) 


nectar of immortality, 159, 233, 302, 346, 427, 592, 721; churned from ocean of milk, 98, 418, 761; 
Garuda seeks and steals, 303; gods and demons desire to obtain, 97; gods and asuras churn ocean 
for, 97-98, 418, 469, 620, 757, 781, 790; gods gain, 134, 339; Mainda and Dvivida drink, 525, 560; 
produced from sacrifice, 395; Ravana threatens to churn ocean for, 757; Sita tells Ravana that he 
could not survive assaulting her even should he drink, 319. See also ocean: churning of 

Nikumbha (raksasa warrior): Nila fights and kills, 58 1—82 

Nikumbha Kumbhakarni (son of Kumbhakarna), 647; Hanuman fights and kills, 651; minister of 
Ravana, 509, 546-47, 769 

Nikumbhila (goddess), 472; Indrajit performs sacrifices at shrine of, 641, 657, 660-62 

Nila (monkey troop leader), 365, 390, 397, passim; appointed as scout for army, 540; confronts 
Prahasta at eastern gate, 573; created by gods, 787; fights Atikaya, 637; fights Indrajit, 641; fights 
and kills Mahodara, 634; Indrajit strikes down, 643; Nikumbha, 58 1—82;—-Prahasta, 602—3 ;— 
Prahasta, recalled, 721; general of Rama’s army, 502, 540-41, 564, 577, 614;—-of one humdred 
thousand troop leaders, 557; guards eastern gate, 573; Kaikeyi embraces, 722; has army camp, 543; 
hurls mountaintop at Kumbhakarna, 623; kills Mahodara (2), 634; member of southern search 
party, 400; number of troops of, 397; one of “five tigers among monkeys,” who rushes 
Kumbhakarna, 623; one of four monkeys who can leap to Lanka, 438; Pavaki as patronymic of, 
614; perches on Ravana’s battle standard, 606-7; pulls out arrow in Valin, 377; Rama gives gifts 
to, 742; Rama orders, to scout way for army, 540; Ravana attacks and fells, 606—7; son of Agni, 
400, 603; scouts way for army, 541; Sugriva orders, to assemble monkey army, 385; stationed at 
eastern gate, 573, 577, surrounded by one hundred million troops, 560, Trisiras immobilizes, 634 

Nimi: birth of, 804; boon of, 805; brahmans churn body of, 805; curses Vasistha, 803; founder of 
Janaka’s lineage,122; founds Vaijayanta, 802; Gautama performs sacrifice for, 802; son of Iksvaku, 
802; son of, called Mithi, Janaka, and Vaideha, 805; story of, 802—5; Vasistha curses, to become 
disembodied, 803 

Nisada (hunter), kills s@rasa crane (kraurica), 9, 54-55; Valmiki curses, 9, 54 

Nisada(s) (forest tribe), Guha, king of, 56, 182, 186, 220-21, 223-24, 717; boat of, 795; ferry 
Bharata and his army across the Ganges, 224—25; Garuda lays waste to realm of, 303; offer 
hospitality and provisions to Bharata, 220; Rama recalls help of, 795; Visvamitra curses Mahodaya 
to become, 111 

Nisakara (ascetic), ashram of, 421; boon to from, 421; foretells abduction of Sita by, 422; foretells 
new wings for Sampati, 422; grants boon to Sampati 421; Sampati tells story of meeting with, 420— 
22 

nitisastra (statecraft), discourse of Kumbhakarna on, to Ravana, 31;Rama questions Bharata about 
his conduct of, 238-41; Ramayana as, 5; text on kingship and governance, 5 

Nivatakavacas (class of daityas), alliance of, with Ravana, 760-61; boon of, 760 

noose(s) (pasa[s]): of Brahma, 108; of Dharma, 80; of Kala, 73, 80, 108, 111, 285, 292, 298, 321, 
323, 326, 512, 548, 574, 590, 664, 760, 846; of Mrtyu, 285, 290, 293, 297, 737, 759; of Varuna, 80, 
108, 403, 456, 786; of Yama, 295, 297, 307, 624, 637 

northern quarter: description of, 404—6; dispatching of search party to, 407 

northern search party: dispatching of, to northern quarter, 407; failure of, to find Sita, 409; Satabali as 
leader of, 404, 407 

Nrga: brahmans curse, to become a lizard, 801—2; burrows of, 801—2; consecrates Vasu, 801; gives 
cows to brahmans, 800; Narada and Parvata alert, to danger facing him, 801; purohita of, not 
named, 801; story of, and brahmans, 800-802; Vasudeva liberates from curse, 801 

number: of apes, 387, 393, 580; of langurs, 393; of monkeys, 385, 393, 580; of raksasa troops, 392, 
513; of troops of monkeys, 397-98 


oath: spoken word as, 387; swearing of, of Bharata, by Rama’s feet, 291;—-of Bharata, by truth, 851; 
—of Dasaratha, 143, 248, 711;—-of Dasaratha by acquired merit, 143;—-of DaSaratha to exile 
Rama, 142; —of Hanuman, 497;—Hanuman on mountains and fruits and roots, 489; —of 
Hanuman on truth, 534 ;—of Laksmana, 156, 795;—of Laksmana, on truth, 183; of—of Laksmana 
on truth and bow, 153;—of Rama, on arms and life, 794;—-of Rama, on truth, 358;—of Ravana, 
572, 742;—of Sita, on truth, 494;—of Sita on virtue, 707 (see also Sita: truth-act of);—of Sugriva, 
25, 387;— of Sugriva, on truth, 359; of—of Sugriva on Valin’s feet, 360;—of townspeople, on 
sons, 181. See also truth-act; vow 

ocean: agitated by battle between Rama and Ravana, 697; churning of, 97-98, 418, 469, 620, 757, 
781, 790; (see also ocean of milk: churning of); description of, 543; difficulty in crossing, 537; 
digging of, 91-93, 96; god of (see Sagara; Varuna); leaping of, by Hanuman, 14, 53, 56, 427-37, 
516-18; leaping of, discussion of, 423—25; monkey army crosses, 555; monkey army reaches 
southern shore of, 542; Nala and monkeys build bridge across, 554-55; Rama asks Vibhisana how 
to cross 552—53;—proposes building bridge to cross, 538;—-encamps on shore of, 543-44, 568;— 
and Sugriva deliberate crossing, 542—43 

ocean of milk: churning of, 97-98; healing herbs located near, 591; in eastern quarter, 398—99; locus 
of Candra and Drona, 592; monkeys live on shore of, 394; nectar of immortality chumed from (see 
nectar of immortality); supreme seers drink foam of, 761 

Odyssey, 3 

offerings: to ancestors, 87, 105, 250, 251, 283, 349, 845; to guest. See also guest-offering(s) 

old age: Yayati exchanges, with son Piru, 805—7 

Old Avadhi, 43 

Old Testament, 37 

omen(s): Laksmana observes, 576; presage Rama’s victory and Ravana’s defeat, 695; raksasas 
observe, 498; Rama observes, 330-33, 576, 695; Rama skilled in reading, 291, 695; Tara reads 
376. See also auspicious omen(s); inauspicious omens 

omniscient vision of rsi (seer), 4, 39 

oral composition, 7 

ordeal by fire (agnipariksa): of Sita, 15, 17, 708, 710—-11;—Uttarakanda refers to, 793 

ornament(s): 60, 69, 84, passim; of Agastya, accepts from Sveta;—gives to Rama, 824; —made by 
Visvakarman, 824;—Rama accepts, 826; Anasilya gives, to Sita, 262; of Atikaya, 630;Dasaratha 
wants to give, to Sita, 171; Garuda wears, 592; good conduct, of virtuous, 704; husband is a 
woman’s finest, 461; of Kaikeyi, stripped off, 143; king of Kekeya gives to Bharata, 206; of 
Kumbhakarna, 620; of Marica, 313; of ministers of Ravana, 501; of monkeys, 724; of raksasas, 
440-41; Rama gives, to monkeys, 726;—orders Sita tobe adorned with, 705;—orders Vibhisana to 
give, to monkeys, 714; —tejects Vibhisana’s offer of, 713; of Rambha, broken, 767; Ravana adorns 
sons with, before battle, 630; promises, to Sita, 317, 471; Sampati sees Sita throwing, 418; Sita 
emerges from fire adorned with, 710; of Sita broken, 337;—described, 324—27;—dropped, 357;— 
dropped, Jatayus sees, 418;—-dropped monkeys find, 485;—-enflame Rama’s grief, 485; —lacking 
of, 459, 462—64;—_wears, 418, 460;—-wishes to give, to sages’ wives, 794-95; Sugriva shows, to 
Rama, 357; of Vayu, 785; of women of Ravana’s inner apartments, 442-44, 446-48, 464, 466, 521. 
See also hair ornament; gold necklace; jewel; jewelry; pearl necklace(s); signet ring 

ospreys, 346, 386, 413, third path in sky, that of, 419; women shriek like, 700 

Osthakarnakas (name of a people), 399 


Padma (goddess), 853 
Padma (guardian elephant [diggaja]), 776. See also Mahapadma 
Padma (presiding deity of Kubera’s treasury), 750—51 


padma (type of mansion), 440 

padma(ka) (type of sandalwood), 390, 402, 418 

padma(ka) (type of tree), 394, 404, 516 

Pahlavas: destroy Visvamitra’s army, 106; produced from wish-fulfilling cow, 106-107; Visvamitra’s 
army destroys, 106 

palace of Ravana: description of, 443-46; Puspaka (flying palace) as, 445-46. See also 
Puspa/Puspaka(vimana) 

Pampa (lake), 13, 53, 56, 72, 354-55, 717; description of, 346-47, 349-52; Rama and Laksmana 
arrive at, 351; as residence of Sugriva and monkeys, 345—46, 347, 349, 350; RSyamukha located 
east of, 347 

Pampa (pond), 346, 716 

Pampa (river), 269 

Panasa (monkey troop leader), 525, 540-41, 574; advises Rama about Vibhisana, 573; Angada 
exhorts to fight, 622; arrives in Kiskindha, 397; cut through with a sword, 565; dwells on Mount 
Pariyatra, 558; struck down in battle, 643; Susena sends to ocean of milk for healing herbs, 592 

panasa (tree or fruit), 227, 323, 276, 281, 346, 565 

Paficajana: Visnu kills, on Mount Caravan, 403 

Paficajanya (conch [sankha] of Visnu), 737 

Paficapsaras (Pond of the Five Apsarases): etymology of name of, 247; story of, 274 

Paficavatt (forest), 12-13, 281; Agastya directs Rama to, 279; description of, 281—82; Rama dwells 
in, with Sita and Laksmana in, 12, 281 

Pandavas: devious behavior of, 38 

Pandyas (region), 400-401 

panegyrists (bandins), 35, 137, 146, 159, 201, 224, 395, 722 

parasol. See umbrella 

Parasurama. See Rama Jamadagnya 

parayana (recitation). See Valmiki Ramayana: recitation of 

Pariyatra (mountain), 403, 500, 558 

Parjanya (god of rain), 295, 495, 559, 727, 845 

Parsvamauli, 750 

Parvata (divine seer): alerts Nrga to danger facing him, 801 

Parvata (king of gandharvas), 228 

Parvati (Uma). 95; austerities of, 87-88; curses gods and the Earth 88-89; daughter of Himalaya, 87— 
88; grants boons to Sukega, 732-33; helps Siva retain semen, 88; left eye of Kubera burned by 
gazing at, 748; offers Ila half a boon, 834; Siva and, grant Sukesa boons, 732-33; Siva as lord of, 
736; Siva marries, 88; Siva turns himself into a woman to delight, 833; story of Siva and, and 
Ila/Ila, 833-34 

Passion Play, 6 

past lives. See birth(s): reaping consequences of previous 

Pagupati. See Siva 

Patala (underworld), 346, 370, 407-8, 436, 543, 610-11, 843; asuras inhabit, 432; danavas inhabit, 
423, 554, 577, 697, 843; Kausiki rescued from, 494; raksasas enter, 740; Rama demands Sita be 
brought back from, 843. See also Rasatala 

path(s): of ancestors, 131, 246; of crows as second in sky, 419; of falcons as fourth in sky, 419; 
Ganges goes by three, 76, 87-88, 96-97, 182, 186, 716; of kites as third in sky, 419; of kraurnicas as 
third in sky, 419; of kulingas as first in sky, 419; of sons of Vinata as highest in sky, of hamsas as 
sixth in sky, 419; of ospreys as third in sky, 419; of vultures as fifth in sky, 419 

pativrata (ideal wife), 5, 22, 24. See also ideal wife 


Paulastya(s), lineage of, 74; House of, 299; patronymic of Indrajit, 655, 664;—of Ravana 
(Dasagriva), 321, 463, 470, 612, 614, 672, 746, 752-53;—of Trisiras/Trimurdhan, 633;—of 
Vibhisana, 743; —of Visravas, 730, 741, 746; Rama kills, 740 

Paulastyavadha (Slaying of Paulastya): alternative name of Ramayana, 3, 57 

Paulomi. See Saci 

paundarika (sacrifice): of Rama, 726 

Pauravas (region): searched by northern search party, 404 

Pauravas (vedic clan); associated with the Mahabharata, 35 

Pavana. See Vayu 

peacock: Indra grants boon to, 754—55 

pearl necklace(s): Indra has Vayu give Rama, 725; of Kaikeyi, 142; of Sita, 325; Rama gives 
Hanuman, 789; Rama gives Sita, 726; of Ravana’s women, 447, 451; of Sita falls during abduction, 
325; Sita gives Hanuman, 726; Vidyadhara women wear, 430 

performance, of Ramayana. See Valmiki Ramayana: recitation of 

phalasruti (fruitful hearing): benefit of hearing Ramayama, 9 

Plaksa (monkey): announces Laksmana’s arrival, 389 

plaksa (tree), 67, 346 

poem (kavya): Ramayana as first (adikavya), 4; uniqueness of Ramayana as, 3—4; Uttarakanda 
identified as, 844; Valmikiramayana self identifies as, 55—57, 818, 839-40, 844. See also poetry; 
Valmiki Ramayana 

poet(s) (Kavis): Valmiki as first (@dikavi), 4; Valmiki and Vyasa as historian-, 39—40 

poetry (Aavya or sloka): Ramayana as, 3, 4; Valmiki creates, 9, 54—55;—-renders Ramayana story 
into, 57. See also poem; Valmiki Ramayana 

poison, 197, 283, 301, passim; Devayani threatens suicide by, 806; drinking kda/akiita as a means of 
suicide, 318; drinking of, 323, 326, 473, 750;—as a means of feticide, 252;—as a means of suicide, 
150, 454; food consisting of, 511; herbs counteract, 430; in food, 224, 286; monkeys threaten 
suicide by, 454;—-warned about fruit and water mixed with, 540; murder by, 474; Sagara (sa-gara) 
born with, 122, 252; Sita threatens suicide by, 163-64, 314, 477-78; women of Ayodhya, threaten 
suicide by, 181 

politics: gendering of, in Ayodhyakanda, 12 

popular saying. See proverbs: “no such thing as untimely death,” 477 

porcupine: eating of, by brahmans and kshatriyas, 370 

porridge, 212, 229; Dasaratha apportions, to wives, 69-70; emerges from sacrificial fire, 69 

portents. See auspicious omen(s); inauspicious omens; omen(s) 

power(s) of illusion (maya): of ascetics (see ascetic power); Kala created by, 849; of Indrajit, 588-89, 
592, 641, 655-56, 661-62, 673, 729, 772; of Indrajit called tamast, 764; of Marica, 325-26; of 
Marica and Subahu, 83-84; of Maya, 327; of raksasas, 630, 751; of Rama, 700; of Ravana, 341, 
545-46, 685, 693, 696, 751, 76; Ravana’s chariot fashioned through, 320; Ravana’s weapons 
infused with, 696; Siva (Pasupati) gives to Indrajit, 764; of Tataka, 79; of Vidyujjihva, 564; of 
Visnu as yogic, 82 

Prabhava (monkey): announces arrival of Laksmana, 389, 577 

Pracetasa: Valmiki as, 840 

Praghasa (field marshal of Ravana): Hanuman fights and kills, 502—3; son of Sumalin, 734 

Praghasa (minister of Vibhisana), 573 

Praghasa (monkey hero), 577 

Praghasa (raksasa): Sugriva fights and kills, 581 

Praghasa (raksasa woman), 472 

Pragjyotisa (city): danava Naraka lives on, 403; located on Varaha mountain, 403 


Prahasta (minister of Ravana), 729, 732, 744, 745, 749-50, 769, 776-78; Arjuna Kartavirya fells in 
battle, 778; encourages Ravana to fight Kubera, 744; Ravana sends as messenger to Kubera, 744— 
46; son of Sumalin, 734 

Prahasta (raksasa general), 509-10, 567, 603, 610, 629, 668, 678, 715, 728, 729, 732; battles 
monkey army, 601-2; believes returning Sita, is only way to avoid war, 599; inauspicious omens 
presage defeat of, 600; interrogates Hanuman, 509-10; Nila fights and kills, 602, 721; Ravana 
claims, killed Rama, 565—66;—dispatches to battle, 599-600;— stations at eastern gate, 572—73; 
son of Jambumalin, 500; vows to fight for Ravana, 546 

Praheti (raksasa, brother of Heti), 732 

Prahlada/Prahrada (asura devotee of Visnu), 30, 649 

Prajangha (raksasa): fights Sampati (monkey), 581 

Prajapati. See Brahma 

Prajapatis (lords of creatures): Brahma fourth of six, 470; Jatayus names, 280; Vivasvant first among, 
251 

Pramathin (monkey troop leader), 559, 577 

Pramathin (ra@ksasa warrior): Rama fights and kills, 291, 293 

Prasravana (mountain), 298, 336; monkeys return to, without Sita, 408—9; Rama lives on, 381; Sita 
implores, for aid, 320; Sugriva and Rama meet on, 395-96. See also Malyavan (mountain) 

Prasthalas: northern quarter location of country of, 404 

Pratapana (rdksasa): battles Nala, 581 

Pratardana (ally of Rama): Rama embraces and dismisses, 787 

Pratisthana (city): founded by Ila, 837; inherited by Purtravas, 837 

Prativasudeva, 36 

Prausthapada (month), 383 

Prayaga (confluence), 225, 228; Rama’s visit to, 188—90 

preceptor: of the Taittirtyas, 166; Sukra, of demons, 415, 715. See also purohita(s) 

pregnancy: gaze of Pulastya causes, 729; of Salakatankata, 732; Sita, 17, 796; of Trnabindu’s 
daughter, 729; of wives of Asita, 252; Rama observes signs of, in Sita, 791 

prenuptial promise: Dasaratha breaks, 23 

preservation: of bodies of Nimi, 804;—in vat of oil, 202, 822. See also corpse(s): preservation of, of 
Nimi 

previous lives. See birth(s): reaping consequences of previous; reincarnation 

proclaim: name when entering battle, 326, 500, 579, 635, 760, 762 

prologue (upodghdata) of Ramayana, 4, 6, 9-10, 39, 51-58 

protection of ascetics. See ascetic(s): protection of, as duty of kings 

proverbs, 197, 241, 246-47, 415, 499, 800; “cheerfulness, perseverance, and mental fortitude 
produce success in an undertaking,” 410; “It is impossible for a man or a woman to die before the 
appointed time,” 473; “giving away of something that has been given brings great benefits,” 824; 
“grief diminishes with the passage of time,” 543; “Joy will eventually come to a person who lives, 
even if it takes a hundred years,” 482, 719; “kshatriya has no real power,” 106; “living in forest is 
nectar of immortality,” 233; “men take after their mothers not their fathers,” 283; “no such thing as 
untimely death,” 477; “in this world a man’s destiny inevitably follows him,” 416; “When a 
husband dies first, they say it is because of the wife’s lack of virtue,” 566 

Prthivi (goddess of earth), 177. See also Dharant; Madhavi; Vasuda 

Pulastya (brahman-seer), 837; ashram of, 729-30; curse of, on girls, 729; descendants of, 289-90; 
distracted by young girls, 729; gaze of causes pregnancy, 729; marries Trnabindu’s daughter, 730; 
one of the mind-born sons of Brahma, 470; one of the Prajapatis, 280, 470; raksasas spring from 


lineage of, 732; requests Arjuna Kartavirya to release Ravana, 779-80; son of Brahma, 729, 780; 
Trnabindu recognizes curse of, 730; Visravas son of, 28, 730, 741 

Pulindas: northern quarter location of country of, 404 

Puloman: Anulada seizes daughter of (Sact) (comparison), 396; carries Jayanta from battlefield, 770; 
father of Saci, 396-97, 490; grandfather of Jayanta, 770; Indra kills, 397 

punishment, 18, 360, 415, 421, 483, passim; for committing sin, 371, 372; danda as word for, 827; 
death as, 371, 385, 414, 513, 528, 562, 850; death as, for illicit sexual relations, 371; death not, for 
emissaries, 512;—of Valin as, 371—72; deformity as, 421; execution as harshest, 247; Hanuman 
encourages Rama to inflict, on raksasas, 608;—seeks, against raksasa wardresses, 34, 704; 
imprisonment as, 416; Kaikeyt as deserving, 247; kings mete out, 203, 338, 369, 370-71; kings 
wield rod of, 264; kshatriyas mete out, 60; Mandhatr inflicts, 371; of ministers, 562; raksasa 
women seek, for Hanuman, 499;—should not be subject to, 34 704; Rama metes out, 18, 338, 371, 
578; Rama’s judgement in determining, 372; relative nature of, 80; rod (danda) of, 264, 452, 512, 
578, 826; Sita threatens Ravana with, from Rama, 320; of sons, 60; Sugriva as wielder of, 410, 
414, 416, 425, 452, 528; tail of Hanuman set on fire as, 27, 513; by Valin, 360-61; on Valin by 
Rama, 371—72; Valin freed from sin of, 372. See also Danda (son of Iksvaku) 

Pufyikasthala (apsaras), 425. See also Anjana 

purohita(s) (household priest[s]): Agni as, of gods, 89; Brhaspati as, of gods, 339;—of Indra, 723; 
function of, defined, 35; as members of royal court, 35; Kaficana as, of Satrughna, 852; of Arjuna 
Kartavirya not named, 780; of Bharata not named, 718; of Dasaratha not named, 120, 146, 213-14, 
219; of Nrga not named, 801; of Rama not named, 800; of Romapada not named, 61-62; of 
Satrughna not named, 818; of Vi$vamitra not named, 105; Satananda as, of Janaka, 102-3, 120-21; 
USanas Kavya as, of asuras, 599;—of Danda, 827;—of raksasas, 599; Vamadeva as, of Rama, 60, 
133, 820; Vasistha as, of Bharata, 203—6, 209, 212-14, 218-19, 225-26, 231, 235-36, 239, 243-44, 
228, 238, 244, 248, 251, 253, 255, 257, 725;—-of Dasaratha, 52, 60, 62-66, 68, 71-73, 75, 120-26, 
133, 136-37, 339, 798-99;— of Iksvaku, 804; —of Mitrasaha, 812—13;—of Rama, 723-25, 810— 
11, 820-21, 837, 841, 850-51, 853;—of Trisanku, 109-10, 541 

Piru: birth of, 805; rules in Pratisthana, 807; son of Sarmistha, 805; son of Yayati, 805—7; Yayati 
consecrates, 807; Yayati exchanges old age with, 805—7 

Puriravas: birth of, 836; inherits Pratisthana, 837; king of Kasi, 804; name of a king, 755; son of Ia 
and Budha, 836; Urvasi and, 319 

Piisan (name of a god or one of the Adityas), 158 

Puskara (forest and lake), 113-15, 800; VisSvamitra performs austerities at, 114 

Puskara (son of Bharata): established as king in Puskaravatt, 846-47 

Puskara (unidentified figure): fights Ravana, 761; goes forth with Go, 761 

Puskaravatt: Bharata founds, 846—47 

Puspa/Puspaka(vimana), 18, 31, 121, passim; as abode of divinity, 758; attends Rama, 822; Brahma 
gives, to Kubera, 731; brought to a halt in the sky, 751; comes to and serves Rama, 789-90; departs 
for the abode of Kubera, 723; description of, 445-46, 714; does not carry a widow, 589; flies 
wherever one desires, 318, 714, 751; Hanuman searches, 445-46, 451; Kubera owns, 299, 318, 
329, 731; Kumbhakarna sees Ravana in, 615; Nandisvara orders, turned back, 752; Rama 
dismisses, 790;—reaches Kiskindha in, 721; —returns to Nandigrama in, 15, 53-54, 56, 714-16, 
72 1—22;:—-searches for Sambiika in, 18, 822—23;—visits Agastya’s ashram in, 823-24, 829; Ravana 
conquers realms from, 756—81;—falls from, 476;— offers Sita to use, 329;—1roams earth in, 754; 
—seated in, 615;—-sees Kubera in, 742; —steals, from Kubera, 299, 329, 699, 713, 751; Sita 
observes battlefield from, 587—89; Sugriva and his army board, 715; Sumalin sees Kubera in, 740; 
Trijata forces Sita into, 587;—tums around, 589; Vibhisana lends, to Rama, 31, 56, 713-14; 
Visvakarman creates, for Brahma, 446; yoked to hamsas, 825 


Pusya (chariot), 160 
Pusya (constellation, asterism), 132, 134-35, 138, 140, 146, 159, 282, 721 
Put (a hell), 249 


queens of Ayodhya. See Kaikeyi; Kausalya; Sumitra 
Qur’an, 3 


rabbit: eating of by brahmans and kshatriyas, 370 

Raghava. See Laksmana; Rama 

Raghu (son of Kakutstha), 36, 122, 252 

Rahu (demon of the eclipse), 125, 295, 305, passim; desires to devour the sun god Surya, 784; 
Hanuman mauls, 784-85; in story of Hanuman’s birth, 784-85; son of Simhika, 784 

raining blood: as inauspicious omen, 29, 571, 576, 594, 679, 695, 737, 741 

rainy season: description of, 382—83;—of end of, by Rama, 386; inflames lust, 197, 382; living 
outdoors during, a type of austerity, 115; seduction of RSyasrmga will bring, 61-63; Sugriva does 
not notice end of, 387 

rajadharma (royal duty), 17, 20; in Uttarakanda, 16 

Rajadhiraja (king of kings): as title, 35 

Rajagrha (city), 12, 140, 719; Bharata and Satrughna depart from, 206; Bharata and Satrughna live 
with grandfather in, 203-4; messengers of Vasistha arrive at, 205; Vasistha sends messengers to, 
204 

rdjasiya (sacrifice), 35; Bharata advises Rama not to perform, 830; Laksmana recommends, 830; of 
Dasaratha, 238, 356; as destructive, 830; of Indrajit, 764; purifies one of all sins, 830; Rama wishes 
to perform, 829-30 

raksasa army: battles gods, 769-73; —Hanuman, 598-99, 663;—monkey army, 580-83, 595, 597, 
647, 651-52, 657, 662, 668, 675, 679-80;—Visnu, 737-40;—vaksas, 749-51; believes Rama slain 
by Indrajit, 586; of fourteen thousand, Dusana rallies, 293;—-Khara dispatches and leads, 289;— 
Rama battles and destroys, 52, 293-94;—Rama destroys, recalled, 300, 301, 327, 677; Garuda 
drives back, 736; monkey army destroys, of Ravana, 15; number of troops in, 539, 676; Rama 
destroys, of Ravana, 15, 676; troop leaders of, Ravana sends forth, 502-503, 594—Ravana 
stations, to guard city, 572—73 

raksasa brahmans. See brahman raksasas 

raksasas, 27-28, 32, passim; abandon Lanka in fear of Visnu, 731, 740, 744; as eaters of human 
flesh, 28, 83, 87, 273, 276, 288, 327, 332, 334, 346, 587, 603, 612, 732, 780; attempt to awaken 
Kumbhakarna, 610-11; beat and drag Hanuman, 508; Brahma creates, 732; brahmans among, 
recite vedic mantras, 463; bring offerings to Rama, 703; changing of form at will by (see shape- 
shifting: of raksasas); chiefs of, boast of killing Rama single-handedly, 546; code of conduct of, 
465; consecrate Ravana as lord of, 745—46; culture of, stands in opposition to that of Aryan, 28; 
description of, 440-42; each returns to own divine source, 855; engage in religious observances, 
440, 443; etymology of word, 732; exotic food of, 451; flee to 731, 740, 744, 817; flesh-eating (see 
flesh-eating: by raksasas); funeral practices of (see Kabandha; Ravana: funerary rites of; Viradha: 
burial of); genealogy of, 16, 732—35; grief of mothers of slain, 501; Hanuman battles, 499-506, 
513-14; —recalled, 782-83; in guise of cook offers Vasistha human flesh, 813; in guise of 
Vasistha, asks Mitrasaha for meat, 812; inauspicious omens presage destruction of (see 
inauspicious omens); intoxication of, 441; Khara dispatches fourteen, to attack Rama, 286-87; — 
dispatches fourteen thousand, 289; kill ascetics, 269; live in Patala, 740 (see also Patala); live in 
731, 744 (see also Rasatala); Marica foretells destruction of, 306, 309; night battle between 
monkeys and, 582—83; number of, in Lanka, 392, 539; parodies of aryan civilization, 27—28; 


perform sacrifices, 440, 443; power of illusion of, 83, 630, 751; Rama battles and kills fourteen, 12, 
287;—battles and kills fourteen thousand, 52, 291—94;—-battles and kills fourteen thousand 
recalled, 300-301, 303, 326, 460, 474, 490, 652, 677, 720;—-six, 583; Ravana dispatches eight, to 
Janasthana, 327—28;—dispatches fourteen thousand, to Janasthana, 763—64; Ravana stations, to 
defend Lanka, 572; re-occupy Lanka, 745—46; revival of Rama and Laksmana dismays, 593-94; 
secret police of, 440; set fire to Hanuman’s tail, 513; sound of monkey army demoralizes, 570; take 
on form at will, 392, 812; two lineages of, 740; Usanas Kavya as purohita of, 599; Visnu takes 
birth to slaughter, 740;—-vows to kill, 736; weapons of, 440-41, 443, 500; worship Visnu, 854; 
yaksas and, Brahma, creates, 732 

raksasa wardresses: description of, 462, 469; eaters of humans, 330, 462, 472, 475, 521; Hanuman 
asks Sita for permission to kill, 704;—+terrorizes, 498-99; intoxication of, 462, 472; menace Sita, 
330, 471-72, 477; Ravana orders, to guard Sita, 330, 327; report Hanuman to Ravana, 499; show 
Sita battlefield in Puspaka, 587; Sita defies, 471, 473—74;— tells Sarama that, menace her, 569;— 
tells Hanuman not to punish, 704; tell Sita of Hanuman’s punishment, 513; terrorize Sita in asoka 
grove, 14, 33, 330, 470-72, 477;—recounted, 521; Triata rails at, for terrorizing Sita, 476; worship 
Nikumbhila, 472 

raksasa women: blame Sirpanakha, 676-77; characterization of, 32—34; foretell Ravana’s downfall, 
678; grief of, 297, 676-78, 699-700; intoxication of, 442, 447-48. 463; lament of, for Ravana, 
699—700;—their slain kinsmen, 676—78; not monolithically evil, 28; Surasa takes form of, 434. See 
also Dhanyamalint; Mandodart; Ravana: wives and courtesans of, described 

ram. See Vatapi, as demon ram 

Rama (Aiksvaka, Dasarathi, Kakutstha, Raghava): abandons Sita, 6, 17, 18, 19, 794-98; 
accompanies Visvamitra to Mithila, 10-11, 83; addresses people of Ayodhya, 177—78; adherence to 
righteousness (dharma) by, 11; admonishes Khara, 296; Agastya and (see Agastya); Agni instructs, 
to take Sita back, 710; agrees to take Laksmana to forest, 165;—-Sita to forest, 164; as Aisvaka, 77, 
182, 184;—Laksmana, and as, 342; alliance of, with Sugriva, 13, 25, 30, 53, 56, 356-58, 364, 486, 
716;—sanctified by fire, 356, 358; ancestors gratified by, 845; Angada as messenger of, 578—79;— 
tells story of, to Sampati, 417—18; argues against his own consecration, 245, 246-47, 250-51; army 
of, encamps near Mount Suvela, 563—64; arrives at Lake Pampa, 351; arrow(s) of;—Agastya gives, 
278; —described, 266, 278, 287, 293-94, 363-64, 368, 697, 698, 810;—fletched with Garuda’s 
feathers, 698;—invested with Brahma’s weapon-spell, 278, 698; —take any form at will, 690; 
ascends to heaven, 853—55; as an ascetic, 144, 152, 175, 209, 237, 258, 283, 306, 466, 566; ascetics 
host, for ten years, 274;—-seek protection of, 12, 258, 264-65, 269, 273, 808;—-show hospitality to, 
264-65; ashram of, 52, 189-190, 230, 236, 242-43, 281, 284, 287, 279, 304, 309-10, 323-24, 720; 
asks Jatayus to protect Sita, 312; —javelin to spare Laksmana, 686; —Laksmana to protect S1ta, 
312; asoka grove of, 725, 790-91; assents to his own exile, 150; audience of, with Bharadvaja, 56, 
188-90, 716-17; banishes Laksmana, 19, 850—51; battles and kills fourteen rdksasas, 12, 287; 
fourteen thousand raksasas, 12, 291—94;—fourteen thousand recalled, 300-301, 303, 326, 460, 
474, 490, 652, 677, 720;—six raksasas, 583; Bhadra tells, rumors about Sita, 791-92; Bharadvaja 
directs, to Citrakita, 189-90; Bharata and (see Bharata); birth of, 10, 71; —through own intention, 
849; bleeding of, 565, 584, 589, 591, 655, 692; boons to, Bharadvaja grants, 717;—-gods grant, 53, 
721, 823;—-Indra grants, 712-13, 722; born in House of Iksvaku, 51, 329, 356; bow of, 585, 604— 
605, 626, 675—76, 683, 687, 689; Brahma and (see Brahma); brahman blames, for death of child, 
18, 820; brahmans of Ayodhya address, 178-79; breaks Siva’s bow, 11, 13, 119; —Viradha’s right 
arm, 266; brothers of, as “life breaths outside body of,” 793;—bound by oath to Rama, 794; as 
Cakravartin (Universal Emperor), 35; calms Laksmana, 235-36, 387-88; character synopsis of, 
20-21; chariot battle of, with Ravana, 689-93, 695—98; closeness of Laksmana and, 493-94; 
compared to Visnu, 51, 609 (see also Rama: as Supreme Being, Lord, Soul, or Spirit this entry); 


compassion of, 34, 131, 149, 167, 181, 186, 195-96, 258, 260, 337, 369, 392, 460, 474, 478, 493, 
513-14, 534, 593;—for crow, 493; complaint of seers to, about raksasas, 258-59; confides in 
Laksmana, 187-88; confrontation of, with Rama Jamadagnya, 11, 56, 126-28; consecrates Angada 
and Candraketu, 847; —Lava and KuSa, 851—52; consecration of, 16, 725—26;—-Ayodhya readied 
for, 136—-38;—-ends some versions of Ramayana, 19;—interrupted, 56, 150;—priests prepare for, 
146-47; consoles Kausalya, 157—58;—Valin, 372; conversation with Nisada chief (Guha), 56, 
183-84; cremates Jatayus, 342; crosses bridge to Lanka with army, 555;—-Ganges (Mandakin1), 56, 
186-87; cuts off Kabandha’s right arm, 343; Dasaratha as foil for, 12, 23; —exiles Rama, 11, 149— 
51;—spirit of, instructs, 711-12; death of raksasas in Janasthana by, recalled, 564, 700-701; —of 
raksasas in Lanka by, recalled, 728; —of Viradha by, recalled, 564, 677, 697, 716, 719; deeds of, 
praised sages, 728-29; —recalled, 717; defends Visvamitra’s sacrifice, 10, 82-83; deliberates 
crossing the ocean, 542-43; describes end of rainy season, 386;—hardships of the forest to S1ta, 
161—62;—Paficavati, 281; description of, 51-52, 72, 130-31, 300-301, 354, 355, passim; 
description of body of, 133, 484-85; designated as prince regent, 11, 131-35; destroys raksasa 
army of Ravana, 15, 676; determined to kill Ravana himself, 574; devoted to the welfare of all, 
103, 132, 189, 193, 219, 304, 306, 317, 321, 337, 338, 369, 412, 556, 676, 712, 850; directs 
Laksmana to find Sugriva, 350; discourses of, on fate, 378;—on righteousness and statecraft, 154, 
238-41, 272-73; 370-72, passim; dismisses allies, 17, 787—89;—-Guha, 186;—Puspaka, 790, 829; 
—Ravana from battle, 15, 30, 609;—-Sumantra, 184-86; dispatches monkey army to find Indrajit, 
584; Durvasas foretells future of, to DaSaratha, 799;—-visits, 849-50; dwells with Sita and 
Laksmana in Paficavati, 12, 281-84; eats meat, 187, 791 (see also hunting: of Rama); encamps on 
banks of Ganges, 182—84;—on Mount Suvela with chief monkeys, 574—-76;—on northern shore 
with army, 543-44; encounter of, with Kabandha, 32, 53, 56, 343-47; —with Kabandha recalled, 
460, 564, 627, 677, 697, 716, 717, 720;—with Samudra, 553-54 (see also Sagara);—with Viradha, 
12, 32, 52, 265-67;—-with Viradha, recalled, 460, 474, 564, 627, 677, 697, 716, 719; enters blazing 
power of Visnu at Sarayu, 854;—-Dandaka forest, 12, 52, 56, 264; establishes ashram on Citrakita, 
190-91; exhorts Sugriva to search for Sita, 358; exile of, to Dandaka forest, 56, 144, 150, 152, 
168-69;— recalled, 208-9, 245, 434, 510, 519-20; fasting of, 223, 251, 306; fears criticism of 
people, 17, 793; fights and kills Agniketu, Rasmiketu, Suptaghna, and Yajiiakopa, 581;—-Disana, 
32, 52, 293;—Disana recalled, 52, 293; Rama fights and kills recalled, 300-301, 303, 327, 461, 
480, 564, 585, 652, 677, 697, 715;—Khara, 52, 56, 295-98; —Khara recalled, 300-301, 303, 307, 
314, 321-23, 327, 329, 460-61, 480, 547, 564-65, 585, 627, 677, 692, 697, 700,716 ;— 
Kumbhakarna, 626-28; —Mahakapala, Sthulaksa, and Pramathin, 291-93; Makaraksa, 652—53;— 
Trisiras, 32, 52, 56, 294-95; fights Indrajit, 584-85, 642, 654—-55;—Ravana, 608-9, 683-85, 687, 
689-98;—and kills Ravana in final battle, 695—98; filial devotion of, 11; final audience of, with 
Dasaratha, 167—72; followers of, assume celestial forms, 854-55; founds Angadiya for Angada, 
847:—Candrakanta for Candraketu, 847;—Kusavati for Kuga, 852;—-Sravati for Lava, 852; frees 
Ahalya from curse, 101—2;—-Kabandha from curse, 344-45; —Viradha from curse, 266-67; 
friendship of, with Sugriva, 354, 356, 358, 364, 371, 549-50, 590, 725; Garuda heals wounds of, 
and Laksmana, 592; genealogy of, 121—122, 251-52; gives armlets to Angada, 726;—arrow of 
Visnu to Satrughna, 810 —away wealth, 11, 165-66;—donations to ascetics, 845;—gifts to 
brahmans, 726; —gifts to Sugriva and Vibhisana, 788; —Sita pearl necklace, 726; gods remind, of 
true identity, 708-710, 844; grief of, 19, 172, 241-242, 266;—at seeing Laksmana pierced by 
javelin, 686;—for Jatayus, 342; —over abandonment of Sita, 794, 799-800;—-over banishment of 
Laksmana, 850, 851;—-over death of brahman boy, 820—21;—over false report of Sita’s death, 658, 
661;— over separation from Sita, 334-336, 339, 349, 351-52, 355, 357-58, 381, 385-87, 393, 
485-86, 488-89, 530, 537-38, 543-44;— over Sita’s return to her mother, 843-44; Hanuman and 
(see Hanuman); has golden image of Sita fashioned, 18, 838; has Laksmana consecrate Vibhisana, 


15, 31, 53, 552, 702-3; history of, 355, 356, 413;—Lavana heard by, 808-809; identification of, 
with Visnu, 128,571, 677, 709-10, 740, 844, 848-49, 854; Iksvaku as ancestor of, 36; impervious 
to weapons of Indrajit, 642; inaugurates Ramarajya, 5—6, 16; as avatara (incarnation) of Visnu, 4, 
5n, 9, 11, 20, 35, 40, 844; Indra foretells great feat of, 267—68;—has Vayu give golden necklace 
and lotuses to, 725;—-sends weapons, chariot, and Matali to, 689; Indrajit binds, and Laksmana 
with serpent weapons, 24, 32, 584—85;—eports death of, and Laksmana, 586; informs brothers of 
the people’s allegations, 793;—Kausalya of his exile, 152;—-Sita of his exile, 159-60; inner 
apartments of, 147, 311, 791, 853; instructs monkeys not to take human form in battle, 574; as 
instrument of Ravana’s destruction, 524; Jabali urges, to accept kingship, 249-50; Jatayus 
reassures, 341; —tells, about S1ta’s abduction, 340-41; journey of, with Visvamitra, 10-11, 75— 
102; justifies killing Valin, 370-72; Kabandha directs to, Pampa, 346-47;—urges alliance between 
Sugriva and, 345-46, 347; Kaikeyt informs, of impending exile, 150; Kausalya and co-wives meet 
with, on Mount Citraktita, 243-44;—blesses, 158-59; Khara and, mock each other, 297-98; kicks 
Dundubhi’s skeleton, 53, 363; killing of Valin by, as unjust, 370; kills Marica, 13, 312—13;— 
Ravana, 15, 698:—kills Sambiika by beheading, 18-20, 41, 822—23;—-Subahu, 10, 83; —Tataka, 
10, 79;—Valin by ambush, 13, 14, 25, 26, 368;—-Viradha, 266-67; Kumbhakarna decimates 
monkey army, 5, 31, 624; Laksmana and, (see Laksmana); Laksmana as emotional foil for, 11, 22; 
—as second life breath of, 22, 72, 561; —builds hut for, 191, 282;—-calms, 338—40;—consoles, 
335, 381, 386, 658-60, 800; describes winter to, 282—83;—-guards door for, 848;—urges, to 
proceed with the consecration, 156—57;—urges, to search for Sita, 335, 338—39;—-warns, about 
golden deer, 3 10;—-warns, of arrival of Bharata’s army, 234-36; lament of, for Sita, 13, 333-35, 
385, 543-44;— for Laksmana, 589-90, 687-88; Lava and KuSa (see Kusa; Lava; Rama: sons of, as 
disciples of Valmiki this entry); Lavana and (see Lavana); learns of DaSaratha’s death, 241; leaves 
Ayodhya with Sita and Laksmana, 11, 172—74; lies wounded on bed of arrows, 585, 590-91; life 
span of, complete, 849; like madman from grief over Sita, 334-35; lives with Laksmana in cave 
during rainy season, 380-81; love for Sita, 129; madness of, 13, 336-38, 843; Malyavan counsels 
Ravana to make peace with, 570—72; manliness of, 357-58; marches southward with army, 540— 
42; Marica as golden deer lures, into forest, 13, 312—13;—cries for help in voice of, 13, 313;— 
praises, 304;— recalls previous encounter with, 305—7; marriage of, to Sita, 11, 123-25; married 
life of, 791; matted locks (hair) of, 144, 150, 155, 186, 222, 238, 247, 265, 284, 719; —abandoned, 
724; Maya as immemorial consort of, 854; meets Jatayus, 279-8 1;—-Sugriva, 13, 356;—-Sugriva on 
Mount Prasravana [Malyavan], 395-96; ministers of, 800, 820-21, 853;—-consulted, 850-51; 
monkey army leaders advise, on Vibhisana, 549—5 |;—protects, and Laksmana, 586-87; monkeys 
report Sita’s condition to, 53 1-32;—-seek refuge with, 605, 624, 626, 636; as most central and 
compelling character in the epic, 20; mothers of, ascend to heaven, 845; mourns DaSaratha’s death, 
241-43; must rescue Sita himself, 491, 495, 522, 535; Narada describes practices of social classes 
in yugas, 82 1—22;—explains untimely death of child to, 18, 821;—narrates adventures of, to 
Valmiki, 9, 51-54; not mentioned as incarnation of Visnu in upodghdata, 9; as object of emulation, 
20-21; observes Sita’s pregnancy, 791; offers to consecrate Laksmana as prince regent, 726; as one 
of true vows, 850-51; orders Laksmana to abandon Sita, 794—97;—Sita to be proven innocent 
publicly, 710;—-ibhisana to bring Sita, 705;—Vibhisana to perform Ravana’s funerary rites, 30, 
701-2; people of Ayodhya lament exile of, 166-67, 173—75, 180-81; poetic fame deserved by, 844; 
posts troops at gates of Lanka, 573-74; power of illusion of, 700; Pratardana as ally of, 787; 
prepares for siege, 540, 576;— to leave for forest, 165—75;— troop leaders to attack Lanka, 577—78; 
purohita(s) of (see purohita(s): of Rama); Puspaka and, 722, 789-90, 822 (see also 
Puspa/Puspaka(vimana)); questions Vibhisana about Kumbhakarna, 613; rage of, at loss of S1ta, 
336-38, 843-44; rages against earth goddess (Vasudha), 843-44; Raghu as ancestor of, 36; Ravana 
and (see also Ravana); Ravana hears of death of Khara, Dusana, and Trisiras by, 300;—reviles, 


303, 466, 469;—-vows to destroy, by abducting Sita, 13, 303-4; Ravana’s appearance impresses, 
604; reaches Lanka, 577; rebukes Laksmana, 331—33; recognizes Lava and Kusa as his sons and 
Sita’s sons, 10, 19, 841; as refuge of all, 214, 338, 549, 552, 605, 613, 636, 675, 830, 854; refuses 
to enter Kiskindha, 379-80; regards world as empty, 844; rejects Sita as unfaithful, 707; releases 
Ravana’s spies, 556, 563; reminds Kausalya of wifely duty, 24, 157-58; removes and breaks 
Ravana’s javelin, 687; repudiates and rejects Sita, 15, 706-707; rescues Sita from Viradha, 267; 
residence of, on Mount Prasravana (Malyavan), 381; resumes trappings of royalty, 723—24; reunion 
of, with queen mothers, 723;—with Sita, 705—11; as role model, 5, 17; romantic interlude of, with 
Sita in asoka grove, 790-91; royal lineages established by, 799; Sabari welcomes, and Laksmana, 
348; sacrifices of, 17-19, 191;—agnistoma and atirdatra, 845;—asvamedha (see asvamedha);— 
paundarika, 726;—performed by, for thousands of years, 845;—vajapeya, 726, 845; sages 
assembled at court of, 728, 807, 844; Sampati assists, 24, 418; sandhya rites of, 137, 182-83, 187, 
223, 270, 544, 829; Sardiila describes capture of spies and forces of, 563—64;—describes, to 
Ravana, 564; Satrughna and (see Satrughna); saves Sita from crow, 492-93, 496; —recalled, 533— 
34; sees omens, 330-33, 576, 695;—-vision of Indra, 267; sends Sugriva back to Kiskindha, 788— 
89; —Laksmana and Sita into hiding, 291; —Laksmana to confront Indrajit, 661; —Laksmana to 
exhort Sugriva, 386-87; —Satrughna to fight and kill Lavana, 17-18, 809—10;—-Satrughna back to 
Madhura, 18, 819-20; sets out for Mount Rsyamika, 56, 352; shatters lance of Ravana with 
javelin, 691; sight of, will allay grief, 219; signet ring of (see signet ring); simulacra of head and 
bow of, 564-68; Sita begs, for golden deer, 310—11;—exhorts Laksmana to find, 313—14;— 
implores, to take her to Dandaka forest, 161—63;—laments believing, dead, 566—67,—laments 
recalling, 473-75, 477-78; Sita rebukes harsh treatment and accusations of, 707—708;—efuses to 
touch male other than, 491;— takes ring of, 14, 487, 522;—-warns, of perils of violence, 271—72; 
Sita’s devotion to, 442, 460, 462-63, 464, 465, 467, 477, 491, 524, (see also Sita); slaying of 
Khara’s army by, recalled, 52, 300, 301, 327, 460, 677; as son of Aditi, 849; sons of, as disciples of 
Valmiki, 6, 10, 17-18, 57, 839-41;—-s reflections of Rama, 840;—perform the Ramayana for 
Rama, 19, 58, 839-41; —Valmiki teaches, the Ramayana, 6, 10, 57 (see also Kusa; Lava); splits 
seven sala trees as demonstration of skill, 363-64; —recalled, 366, 393; stoicism of, 11; story of, 
known to Valmtki, 56—57; stuns Marica with arrow, 10, 83, 306; suffering of, 798; Sugriva 
challenges, to split sala trees, 53, 363—64;—-consoles, 357-58, 530—31;—-enumerates monkeys to, 
396; —narrates conflict with Valin to, 13, 26, 359-63, 408;—promises to search for and recover 
Sita, 13, 357;—reassures, 537-38; Suka and Sarana describe, to Ravana, 556-57, 561; Sumantra 
delivers message of, to Dasaratha, 192—94; summons Sita to assembly, 841—43; as Supreme Being, 
Lord, Soul, or Spirit, 4, 20, 40, 475, 709-12 790; Stirpanakha asks Ravana to kill, 301; —seduces, 
12, 33, 284-85; takes no wife after Sita, 845; teases Sirpanakha, 285; tells story of Ila/Ila story, 
833-37;—of Nimi, 802—5;—of Nrga, 800-—802;—-of Yadu, 805-7; threatens cosmic destruction, 
337-38; tours Citraktita and Mandakini with Sita, 232—34;—1ravels from Lanka to Ayodhya from 
Puspaka with Sita, 715—16; unable to distinguish Valin from Sugriva, 364—65;—to find and 
recover Sita without Sugriva, 25; Valin rebukes for killing, 26, 369—70;—begs forgiveness from, 
372; Vasistha instructs, and Sita prior to the consecration 136; Vibhisana advises, to solicit aid of 
Samudra, 553;—lends Puspaka to, 31, 713—14;— takes refuge (saranam) with, 31, 549, 551-52; 
visits Agastya’s brother, 275—76;—Atri, 259—63;—-visits Sarabhafiga, 268;—Sutiksna, 52, 56, 269— 
71, 274-75; Visnu’s bow and, 127-28; Visvamitra gives weapons-spells to, 10, 80—81;—requests 
aid of, 10, 71-75, 305; vital points (vitals) of, pierced by Indrajit’s arrows, 584-85; vow of, to 
annihilate Sita’s abductor, 511;—to Kala, 848, 850-51; vows to kill Ravana, 687;— to kill Valin, 
13, 25, 53, 359, 361, 486;— to protect seers of Dandaka forest, 271, 273;—-weapon-spells of, 561, 
588, 653, 676;—deployed against Indrajit, 654—55;—-deployed against Kumbhakarna, 626—627;— 
deployed against Ravana, 684, 685, 689-90, 692-93, 698; —weapons of, take on human form, 


853; welcomes Durvasas, 850; wears clothing of ascetic, 11, 170, 171 (see also barkcloth 
garments); will go to Brahmaloka, 54, 799; world regarded as empty by, 844; Yudhajit dispatches 
Gargya as messenger to, 845—46 

Rama Jamadagnya, 11; as avatara (incarnation) of Visnu, 21;encounter of, with Rama 126-28; 
exterminates kshatriyas, 126-27; obeys father’s command to kill mother, 154 

Ramakatha (“Tale of Rama”), 3; representations of Sirpanakha in, 33 

Ramarajya: Gandhi on, 42; Rama inaugurates, 5—6, 16; as utopian reign, 17-18, 42 

Rama story: foretold, 422;—tecalled 284, 316-17; 329, 355, 480-82, 510;—-Rama recaps, during 
return journey, 715—16 

Ramayana: as cautionary tale, 5, 41; as cultural work, 47; consecration of Rama ends some versions 
of, 16; Jain versions of, 5n, 36; legacy of, 41-43; as morality play, 5; political history of, 35; 
popularity of in religious cultures of Asia, 5(n); reception of, 20; in religious history of Hinduism, 
40; versions of, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9-10, 16, 19, 27, 33, 36, 37, 42, 43, 46-47; See also Valmiki Ramayana 

Rambha (apsaras): Indra sends, to seduce Visvamitra, 115—16; Kubera Vaisravana curses Viradha 
because of, 267; Nalaktbara confirms story of, 767; Ravana rapes, 766—67; reports rape to 
Nalaktbara, 767; ViSvamitra curses, 118 

Rambha (monkey troop leader): arrival of, in Kiskindha, 397; lives in Sahya mountains, 558; number 
of troops of, 397, 558-59, 574, 587, 622 

Ramcaritmanas, 43 

Ramlila: reenacted annually in India, 6 

Ramopakhyana (“The Secondary Narrative of Rama’): as version of Ramayana, 36 

rape: of Ahalya, by Indra, 774; of apsaras Rambha by Ravana, 766-68; of Araja by Danda, 827-28; 
common to all men, 774 

Rasatala (underworld), 53, 92, 356, 517, 546, 569, 655, 817; Hanuman pushes Mount Arista into, 
517; raksasas flee to, 731, 740, 744, 817; Ravana goes to, 760—61;—-goes to, recalled, 545;— 
prepares to go to, 757; Sita enters, 843; sons of Sagara tear up, 92; Sumalin and advisors come up 
from, 744; Sumalin leaves, 740. See also Patala 

Rasmiketu (raksasa), 443, 547; Rama fights and kills, 581 

Rati (goddess of pleasure): Sita compared to, 315; wife of god of love, 315, 459 

Ravana: abducted women curse, 16, 30, 762—63; abducts daughters of serpents, yaksas, raksasas, 
men, daityas, and danavas, 5, 16, 762—63;—-Sita, 12-15, 24, 52, 320—27, 355, 357, 429; accuses 
Malyavan of treachery and humiliates him, 572; acquires epithet, “Ravana,” 30, 752;—ninety-nine 
powers of illusion, 761; admonishes Marica, 307—8; Agastya narrates genealogy and history of, 
16-17, 729-82; aims javelin at Vibhisana, 686; alliance of, with Nivatakavacas, 761;—with Valin, 
26, 782; alternative title of poem foregrounds, 3, 57, 354; Anaranya curses, 16, 756; Angada tells 
Sampati about fight of, with Jatayus, 417-18; —attacks palace of, 579; appearance of, impresses 
Rama, 604; approaches and meets Sita in ashram, 315—17; Arjuna Kartavirya defeats, 16, 26, 30, 
780; —fights and captures, 779-80;—fights ministers of, 778—79;—Rama, fights Ravana, 608-9, 
684-85, 687, 689-98; asks Brahma for immortality, 743; —Marica to aid in abduction of Sita, 52, 
303—4;—-guise of brahman ascetic, 13, 314—17;— true form, 319-20; attempts to lift mountain 30 
35, 363; austerities of, 29, 299, 444, 742-43; bathes in Narmada, 776; battles gods, 768—73;— 
Kubera and yaksas, 749-51; begs Kumbhakarna to drive off the enemy army, 615;—to save him, 
616-17; birth of, 28-29, 741; —accompanied by dire omens, 28—29; boasts of his power to Sita, 
318-19, 754; boon of, 10, 24, 68-69, 74, 636-37, 649, 742-43, 745, 768, 772, 779; Brahma grants 
boon to, 68, 74;—protects, from Yama, 760;—stops auto-decapitation of, 299, 742—43;— tells, to 
release Indra, 773; —proposes alliance between, and Nivatakavacas, 760—61;—1estores heads of, 
743; —tells Yama not to strike, 760; briefs Kumbhakarna on battle, 615; brings abducted women to 
Lanka, 763; broods upon hearing the sound of the monkey army, 570; cannibalism of, 330, 468, 


474, 754;—of ministers of, 748, 778; cannot be slain without an ally, 392; challenges Valin to 
battle, 781; charriot battle of, with Rama, 689-98, 695-98; chariot of, fashioned through power of 
illusion, 320; claims Prahasta has beheaded Rama, 565; comes to abode of Varuna, 761; conquers 
city of ASmanagara, 761; —Kubera, 318, 446, 299, 545, 749-5 1;— the serpents, 760; as 
conquistador, 5, 749-51, 755-56, 758-62, 768-73; consecration of, as lord of raksasas, 745—46; 
consults his ministers, 544-45, 564; cremation of, 720; crimes of, 299; cursed to die on account of 
a woman, 16, 762; cuts off heads as offering, 299; Dasagriva, “Ten—necked,” as birth name of, 30, 
752; death of, 3, 5, 15, 21, 30, 53, 56, 698; deeds of, recounted, 545—46; defeat of, presaged in 
Trijata’s dream, 476; defeats Indra and the gods, 773; defiler of sacred rites, 5; delighted with 
Indrajit, 586; delusion of, 693; description of palace complex of, 443-46, 453;—of wives and 
consorts of, 29-30, 446-450; descriptions of, 27-30, 299-300, 448-49, 509, 604; 673; destroys 
Nandana and other gardens, 748-49; Dhanyamalint diverts, from Sita, 470; dismissal of, in battle 
by Rama, 15, 30, 609; dispatches raksasa leaders Dhumraksa and Akampana, 594, 596;—Prahasta, 
745;—raksasas, 327—28;—spies, 555-56, 562; distressed at revival of Rama and Laksmana, 594; 
diverted by Dhanyamalint, 470; does not die from multiple beheadings, 697; drinking hall of, 
described, 451; each of monkeys vows to kill, 407; effigy of, burned at Ramlila, 6; elements fear, 
68, 315, 318-19, 776; encounter of, with Valin, 16, 26, 27, 30, 370, 781-82; encounters 
Nandisvara, 751; enemy of Indra, 69; enlists aid of Marica, 13, 303—09;—-Madhu as ally, 766; 
enmity of, with Kubera, 29, 742-51; exchanges words and blows with Hanuman, 605-6; excoriates 
Vibhisana, 31, 548 exhausted in battle, 609, 693-94, 773; faints at news of Kumbhakarna’s death, 
628; falls at S1ta’s feet, 521;—into stupor, 672; fate impels, 52, 318, 329, 548-49, 629, 679, 693; 
feats of, described, 299; feeds slain messenger to raksasas, 748; fells monkey champions, 605; 
fights and fells Nila, 606—7;—-sons and grandsons of Varuna, 761—62;—-Sugriva, 605; fights and 
kills Anaranya, 755—56;—Anaranya, 756; fights and vanquishes Marutta, 754; Nivatakavacas;— 
760; serpents, 760; fights Arjuna Kartavirya, 775-79; —Indra, 771—73;—Jatayus, 322-23; — 
Jatayus, recalled, 417—18;—Kubera, 573; —Laksmana, 607—8;—-Vaivasvata, 757-60; —Yama, 
Kala, and Mrtyu, 757-60; final battle of, with Rama, 695-98; foresees his own destruction, 579; 
forges nonaggression pact with Arjuna, 780; fraternal conflict of, with Vibhisana, 26, 29, 548, 741; 
from flying chariot, views earth, 302—3; funerary rites of, 28, 30, 34,702; genealogy of, 74, 731-41; 
gifts Kumbhakarna jewels and garlands, 620; gives Sirpanakha in marriage to Vidyujjihva, 746;— 
ultimatum to Sita, 468, 521; gods complain to Brahma about, 68;—-eager for destruction of, 254;— 
etc., incarnate as monkeys to aid in defeat of, 24, 70-71; goes forth to war with 

Mahodara, Mahaparsva and Viriipaksa, 679; goes to Bhogavati, 760;—Kailasa, 299, 545, 749-51; 
Manimatt, 760;—Rasatala, 760-61; goes with Marica to Rama’s ashram, 52, 309; grief of, 594, 
603, 610, 628-29, 640, 651, 672—74, 683; in guise of brahman mendicant praises Sita in sexual 
terms, 13, 315—16; Hanuman brought before, 14, 508—9;—-dazzled by splendor of, 509;—fears Sita 
might mistake him for, 479;—fights and stuns, 608;—observes closely, 464;—teports his 
confrontation with, to monkeys, 523; —reviles, 14, 510—12;—-searches inner apartments of, 56, 
452-53, 520, 531-32, 546, 452;—-searches palace of, 442—45; sees, 449, 451;—-vows to bind and 
bring, 430;—-warns, of destruction, 511;—urges, to return Sita to Rama, 511—12; Hanuman’s 
destruction of asoka grove enrages, 499; harasses divine beings, 747; has raksasa women take Sita 
to see Rama’s body, 587; has Vidyujihva show illusory head of Rama to Sita, 565—66; hears of 
Akampana’s (1) death, 599;—hears of death of Khara, Disana, and Trisiras, 300; holds forth on 
types of men, 544-45; holds Sita captive, 13, 330-705; hurls lance at Rama, 691;—javelin at 
Vibhisana, 686; in guise of brahman ascetic, 314-17; in guise of mendicant, assumes true form, 
319—20;—of mendicant, praises Sita in sexual terms, 13, 315—16;—teveals identity to Sita, 317; 
Indra requests Visnu to kill 10, 768; inhabits Lanka as lord of, 745, 746, 747, 748, 757; inner 
apartments of, 23, 33, 327-28, 450, 452, 466, 470-71, 472 747, 572, 699, 765, 782; intones 


mantras, 776; invincibility of, through boon, 10, 24, 68-69, 74, 636-37, 649, 742-43, 745, 768, 
772, 779; invokes the serpent weapon-spell of the raksasas, 690; invokes weapon-spell of the 
asuras, 684;—-weapon-spell of Maya, 685; invulnerability of, to supernatural beings, 10, 743; Jain 
representations of, 36; Jatayus admonishes, 32 1—22;—-challenges, to battle, 32 1;—-destroys flying 
chariot of, 322—23;—reviles, 32 1—23;—fights, 322—23; javelin, Maya gives to, 691; —of Indra 
shatters lance of, 691;—-of, forged by Maya, 686; of, Rama removes and breaks, 687;—of, strikes 
down Laksmana, 686-87; justification for his evil nature, 28; Kaikasi counsels, with ministers, 
570;—ncites sibling envy of, 29, 742; kills four hundred Kalakeya daityas, 761;—husband of 
Sirpanakha, 29, 763; —messenger of Kubera, 748;—monkeys, 679-80;—troops of Yama, 758-59; 
—Vidyujjihva, 29, 33, 763; Kubera half-brother of, 29, 742, 744; Kumbhakarna lectures, on 
statecraft (nitisastra), 31, 615-16; laments for Indrajit, 672—73; —for Kumbhakarna, 629; 

liberates condemned souls, 758; lineage and adventures of, 74, 728-82; makes Disana chief of 
Khara’s army, 763; makes his first sortie, 603; Malyavan advises, to make peace, 571—72; marches 
to Madhu’s city, 765; Marica foretells death of, 306;—rebukes, 308—9;—tells, of his past 
encounters with Rama, 305—7;—rges, to consult with Vibhisana, 305;—-warns, 52, 304—6; marries 
Mandodari, 746;—Sirpanakha to Vidyujjihva, 746; master of weapon-spells, 738; Maya forges 
javelin for, 686;—gives, Mandodari in marriage, 545; meaning of epithet of, 30; meets Meghanada 
in the Nikumbhila grove, 764;—-Narada, 756; ministers flatter, 545-46; ministers of, 744, 749, 751, 
752, 758, 761, 765, 769, 776, 778, 781—-82;—battle guardians of the underworld, 758;—boast of 
their abilities, 546—47;—kill sons and grandsons of Varuna, 761;— reassure, of safety, 545-46;— 
report death of Indrajit to, 672; —slaughter Arjuna’s ministers, 778 (see also Dhimraksa; 
Mahodara; Marica; Prahasta; Sdrana, Suka); mocks Mahodara, 619;—Nandigvara, 751; molests 
Vedavatt, 21—22, 752-54; mortally wounds Jatayus, 13, 24, 323, 341; Mrtyu asks to kill, 759; 
Nalakibara curses, 16, 767-68; Nandisvara curses, 16, 24, 751—52; Narada praises valor of, 756; 
Nisakara foresees abduction of Sita by, 422; number of forces of, six million, 573; number of 
subjects of, more than three hundred twenty million, 328; objects to Meghanada’s sacrifices, 764; 
offering of, to Siva, 776; offers heads as oblations, 299, 742; —Sita sovereignty over Lanka, 328; 
omens appear at birth of, 29;—presage defeat of, 695; on the nature of kings, 307; only two mortal 
beings ever defeat, 26; oppresses gods and sages, 10, 69;—-kshatriyas, 752; —the three worlds, 74; 
orders capture of Indra, 772;—-construction of sleeping chamber for Kumbhakarna, 747; — 
Dhimraksa to lead a sortie, 594; —Hanuman paraded through Lanka, 513; —Hanuman’s 
execution, 511;—-Hanuman’s tail set on fire, 513;—-Indrajit into battle, 653;—Khara to rule the 
Dandaka forest, 763;—kimkaras to capture Hanuman, 499; —Kumbhakarna to march forth 
accompanied by an army, 620;—Mahodara, Mahaparsva and Virtipaksa, to send forth more troops, 
678;—Marica to take form of golden deer, 303-4, 308;—Prahasta to lead a sortie, 599;—-Prahasta 
to question Hanuman, 510;—raksasa women to pressure Sita, 470;—raksasa women to guard Sita, 
327, 330;—raksasas to awaken Kumbhakarna, 610;—rdaksasas to capture and kill Angada, 579;— 
Vidyujihva to create illusion of Rama’s severed head and his bow, 564; places Sita in asoka grove 
under guard of fearsome raksasa women, 330; plans to conquer three worlds, 757;—the world 
guardians, 757; popular representations of, 42; positions raksasa chiefs to defend Lanka, 572; 
power of, 299; power(s) of illusion of, 341, 545—46, 685, 693, 696, 751, 761; praises Valin, 782; 
prepares to go to Rasatala, 757; presses Rama hard in battle, 690; proclaims victory over Yama, 
760; Pulastya orders Arjuna to release, 779-80; Puspaka(vimana) of, described, 445—46 (see also 
Puspa/Puspaka(vimana): Ravana); questions Suka and Sarana, 557; radical opposite of Rama, 28; 
rage of, at death of Indrajit, 673; raksasa women report Hanuman to, 499; Rama destroys raksasa 
army of, 15, 676;—deploys weapons spells against, 684, 685, 689-90, 692-93, 698; —dismisses, 
from battle, 15, 30, 609;—kills, 15, 698;—-orders funeral of, 30, 702;—orders Sugriva to search for 
and kill, 358, 380, 398—-99:—-praises, 702; —sends warning to, via Suka and Sarana, 556;—shatters 


lance of, with javelin, 691; —vows to kill, 687; Rama’s expression of fraternal feelings for, 30, 
702;—1treatment of, 30, 609, 702; rapes apsaras Rambha, 766-68; ravages heavenly gardens, 747; 
realizes his failures, 28, 616;—the fortunes of war have turned against him, 681;—that Laksmana 
is a portion of Visnu, 608; recalls his vulnerability to humans, 609; receives intelligence on the 
forces of his enemy, 557-61; redirects huge javelin at Laksmana, 686; refuses to return Sita, 563, 
570, 572; regrets his failure to heed advice of Vibhisana, 629;—his treatment of Vibhisana, 629; 
resolves to destroy Rama by abducting Sita, 13, 304;— to kill Sita, 673; reviles Rama, 303, 466, 
469;:—Suka and Sarana, 562;—Vibhisana as a traitor, 548; riddles Matali with arrows, 690; rushes 
upon Sita with sword drawn, 674; Sampati (vulture) reveals identification and location of, 418-19; 
scorches monkeys with Tamasa weapon-spell, 683; seeks alliance with Madhu, 545;—counsel 
from raksasas, 544-45; sends Akampana into battle, 596;—-Aksa and an army to capture 
Hanuman, 503—4; —his brothers Mahodara and Mahaparsva to guard sons, 630;—Indrajit 
against Hanuman, 506;—Jamuméalin to fight Hanuman, 499-500;—Khara and Disana to Dandaka 
forest, 763—64;—kimkaras against Hanuman, 499; Kumbha and Nikumbha into battle, 647;— 
Makaraksa to kill Rama, 651;—1dksasas to isolate and kill Rama, 675;—-seven sons of minister 
against Hanuman, 501;—-sons off to battle, 630;—Suka and Sarana to spy on Rama and monkey 
army, 555-57; —Sirpanakha to Dandaka forest, 33, 763-64; severed heads of, reappear, 697; 
sexual predator, 5, 21, 28; shows Sita his palace, 328;—illusion of Rama’s head and bow, 565-66; 
Sita admonishes, 467—68; —foretells destruction of, 474;—foretells doom of, 329—30;— offers 
hospitality to, 316;—rebukes, for abduction, 325—26; —tejects advances of, 317—19;—reviles, 
318-20, 326, 329-30, 467-69; Siva crushes arms of, under mountain, 30, 752;—-gives name, 
“Ravana,” to DaSagriva, 752;—pleased with, 30, 752; sons of, offer to take up the battle, 630;— 
engage in great battle with monkeys, 631;—-set out with a vast host, 630-31; speaks Sanskrit like a 
brahman, 479; spies report to, 564; steals Puspaka, 299, 545, 751; strikes Hanuman with arrows, 
609; strikes down Indra’s horses, 690;—-Laksmana with javelin, 686;—Laksmana with lance, 408; 
—Laksmana’s arrows, 683—64;—and defeats Kubera, 751; stuns Hanuman, 606; subjugates 
Kubera, 545; Sugriva sends out monkeys to search for, 398—408;—-vows to kill, 357, 392; Sampati 
(vulture) reports witnessing abduction by, 419-20; Suparsva (raksasa) dissuades, from killing 
Sita; Siirpanakha asks, to kill Ravana, 301;describes Rama, Laksmana, and Sita to, 300-301; — 
incites, to take revenge, 300-302; —reports death of Khara and Disana to, 299;—reports events in 
Dandaka forest, 299-30;—reproaches, 763; Siirpanakha’s report enrages, 300; surveys Rama’s 
army, 557; takes possession of Lanka, 744-46, 757; takes Sita to and shows Lanka, 327—28; tears 
up Saravana, 752; tells Hanuman to return Sita, 511—12;—-Sita Rama is dead, 565; ten heads of, 
741; terrorizes worlds, 5, 299, 742; “thorn (in the side) of the world (lokakantaka),” 18, 69; 
threatens to kill Sita, 14, 330, 468-69; threatens Marica, 32, 308; tries to kill Sita, 674—75; tries to 
woo Sita, 328-29, 465-67; Trijata foretells downfall of, 475—76; unable to lift Laksmana, 608; 
unable to pass over place of Siva’s dalliance, 751; Valin captures, 26, 30, 781; Vedavatt refuses to 
curse, 753; Vibhisana advises, to return Sita, 547-48;—-dissuades, from Hanuman’s execution, 
512—13;—performs funerary rites for, 30, 701—2; visits Marica, 303; —Sita in asoka grove, 463— 
70; Visnu incarnates to kill, 10, 69-70, 710; Visravas curses, 16, 29, 33, 741;—-to avenge the deaths 
of kinsmen, 678;—to conquer heaven, 765;—to destroy Rama by abducting Sita, 13, 303-4; to 
equal or surpass Kubera, 29, 742;—to kill Madhu, 765;—to kill Rama, 13, 327, 675;—-never to 
give up Sita, 557;—to subjugate Indra, 765; weapons of, infused with power of illusion, 696; 
weapon-spells of, 758; wives and courtesans of, described, 446-52; —sympathize with Sita, 468, 
470; woos Sita, 320; 328-29, 465-66; worships golden /iiga, 776; wounds Jatayus, 323 

Ravanavadha: also known as Bhattikavya, 41 

Ravani. See Indrajit 

Ravi. See Siirya 


Rcika: husband of Satyavati, 86; sells his son Sunahgepa, 113; and SunahSeha story, 113-14; Visnu 
gives bow to, 127 

rebirth. See reincarnation 

recensions: of Ramayana, 7—9, 40, 44, 45 

recitation (pardyana). See Valmiki Ramayana: recitation of 

reincarnation: Vedavati as, of Sita, 21, 753-54. See also birth(s) 

religious history: of Hinduism in Mahabharata, 40;—in Ramayana, 40 

Renuka (mother of Rama Jamadagnya): Rama Jamadagnya kills, 154 

righteousness (dharma), 5, 17, 20, 27, 40, 164, 167, 177, 850. passim; adherence to, by Rama, 11; 
consists in speaking truth, 659; discourses on by Kumbhakarna, 615—16; by Laksmana, 658-60; by 
Malyavan, 570-72; by Rama, 238-41; 272-73; 370-72, passim;—by Sita, 270-72; by Valin, 369— 
70; as highest form of compassion, 493; of kshatriyas, 154, 271-73; of Kusanabha’s daughters, 85; 
meanings and translations of, 46; as quality of Ravana. 567;—of Visnu, 709; not shown by Nimi 
toward Vasistha, 805; as the very essence of this world, 272; virtues of, 85, 369; of women, 157— 
58, 161, 162-63, 172, 197, 109, 260; in yuga theory, 37 

ring. See signet ring 

rites: abhijit, 68; agnihotra, 28, 87, 104, 105, 119, 174, 189, 211, 229, 262, 268, 306, 567, 571, 741, 
786, 853; agnistoma, 567, 764, 845, 853; for ancestors, 124, 249; aptoryama, 68; atiratra, 67, 68, 
645, 845; ayus, 68; bali, 105; benedictory, 678, 748; birth, 813; for funerals (see funerary rites); 
gosava, 845; homa, 105; jvotistoma, 68; lunar, 271; morning, 284; sraddha, 213, 215, 275-76; 
vajapeya, 178, 726, 845; visvajit, 68; water libations as, 76, 87, 283, 379, 419. See also asvamedha; 
sacrifice(s); vaisnava sacrifice 

ritual consecration: golden image of Sita as fit for, 838; of Marutta, 754; of Nimi, 802, 804, 805. See 
also royal consecration 

ritual offerings, 66, 84, 87, 105, 111, 263, 264, 435, 641; crows eat, 419, 492 

Rksa: cave of, 56 

rksa(s): Jambavan king of, 27; in later versions interpreted to be a bear, 27; rendered as ape, 47. See 
also apes 

Rksarajas: adoptive father of Sugriva, 350, 563, 624, 786; adoptive father of Valin, 786; king of the 
mountains, 786; monkey lord, 417, 786; prohibits entrance into Madhuvana, 528; son of Sirya, 346 

roadbuilding, 216-17, 721 

rod: of doom, 639; of Kala, 749, 759-60, 769;—Brahma creator of, 760; of Mrtyu, 322, 546; of 
punishment, 264, 452, 512, 578, 826—27;—king wields, 264; of Yama, 108, 650, 801, 803, 829 

Rohini (consort of the moon), 256, 285, 315, 320, 392, 459, 463, 464, 481, 490, 496, 674, 690, 701, 
703, 720; example of wifely obedience, 260 

Rohini (daughter of Surabhi): mother of cows, 280 

Rohitas (clan of gandharvas): guard forest of Rsabha, 402 

role: of Agastya in Uttarakanda, 16-17, 19, 26, 29; of Satrughna in epic, 23; of Sirpanakha in epic, 
33 

role model(s): characters in Ramayana as, 5, 20, 37; DaSaratha as, 13; Rama as, 5, 17; Sita as, 22, 42 

Romapada (king of Anga), 61, 63, 64, 66; ministers of, 61—2; purohita(s) of (see purohita(s): of 
Romapada not named) 

royal consecration: Ayodhya readied for Rama’s, 136-38; of Angada as crown prince, 380-81; of 
Angada and Candraketu, 847; of Kusa and Lava, 851-52; of Puru by Yayati, 807; priests prepare 
for Rama’s, 146-47; of Rama as king, 16, 725-26; of Rama ends some versions of Ramayana, 19; 
Rama wishes for Bharata, 851; of Ravana as lord of raksasas, 745—46; of Satrughna, 809-10; of 
Satrughna’s sons Satrughatin and Subahu, 852; of Sugriva, 360, 379-80; of Sveta, 825; of Sveta’s 


brother, 825; of Vasu, 801; of Vibhisana as king of Lanka, 15, 31, 552, 561, 702—3; Vasistha urges 
Bharata to undergo, 218. See also ritual consecration 

royal duty. See rajadharma 

Rsabha (monkey troop leader), 540-41, 584, 587, 605, 622, 722; appointed to guard army’s right 
flank, 540; brings water for Rama’s consecration, 725; fight and kills Mahaparsva (younge brother 
of Ravana), 635; Kaikeyi embraces, 722; Kumbhakarna crushes, 623; member of the southern 
search party, 400; one of “five tigers among monkeys,” who rushes Kumbhakarna, 623; posted at 
southern gate, 577 

Rsabha (mountain), 399, 643, 645; sandalwood grows on, 401-2 

rsi(s) (seer[s]): omniscient vision of, 4, 39 

Rsyamika (mountain), 356, 358, 354, 361, 365; ashram of Matanga on, 408; located east of Pampa, 
347; Hanuman goes from, to Malaya, 356; Rama and Laksmana set out for, 56, 352; Rama meets 
Sugriva on, 510, 523; Sugriva dwells on, 346, 347, 349-50, 352, 358, 485;—recalled 677; Valin 
cursed not to enter, 363-64, 408 

Rsyasrnga: performs asvamedha, 10, 66-68; performs son-producing sacrifice, 10, 68-69; seduction 
of, 61-63; sets out with Santa, 71; travels to Ayodhya, 63-64 

Rtadhaman: Rama as, 709 

Rudra: Rama as, 709. See also Siva 

Rudras, 280, 315, 403, 455, 481, 709, 768, 770, 771, 842 

rum, 451, 646 

Ruma (wife of Sugriva), 374, 392, 408, 416, 454; daughter-in-law of Valin, 371; recovered, 381; 
Sugriva embraces, 391 


Sabala (wish-fulfilling cow): as gift of Nrga, 800-801; provides offerings to ancestors, 105; of 
Vasistha, 105-6 

Sabari (ascetic woman): asceticism of, 347-48; ashram of, 348; immolation and ascent of, to heaven, 
349; Kabandha directs Rama to ashram of, 53, 346-47; meeting of Rama with, 53, 56, 348-40; 
social status of, 41; welcomes Rama and Laksmana, 348 

Saci (Paulomi): Anuhlada abducts (comparison), 396; daughter of Puloman, wife of Indra, 396-97, 
490; Indra abducts, 308, 319; Jayanta son of, 770; lord of (see Indra); stolen from Indra, 319 

sacrifice(s) (vajfias), 10, 32, 29; of Ambarisa, 113-14; of Bali, 424; of Daksa, 292, 338; to a home, 
191; of Ila, 837; of Indra (see Indra: asvamedha of; see Indra: performs vaisnava sacrifice); of 
Indrajit (see Indrajit: sacrifice(s)) of Janaka, (see Janaka: sacrifice of); for Mahesvara, 395; of 
Marutta (see Marutta: asvamedha performed by; Marutta: sacrifices to Siva); of Mitrasaha (see 
Mitrasaha Saudasa: sacrifice of); of Nimi (see Nimi: Gautama performs sacrifice for); offerings 
from, not reused, 196; raksasas engage in, 440, 443; raksasas’ portion at, 176; of Rama, 17-19, 
845, (see also Rama: sacrifices of); ritual, 40; of Sagara (see Sagara: asvamedha sacrifice of); son- 
producing, of Brahmadatta, 86;—-of Dasaratha, 10, 68—70; of Trisanku (see Trisanku: Visvamitra 
performs sacrifice for); vedic, 10, 32; vedic, in Lanka, 443; of Visvamitra (see 
Visvamitra,:sacrifice[s)] of). See also agnistoma; asvamedha; bahusuvarnaka; mahesvara; 
rdjastya; rites; vaisnava sacrifice 

Sagara (king of the Iksvakus), 122, 252, 432, passim; asvamedha sacrifice of, 91—92; boon of, 90; 
sons of, 90-96—Kaikeyi recounts story of, to Dasaratha, 170; obey father’s command, 154; story 
of, 90-94; unable to bring Ganges to earth, 96 

Sagara (Samudra) (god of the ocean): appears before Rama, 554; proposes that Nala should construct 
a bridge, 554; Rama assaults, 553—54;—-causes to manifest, 553—54;— petitions, 553; —solicits 
help of, 553; seeks to aid Hanuman, 432-33; urges Mainaka to rise from ocean, 433; Vibhisana 
advises Rama to solicit help of, 553. See also ocean 


sages. See ascetic(s) 

Sahya (mountains), 541; monkey army marches through, 542; Rambha and troops live in, 558 

Saibya, 200; gives body to hawk, 145; promises body to brahman, 145 

Sailiisa (king of gandharvas), 402; sons of, protect country of gandharvas, 845; Vajrajvala daughter 
of, 747 

Sakas: northern quarter location of country of, 404; produced from wish-fulfilling cow, 107 

Sakra. See Indra 

sla tree(s): branch of, used as seat, 358; splitting of seven, by Rama, 53, 363-64; —recalled, 366, 
393; as weapon, 368 

Salakatankata: daughter of Sandhya, 732; wife of Vidyutkesa, 732 

Salmali (river), 204 

salmali or salmali (tree), 326, 352, 546, 667. See also kiitasalmaii tree 

Samaga (brahman who chants Samaveda), 383 

Sambara (asura), 460, 629, 649, 759, 768; also called Timidhvaja, 141; Indra fights, 141. See also 
Timidhvaja 

Sambasadana (asura), Kesarin kills, 487 

Sambhu. See Siva 

Sambhu (king of daityas), 753, 759 

Sambiika (siidra ascetic), 16; austerities of, 18-19, 822; birth of, as siidra, 822; execution/killing of, 
by Rama, 18-20, 41, 822—23; Narada (minister) informs Rama about, 18, 821—22 

Samharas (weapon-spells), 75 

Samkasya: capital city of Kusadvaja, 121 

Samkocana (mountain), 557-58 

Sampati (minister of Vibhisana), 573, 734 

Sampati (vulture): Angada distressed upon seeing, 416—17;—narrates story of Rama to, 417-18; 
arrives to place where southern search party is fasting, 416; boon to, from Nisakara, 412; discovers 
death of brother Jatayus, 417; elder brother of Jatayus, 14, 24, 416-17; falls to Vindhya mountains, 
422; fights Prajangha, 581; grief of, 417; informs southern search party of Ravana’s and Sita’s 
location, 14, 24, 418—20; Jatayus and, make wager on Kailasa, 421; monkeys do not trust, 417; 
prophecy of new wings for, by Nisakara, 422; provides assistance to Rama, 24, 418; restoration of 
wings of, 423; saves southern search party from fasting to death by revealing Sita’s location, 14, 
418-20; scolds Suparsva, 423; southern search party desires, as food, 416; story of, and Jatayus, 
418, 421-22; story of meeting with Nisakara narrated to Angada by, 420—22; Suparsva son of, 419, 
420; Susena wants to send to ocean of milk, 591—92; tells Angada of fight between Jatayus and 
Ravana, 417-18; tells Angada his own history, 420—23; water-libations of, for Jatayus, 419-20; 
wings of, burned by sun, 418 

Samrat (Universal Emperor): as title, 35 

Samudra. See Sagara 

Samvarta (brahman sage/seer): said to officiate at Marutta’s sacrifice, 817; urges Marutta not to fight, 
754 

samvarta (weapon-spell): Bharata kills gandharvas with, 846; of Kala, 80 

Samyodhakantaka (vaksa): Ravana attacks and defeats, 749 

Sanatkumara: tells Dasaratha story of RSyasmga, 61, 63 

sandalwood: gosirsa, 390; harisyama, 390; padma, 390 

Sandhya (goddess of twilight): Salakatankata daughter of, 732 

sandhya rites, 458, 828; evening, 200, 212, 223, 270, 276, 544; morning, 137; propriety of women 
performing, 458; of Rama, 182—83, 187, 270, 276, 544, 829; of Suyajfia, 165; of Valin, 781-82 

Safikara. See Siva 


Sanskrit: anustubh common meter of, 8; brahmanical usage of, 479; difficulties in translation of, 44— 
47; Hanuman speaks to Sita in, 479; Ilava disguised as brahman speaks, 275; language of humans, 
479; Mahabharata composed in, 8; scribal transmission of manuscripts composed in, 7; Valmiki 
Ramayana composed in, 3 

Santa: marriage of, to Réyasriiga, 61, 63; travels to Ayodhya, 64 

Santana(s) (heavenly world[s]): next to Brahmaloka, 854 

Saptajanas (group of seven sages): ashram of, 364-66. See also seven seers 

Sarabha (minister of Vibhisana), 573 

Sarabhafiga (sage), 270; ashram of, 298, 716, 720; attains Brahmaloka, 268; austerities of, 267; 
becomes a youth again, 268; boon of, 268; directs Rama to Sutiksna, 268; explains Indra’s visit to 
Rama, 268; Rama meets, 52, 267-69; Virddha directs Rama to, 267 

Sarabja (monkey troop leader): declares prowess in jumping, 424; one of the five tigers among 
monkeys, 623; one of the five sons of Vaivasvata, 564 

Sarama (raksasa woman): aids Sita, 33, 568—70; birth of, 747; etymology of name of, 747; foretells 
Rama’s victory, 569; spies for Sita, 569-70; wife of Vibhisana, 747 

Sarana (minister of Ravana), 443, 749, 769, 776, 778; monkeys capture, 556; Rama releases, 556; 
Ravana rebukes and humiliates, 562, Ravana sends, to spy on monkey army, 555—56; reports to 
Ravana on monkey troops, 556-57; spies for Ravana, 777; takes on the form of monkey, 556 

sdrasa crane(s) (kraunca[s]), 87, 182, 233, passim; Nisada kills male of mating pair of, 9, 54 

Sarasvati (goddess of speech), 31, 398, 709; Brahma summons, to enter speech of Kumbhakarna, 31, 
74344; Vedavati as incarnation of, 753 

Sarasvati (river), 398 

Sarayt (river), 38, 58, 64, 66, 76, 91, 182, 198, 199, 213, 234, 283, 383, 398, 851; Asamafija drowns 
children in, 81, 170; etymology of, 77; Laksmana closes off senses on banks of, 851; Rama 
and followers enter its waters, 854-55; Rama enters blazing power of Visnu at, 854 

Sardiila (raksasa spy): advises Ravana, 563; declares impossibility of spying on Rama’s forces, 563; 
describes capture of spies and Rama’s forces, 563—64;—-Rama and Laksmana, 564; names monkey 
leaders and their divine parents, 564; spared by Rama, 563 

sarga (chapter), 6, 10, 45, passim 

Sarmistha: as daitya, 805; daughter of Vrsaparvan, 805; mother of Puru, 805; favored wife of Yayati, 
805 

Satrumjaya (elephant), 165—66, 724; Dasaratha’s aged elephant, 236 

Sarvabhauma (elephant): mount of Kubera, 405, 540, 635 

Satabali (monkey troop leader), 560, 587, 788; arrives in Kiskindha, 397; fails to find Sita, 409; 
leader of northern search party, 404, 407; number of troops of, 541, 580 

Satahrada: mother of Viradha, 266 

Satananda, 112, 841; purohita of Janaka, 102-3, 120-21 

Satananda: son of Gautama, 103; tells story of Visvamitra and Vasistha, 103-17 

Satrughatin (son of Satrughna son): consecration of, 852; established in Vaidisa, 852 

Satrughna, 10, 58, 149, passim; accompanies Bharata to Rajagrha, 130, 204; aids Rama and 
Laksmana, 724; attacks Manthara, 23, 215; and Bharata inseparable, 123; birth of, 71; boon of, 
817; character synopsis of, 23; childhood of, 72; as co-avatara, 22; consecrates sons, Subahu and 
Satrughatin, 853; desires to follow Rama to heaven, 852; devoted to Bharata, 72; etymology of 
name of, 815; fights and kills Lavana, 17-18, 815-17; founds Madhura (Mathura), 18, 23, 818; 
founds Siirasena, 817; gains city of Madhupuri as residence, 817; greets Rama, Laksmana, and 
Sita, 722-23; grief of, 214, 222—23, hears of births of Lava and KusSa, 813; hears recitation 
of Ramayana, 18, 58, 818-19; laments Rama and mourns Dasaratha, 213-14; makes preparations 
for consecration of Rama, 721—25; marries Srutakirti 123, 125; messengers report events in 


Ayodhya to, 852; prepares highway for Rama’s return, 721; purohita of, Kaficana, 852; — 
unnamed, 818; questions Cyavana about Lavana, 814; Rama asks Bhadra about, 79 1;— 
consecrates, in Madhura, 809—10;—dismisses, 18, 819-20; —dispatches to kill Lavana, 17-18, 
809-10;—gives, arrow of Visnu, 810; —informs, of intention to abandon Sita, 792—94;—-sends 
back to Madhura, 18, 819-20; requests Rama to deal with Lavana, 809; resides in Madhupuri 
(Surasena), 817—18; returns to Ayodhya, 18, 818-19, 852;—to Ayodhya with Bharata, 206; role of, 
in epic of, 23; sets forth to kill Lavana, 811; spends night in Valmitki’s ashram, 18, 812, 818; 
Srutakirti wife of, 125; Sumitra mother of, 71; twin brother of Laksmana, 18, 71; youngest brother 
of Rama, 18, 23; Yudhajit takes, to his home, 130 

Satyavatt: sister of Visvamitra, 86; transformed into Kausiki River, 86; wife of Rcika, 86. See also 
Kausiki 

Saudasa. See Mitrasaha Saudasa 

Saumanasa (mountain peak): made of gold, 400 

Saumanasa (one of the elephants who support the earth), 93 

Saumanasa (spell): Visvamitra intones and gives Rama, 81 

Saumitri. See Laksmana 

Savitra: eighth among Vasus, 769; fights and kills Sumalin, 769 

Savitri: as example of wifely obedience, 163, 260 

Savitrl mantra, 853 

sayings, popular. See proverbs 

seer(s): 29, 32, 52, passim; of Citraktta inform Rama of the presence of raksasas, 258-59; 
collectively known as rsis or kavis, 39; omniscient vision of, 4, 39; tell Bharata to agree to Rama’s 
request, 254. See also ascetic(s); Saptajanas; seven seers 

self-immolation: as a means of suicide, 454. See also ordeal by fire; Sita: fire ordeal 

semen: eaten and released by Agni, 88; porridge as, 70; retention of, by Culin, 85; of Siva, 88; 
Vasistha enters, of Mitra and Varuna, 803 

serpent(s), 29, 70, 74, passim; arrows of Indrajit become, 592 (see also serpent-weapons); as battle 
standard of Prahasta, 600; Bhogavati city of, 299, 401, 437, 439; chariot of Ravana encircled by, 
770; drank nectar, 738; Garuda (Tarksya) defeats, 756 (see also Garuda); Kadri mother of, 281; 
live in Rasatala, 760; Ravana abducts daughters of, 762-63; —conquers, 545, 760;—-wishes to 
conquer, 757; raksasas use as mounts, 736, 765, 771; Surasa mother of serpents, 280, 434, 519; 
throne of Dharani emerges from earth on heads of, 843. Vasuki, lord of, 299, 401, 760; See also 
Taksaka; Vasuki 

serpent-chariot: of Sumalin, 769 

serpents, five-headed. See five-headed serpents 

serpent-weapons: of Indrajit Ravani, 24, 32, 584, 592; of Ravana, 689-90 

seven seas, 348—49, 583, 697 

seven seers (sages), 67, 112, 158, 349, 365, 765, 728. See also ascetic(s); Saptajanas 

sexual predator: Ravana as, 5 

shadow(s): Angaraka captures, 401; asuras capture, 399; of Hanuman, 431, 432; Simhika captures, 
436, 520 

shape-shifting (taking form at will): of Aksa, 504; of Afyana, 425-26; of arrows, 583, 592, 690; of 
asuras, 275—76; of divine weapons, 80; of Dundubhi, 362, 408; of Ganges, 89, 95; of Garuda, 468; 
of gods, 10, 754; of Hanuman, 429, 435-36, 438-39, 498, 500, 561, 598, 718; of Himalaya, 362; of 
Indra, 91, 100-101, 272, 700; of Indrajit, 584 ; of Jatayus and Sampati, 421; of Kabandha, 344; of 
Kubera’s forest, 227—28; of Kumbhakarna, 620—21; of Mainaka, 433; of Marica, 13, 32, 304, 309— 
19, 306, 313-16, 325, 330-31, 333; of monkeys, 38, 70—71, 397, 538, 556, 558, 560, 574-75, 579, 
580, 685, 722, 724; of raksasas, 273, 337, 373, 465, 483, 498-99, 581, 584, 651, 676, 704, 812-13; 


of Rama’s bow and arrows, 690, 853; of Ravana, 13, 319, 459, 473, 479, 483, 578, 696, 700; of 
Sampati, 421; of serpents, 468, 584, 592; of Simhika, 436; of Sugriva, 346; of Suka and Sarana, 
556; of sun, 490, 477; of Surasa, 434-35, 520; of Tataka, 78; of Tumburu, 266-67; of Vatapi, 275, 
865; of vedas, 853; of ministers of Vibhisana as birds, 573; of Visnu, 10, 40, 69, 82, 91-94, 801, 
832, 849, 866; of Yama, 373, 379, 571, 848; of Yama’s rod and war hammer, 759-60 

shawl of Sita: dropped, 357; found by monkeys, 357; Sugriva shows Rama, 357 

sibling rivalry: among monkeys, 24; between Ravana and Kubera, 29, 741; between the sons of Diti 
and Aditi, 742, 744. See also fraternal conflict; Sugriva: enmity of, with Valin 

Siddhartha (minister of DaSaratha), 60, 170, 204 

Siddhartha Gautama, 36 

signet ring: Hanuman gives, of Rama to Sita, 487, 522;—-gives, of Rama to Sita recalled, 522; Rama 
gives, to Hanuman, 14, 27, 56, 407, 522 

simha birds: live on slope of Himagiri mountain, 402 

Simhika: catches Hanuman’s shadow, 436; Hanuman encounters and kills, 436; Rahu son of, 784; 
shape-shifting of, 436 

simile, extended (malopama): of Ahalya, 102; of arms of Ravana arms, 449; of arrows of Rama, 628, 
698;— of arrows of Ravana, 605;—of arrows of Visnu, 737; of asoka grove of Ravana, 456-58; of 
Ayodhya, 256; of Bharata’s chariot, 256-57; of Dasaratha’s corpse, 202; of the earth, 421; of 
Hanuman, 431, 504; of Kumbhakarna, 611, 620-21; of Lanka, 646; of moon, 439, 441; of ocean, 
543; of palace of Ravana, 444-45; of raksasas, 738; of Rambha, 766; of Ravana, 318, 448-49, 
451, 509, 469, 609; 605; of Sita, 442, 459, 462-65; of Sita’s face, 244, 324; of a stream, 457; of 
trees, 430-431; of women of Ravana’s inner apartments, 447-48, 449-50 

simulacrum, Indrajit Ravani creates, of Stta, 655-56; of Rama’s head and bow produced by 
Vidyujjihva, 564-68; —vanishes at Ravana’s departure, 567 

Sigira (weapon-spell): of Soma, 80 

Sigira (mountain), 399 

Sita, 10, 12, 13, passim; abandonment of, by Rama, 6, 17-19, 794-978; abduction of, by Ravana, 
12-15, 24, 30, 32, 52, 56, 320—27;—by Ravana Brahma witnesses, 324;—by Ravana 
foreshadowed, 30;— by Ravana creatures seem to mourn, 325;—by Ravana crow foretells, 351; — 
by Ravana Jatayus attempts to stop, 13, 32 1—23;—by Ravana as pivotal event of poem, 12;—by 
Ravana recalled, 355-57; 413, 434, 482, 519-20, 787; —by Ravana rumors arise about, 793; —by 
Ravana Suparsva witnesses, 420; —by Viradha, 12, 32, 265-67;—by Viradha recalled, 460, 677;— 
Ravana plots, 303-4; accuses Laksmana of treachery, 13, 313-14; Agastya praises, 278-79; age of, 
at exile, 317; Agni brings, out of the fire unsinged, 710;—instructs Rama to take back, 710;— 
testifies to fidelity of, 710; Anala relates information to, 489; Anasiuya gives gifts to, 261; 
asceticism of, 464, 469, 513; ashamed of being seen in public, 706; asks Laksmana to rescue Rama, 
313; Rama to capture golden deer, 13, 310—11;—-Sarama to spy on Ravana, 569; asserts fidelity to 
Rama, 708; auspicious omens of, 478, 481; begs Hanuman to stay in Lanka, 495;—Rama for 
golden deer, 310-11; birth of, from a furrow, 21, 118, 261, 461, 753-54, 843; Bhadra tells Rama 
rumors about, 791—92; blames self for misfortunes, 475, 493;—for suffering, 704; bodily signs of, 
587-88; born for the destruction of rdksasas, 678; braid of, 459, 465, 473, 478, 518, 524, 532, 569; 
bride price of, 118, 120, 123; captivity of, 327-30; 459-99, 516, 566-67, 587—89;—ecalled, 53 1— 
32. . character synopsis of, 12, 21-22; compassion of, 34, 272, 704; contemplates suicide, 473-74, 
477-78; conversation of, with Hanuman, 480-97; cries out for help, 320-21; crow foretells 
abduction of, 351; daughter of earth goddess, 11, 118, 843; declines Hanuman’s offer to carry back 
to Rama, 490-92; defies raksasa women, 471—74; denies knowing Hanuman, 498-99; describes 
own auspicious marks, 588-89; description of, 260, 272, 459-65, 588-89; desires to visit asectics’ 
ashrams, 791, 793-94; devotion of, to Rama, 442, 460, 462-63, 464, 465, 467, 477, 491, 524; 


disapproves of going to Dandaka forest, 272;—of killing raksasas, 272, 704; Dharani/Madhavi 
descends to Rasatala with, 19, 843; discovery of, saves Rama from unrighteousness, 537; dropped 
ornaments of, monkeys find, 485; drops ornaments, 357;—Jatayus sees, 418;—-shawl, 326-27, 
357; dwells in Paficavatt with Rama and Laksmana, 12, 281—83; eats meat, 791; elements grieve 
for, 325; enters Dandaka forest with Rama, 12, 52, 56, 264;—-Rasatala, 19, 843;— the fire, 708; 
etymology of name of, 118; exhorts Hanuman, 494—95;—Laksmana to find Rama, 313-14; fasting 
of, 422, 459, 465, 483, 518, 521, 544; fears Hanuman, 481—83;—-Rama and army will be unable to 
cross the ocean, 495;—-Rama will make love to other women, 478;—-Rama and Laksmana have 
been killed, 477; fears of, 474-75, 477—78; fire does not burn, 516, 710; fire ordeal (agnipariksa) 
of, 15, 17, 708, 710-11, 793; foretells destruction of Lanka, 474;—destruction of Ravana, 330, 
474; foster daughter of Janaka, 11, 21, 118, 708; as foundling, 11, 21, 118, 843; gives birth to Lava 
and Kusa, 17, 813; gives Hanuman hair ornament, 56, 494;—-message for Rama, 496—97;—pearl 
necklace, 726; golden image of, 18, 838; grief of, 16, 324, 326, 382, 329, 420, 458-52, 462-65, 
471-75, 477-79, 481-83, 486-87, 489-92, 495-97, 511, 513, 523-24, 544, 566, 587-89, 619, 705, 
797; grief of Rama at separation from, 334-336, 339, 349, 351-52, 355, 357-58, 381, 385-87, 393, 
485-86, 488-89, 530, 537-38, 543-44;—of Rama over abandonment of, 794, 799-800;—of Rama 
over false report of death of, 658, 661;—-of Rama over return of, to mother, 843-44; hair ornament 
of, 56, 494, 497, 532, 534; Hanuman consoles, 14, 459-97, 516, 482-83, 495;—describes Rama to, 
484-85;—devotee of, 27;—discovers, 14, 53, 56, 459-60, 462;—-encounters, 480-97, 516—-17;— 
exhorts, 494-95; —fears he has burned, 515;—fears, is dead, 452, 453-54;—fears, might take her 
own life, 479;—gives signet ring of Rama to, 14, 27, 487;—-gives signet ring of Rama to recalled, 
522;—1mistakes Mandodari for, 450;—offers to carry, back, 14, 491;—ponders danger of revealing 
himself to, 479—-80;— reassures, 487—90, 495—96;—-searches for, in Lanka, 14, 439-59;—-searches 
for, in Lanka, recalled, 53 1—32, 782;—-speaks to, in Sanskrit, 479;— takes no other wife than, 845; 
—tells Rama, is found, 53 1-32; —tells Rama’s story to, 480;—tells Ravana to return, 511—12;— 
tells Ravana Sita got lost in forest, 510;—terrorizes raksasa wardresses of, 498—99; inauspicious 
omens presage abduction, 314, 324, 330-31, 333;—-presage abandonment, 794; as ideal wife 
(pativrata), 5, 22, 478; implores Rama to take her to the Dandaka forest, 161-63; Indra gives food 
to, 422; in inner apartments of Ravana, 327, 328, 619, 452, 532, 553, 710; innocence of, 19, 513— 
14, 710-11, 842-43;—as object of scandal among people, 792—93;—Rama orders, publicly proven, 
710; instructs Laksmana to build her a pyre, 708; Janaka finds, while ploughing (see Sita: birth of, 
from a furrow this entry); Jatayus attempts to save, 13, 24, 52, 322—23; —tells Rama of abduction 
of, 340-41; —vows to watch over, 281; joy of, at learning of Rama’s victory, 703-4; as Kalaratri, 
511, 566; Laksmana builds a pyre for fire ordeal of Sita, 708;— builds hut for Rama and, in 
Paficavatt, 282;—-consoles Rama over, 335, 338-40, 381-82, 386, 800;—-guards, 312;— leaves, 
unprotected, 13, 314, 331;—refuses to gaze upon, 21;—-seeks recourse in cave with, 291;—-urges 
Rama to search for, 338—39; laments, 473-75, 477—78;:—_for Rama and Laksmana, 587—88;—over 
simulacra of Rama’s head and bow, 566-67; leaves Ayodhya with Rama and Laksmana, 11, 172— 
74; love of Rama for, 129; Marica as golden deer entices, 13, 310-11; marriage of, to Rama, 11, 
123—25;— recalled, 262; meets with Anastiya, 56, 259-63; monkeys find jewelry of, 357;—plan to 
rescue, 525—26; —report on condition of, 53 1—32;—-search for, 408—23;—witness abduction of, 
326-27; oath of purity of (see Sita: truth-act of this entry); pearl necklace of, 325; places straw 
between herself and Ravana, 459, 467; power of austerities of, 469; praises Hanuman, 487; 
pregnancy of, 17, 791, 796; prehistory of (see Vedavati); prepares to hang herself with her braid, 
478; prophecy of abduction of, by Nisakara, 422; protected by her own virtuous conduct, 516; 
questions Hanuman about Rama and Laksmana, 487-89; raksasa women aid, 28, 33, 475, 568-70, 
589;—-cajole and threaten, 14, 33, 330, 470-72, 477;—-guard, 327, 328;— take, to battlefield in 
Puspaka, 587;— tell, of Hanuman’s punishment, 513; Rama abandons (see Sita: abandonment of, 


by Rama this entry);—agrees to take, to forest, 164;—asks Jatayus to protect, 312; —asks 
Laksmana to protect Sita, 312; —exhorts Sugriva to search for, 358;—-gives, pearl necklace, 726; 
—grieves for Sita (see Sita: grief of Rama at separation from this entry);—has Laksmana abandon, 
794—97;— describes hardships of forest to, 161—62;—hears rumors about, 792; —informs Sita of 
exile, 159-60;—laments for, 13, 333-35, 385, 543-44;—-marries (see Sita: marriage of, to Rama 
this entry);—orders to Vibhisana to bring, 705;—promises to capture golden deer for, 13, 311-12; 
—tage of, at loss of; —336-38, 843-44; recognizes sons of, 10, 19, 841;—rebukes Laksmana for 
leaving, 33 1—33;—repudiates and rejects, as unfaithful, 15, 706—7;—reunion of, with, 705—11; 
saves Sita from crow, 492—93 ;—-saves Sita from crow recalled, 533—34;—-sends Laksmana and, 
into hiding, 291;—romantic interlude of, with, in asoka grove, 790-9 1;—-summons to assembly, 
841—43;— tells, of need to use violence, 273;— tests true feelings of, 164; vows to annihilate 
abductor of Sita, 511; Rama and Laksmana rescue, from Viradha, 267; Ramayana as Great Tale of, 
3, 57; Ravana abducts (see Sita: abduction of, by Ravana this entry);—approaches in guise of 
ascetic, 13, 314—-17;—-falls at feet of, 521;—-gives ultimatum to, 468, 521; —hears history of, 316— 
17;— offers, sovereignty over Lanka, 328;—-praises beauty of, 315—16;—refuses to give back, 563, 
570, 572;—1eveals identity to, 317; —reveals true form to, 319—20;—shows Lanka to, 328;— 
takes, to Lanka, 327; —terrifies, by violent approach, 674; —threatens, 330, 468—69;—-visits, in 
asoka grove, 463—70;—woos, 320; 328-29, 465-66; Ravana’s wives encourage, 468; rebukes 
raksasa women, 471—74;—Rama, 163, 707—-8;—Ravana, 467—68;—Ravana for abduction, 325—26; 
recounts crow episode, 492—93;—her history to Hanuman, 481—82; reduced to tears by Rama’s 
cruel words, 707; refuses Hanuman’s offer of rescue, 14, 490—92;—-Hanuman’s request to kill 
raksasa women, 704; —Ravana’s advances, 467;— to eat during captivity, 422;—to touch any male 
other than Rama, 491; regrets refusing Hanuman’s offer to rescue, 674; rejects Rama’s accusations, 
707—8;—Ravana’s advances, 317-18, 319; reviles and warns Ravana, 317-19, 325-26, 329-30, 
467-69; as role model, 22, 42; rumors about, 17, 792, 795, 800;—-Rama hears, 792;—Rama tells 
brothers of, 792; Sampati informs southern search party of location of, 14, 24, 418-20; Sarama 
aids, 33, 568-70; sees Rama and Laksmana wounded, 587; silk shawl of, 326, 357; southern search 
party, with Hanuman, will find, 409; sons of Lava and KusSa, 10, 19, 813; Sugriva dispatches 
monkeys to search for, 13, 402—7;—instructs Hanuman to find, 406; Sirpanakha attacks, 12, 285; 
—describes, to Ravana, 301; Suttksna directs, to visit ashrams of Agastya, 276-79; takes Rama’s 
signet ring from Hanuman, 14, 487;—-Rama’s signet ring from Hanuman, recalled, 522; tells 
Anasuya about birth and marriage, 262; Hanuman crow episode, 492—93; —Hanuman of Rama’s 
exile and her abduction, 48 1—82;—story of sword-wielding ascetic, 272; thinks Hanuman is an 
illusion, 48 1—82;—1s Ravana, 482; tours Citraktita with Rama, 232-34; Trijata reassures, 589;— 
tells dream to, 475—77; from Lanka to Ayodhya in Puspaka with Rama, 715-16; truth-act of, 19, 
513-14, 843;—Hanuman, unburnt through, 513—14; urges compassion for the wicked as well as 
the good, 704; —Rama to abjure violence, 272; Uttarakanda refers to ordeal by fire of, 793; 
Valmiki shelters and consoles, 17, 797-98; Vedavati reincarnates as, 21—22, 753-54; Vibhisana 
advises Ravana to return, 547-48;—-enters inner apartments of Ravana to find, 705;—brings, to 
Rama, 705—6;—-conveys Rama’s instruction to, 705;—declares the killing of, to be illusion, 660;— 
has Sita mount palanquin, 705;— orders passage of, cleared of moneys, apes and raksasas, 705-6; 
—orders, come in full view of the public, 706; visits Agastya, 276—79;—-A gastya’s brother, 275— 
76; —Sarabhaiiga, 268;—Sutiksna’s ashram, 269-71, 274-75; wants Rama and Laksmana to 
discard weapons, 272; warns Rama of perils of violence, 271—72; —Ravana of Rama’s vengeance, 
468; wears barkcloth garments, 170-71; welcomes Ravana in guise of an ascetic, 316; wishes 
Rama would renounce kingship for ascetic life, 272;—to accompany Rama into exile, 11, 161-64; 
—to see Rama, while unbathed, 705; wives of Dasaratha welcome, 128; wonders why Rama has 
not rescued her, 474-75; words of Rama wound, 707 


Siva (Bhava, Hara, Mahadeva, Mahesvara, Pasupati, Rudra, Sambhu, Sthanu), 11, 16, 29, 96, 126, 
732, 733, 736, 833-34, 837, passim; asceticism of, 89; asks gods who will bear his semen, 88; 
austerities of, 89; bow of, 117-19, 127;—-Rama breaks, 11,13, 119;—-unstrung by Visnu, 127; 
burs Kama, 76—77; checks fall of Ganges, 95; crushes Ravana’s arms under mountain, 752; denies 
god’s request to kill sons of Sukesa, 735; “Destroyer” as part of Trimurti, 35; fights Visnu, 127; 
friendship of, with Kubera, 748;—-with Ravana, 30, 752; gender transformation of, 833; gives bow 
to Devarata, 127;—-DaSagriva the name “Ravana,” 752; gods take refuge with, 735; grants boon of 
manhood to Ila, 837;—to Hanuman, 786;—lla any boon but manhood, 834;—boons to Indrajit, 
764;—knowledge of weapon-spells to Visvamitra, 107;—lance as boon to Madhu, 808, 811;— 
boons to Sukesa, 732—33; Kubera pleases, 748; lance of Lavana returns to, 817; lord of Uma, 736; 
marries Parvati, 88; partial to Sukesa, 735—36; pleased with asvamedha of Ila, 837; presents 
heavenly spirit of Dasaratha to Rama, 711; presses down Saravana with big toe, 752; promises the 
gods woman would bring about his destruction, 678; Rama breaks bow of, 11, 13, 119;—-compared 
to, 292, 298, 455, 647, passim; Ravana lifts up mountain, sitting on, 752; worships linga of, 776; 
releases Ganges into Lake Bindu, 95; semen of, generates Karttikeya, 88; story of marriage of, and 
Parvati, 87-88; story of, and Parvati and Ila/Ila, 833-34; tells gods to seek refuge with Visnu, 735— 
36; —Rama to perform asvamedha, 711; thanks Rama for ridding world of Ravana, 711; weapon- 
spells of, 626, 684, 764, 758 

size of Hanuman. See Hanuman: size of, changeable 

Skanda (Mahasena), 158, 740, 833; Agni as father of, 560; birth of, 88-90; etymology of name of, 
90; Sravana birthplace of, 751; wielder of the javelin, 740 

sky: fifth path in, that of vultures, 419; first path in, that of kulingas, 419; fourth path in, that of 
falcons, 419; highest path in, that of sons of Vinata, 419; second path in, that of crows, 419; sixth 
path in, that of hamsas, 419; third path in, that of Arauricas, kites, and ospreys, 419 

sleep: of Kumbhakarna, 31, 610, 744, 747 

Sloka, 55; etymology of word, 55; type of meter, 8, 55; type of verse, 8, 55, 391; word for poetry, 55 

social classes (varnas): in Ayran society, 40—41 

social status: of Guha, 41; of Sabari, 41 

Solar Dynasty (Stiryavam$a), 25, 36. See also genealogy: of Iksvakus 

Soma (moon god), 36, 158, 251, 276, 307, 709, 830, 839; ashram of, 404; Budha son of, 835—36; 
Dadhimukha son of, 564; Purtiravas grandson of, 836; Sisira weapon-spell of, 80 

Somada (gandharva woman): mother of Brahmadatta, 86—87 

Somagiri (mountain in northern ocean), 405 

SomavamsSa (Lunar Dynasty), 36 

son(s): of Aditi, 97-98, 280, 744 (see also Aditi; Gditya(s)); of brahman, death of, 18, 820;—restored 
to life, 18, 823; of Diti, 97-98, 280, 744, 760, 833 (see also daitya(s); Diti); lack of, of Dasaratha, 
10, 81; of Rama (see Kusa; Lava); of Sagara, 90-96; of Sita (see Kusa; Lava); of Vinata, that of, 
highest path in sky, 419 

Sond (river). See Magadhi 

southern quarter: Angada, leader of search party of, 27, 400, 407; description of, 400-402; southen 
search party searches, 409-411; Sugriva dispatches southern search party to, 400-402, 407 

southern search party: adventures of, 13—14; —Hanuman narrates to 413; Angada exhorts, 410;— 
leader of, 27. 400, 407; decide to fast to death, 14, 414, 417-18; —to return to cave, 414; dejection 
of, 410-11, 416; despondency of, 417, 423, 425; encounter of, with Svayamprabha, 411—14; enters 
cave, 411; exhaustion of, 410-11, 413; fails find Sita, 409; kills aswra, 409-10; monkeys of, 411; 
reaches southern shore of ocean, 423; Sampati desires, as food, 416;—informs, of location of 
Ravana and Sita, 14, 24, 418—20; search southern quarter, 409-11; seeks refuge with 


Svayamprabha, 413; Sugriva dispatches, to southern quarter, 400-402, 407; Svayamprabha 
rescues, from cave, 413 

spies of Ravana. See Sardiila; Sarana; Suka 

sraddha rites, 213, 250, 275, 276 

Sravati: Rama founds, for Lava, 852 

Sti (goddess of royal fortune or beauty), 4, 69, 216, 376-77, 591, 733, 734, 740, 741, 797; Danu son 
of, 355; Sita compared to, 129, 177, 190, 261, 315, 333, 460, 466, 544, 570, 572, 705 

Srivatsa mark: Rama as Visnu bears, 709 

Sriigaverapura: Guha lord of, 182, 256 

Srutakirti: marries Satrughna, 123-25 

Sruti, “what was heard,” 39 

statecraft (nitisastra): discourses on: 104, 203, 239-241,488, 510-12, 547-546, 571-72, 677; of 
Kumbhakarna to Ravana, 31, 615—16, 619;—of Rama to Valin, 370-72; of Valin to Rama, 369-70 

Sthanu. See Siva 

Sthulaksa (raksasa general): Rama fights and kills, 291—93 

Sthilasiras (ascetic): curses Kabandha, 344 

stratagems of kings, 353 

straw: Brahma’s power in, 493; Sita places, between herself and Ravana, 467 

structure of Valmiki Ramayana. See Valmiki Ramayana: structure of 

Subahu (monkey), 580 

Subahu (rdaksasa): obstructs Visvamitra’s sacrifice 82-83; Rama kills, 10, 33, 83; Ravana commands 
to obstruct sacrifices, 74; Visvamitra complains, obstructing sacrifice, 73 

Subahu (son of Satrughna): Satrughna consecrates, in Madhura, 852 

Subhra (gandharva lord), 402 

Sudamana (counselor): of Janaka, 121 

Sudamana (weapon-spell): of Tvastr, 80 

Sudarsana (elephant): born in Airavata’s lineage, 530; Mahodara mounts, 630 

Sudhanvan: Janaka kills, 123 

Siidra (region): monkeys search, 402 

stidra(s) (social class), 18, 19, 40, 41, 54, 60, 199, 402, 477, 822—24.; born from the feet of Manu, 
280; forbidden to practice austerities in treta yuga, 822; in list of four social classes, 65, 219, 240, 
280, 821, 842; role of, in the yugas, 821; Sambiika as (see Sambiika) 

Sugriva: addicted to sensual pleasures of, 384; adoptive son of Rksarajas, 350, 563, 624, 786; advice 
of Hanuman to, 384-85, 389-90; alarmed at Laksmana’s anger, 390; alliance of, with Rama, 13, 
25, 30, 53, 56, 356-58, 364, 486, 716; —sanctified by fire, 356—58 (see also Sugriva: friendship 
with Rama); created by gods on Rama’s behalf, 787; Angada announces Laksmana’s arrival to, 
389; —fears imprisonment by, 414, 415—16; Angada and, place Valin on bier, 378; apologizes to 
Laksmana, 393; assaults Kumbhakarna with a mountain, 624; assembles monkeys, 385; 
assures Vibhisana he will be raksasas’ king, 591; blocks Valin in cave, 360—61;— recalled, 408; 
challenges Kumbhakarna, 624;—Rama to split sala trees, 53, 363-64;—-Rama to split sd/a trees, 
recalled, 366;—-Valin to battle, 364—66; character analysis of, 25; claims army can leap over the 
ocean, 537; comforts Rama, 359, 530-31; commander of monkey army, 398, 540-41, passim; 
conciliates Laksmana, 393; consecrates Angada crown prince, 380-81; consecration of, in 
kingship, 360, 379-80; counselors set, in Valin’s place, 786; delays fulfillment of promise, 13; 
departs from Kiskindha with Laksmana 395; derelict in duty, 387-88; describes Valin, 362; 
description of abode of, 390-91; dethroned by his brother, Valin, 485; dispatches monkey army in 
all four directions, 13, 398-402, 404—7; dwells at Pampa and Mount Rsyamitka, 346-47, 349-50; 
enmity of, with Valin, 13, 26, 359-63, 408, 787; enters abode of Laksmana, 391; enumerates 


monkeys to Rama, 396; exhorts Rama to abandon grief, 537; fears Rama and Laksmana, 353, 359, 
716;—Valin, 346, 349, 353, 359; fights and kills Kumbha, 649-50; —Praghasa (raksasa), 581; 
fights Kumbha, 649-50;—Mahodara, 68 1|—82;—Ravana, 604—5;—-Valin 53, 56, 364, 368; — 
Virupaksa, 680-81; friendship of, with Rama, 354, 356, 358, 364, 371, 549-50, 590, 725 (see also 
Sugriva: alliance of, with Rama); friendship of, with Hanuman, 787; gajapuspi garland of, as 
identifying sign, 25, 364, 366; —Laksmana gives, 364-65; golden necklace of, 561; grief of, 359— 
61, 379, 408; Hanuman counselor of, 27; —emissary of, 510;—to assist, against Valin, 783, 787;— 
introduces Rama and Laksmana to, 356; harsh nature of, 414; holds fly whisk for Rama’s 
consecration, 724—25; hostility of Valin with, 787; infers success of southern search party, 529; 
inflicts punishment, 410, 414, 416, 425, 452, 528; instructs monkeys to search the directions, 13, 
398-406; —Satabali to search foothills of Kailasa, 405; Kabandha tells Rama about, 345-46; 
Kaikeyt embraces, 722; kills Kumbha, 650;—Mahodara, 682;—-Virtipaksa, 680-81; Kumbhakarna 
carries off, 624; Laksmana directed by Rama to find, 350; reviles, 39 1—92;— threatens, 392; 
Laksmana’s anger toward, 387-89, 390, 392; lives on RSyamtika, 342, 346, 347, 349, 350, 352, 
358, 485; lord of apes, 384, 486; lord of monkeys, 379, 393, 398, 485, passim; makes pact with 
Rama to kill Valin, 486; meeting of, with Laksmana, 391;—-with Rama, 13, 356;—-with Rama on 
Mount Prasravana [Malyavan], 395-96; misfortune of, 357, 359; mistreatment of, by Valin, 354; 
mounts elephant in procession for Rama’s consecration, 724; enmity of, with Valin, 13, 26, 355— 
63, 408; offers funerary libations for Valin of, 360; orders Hanuman to meet Rama and Laksmana, 
353—54;—Hanuman to summon monkeys, 394;—monkeys to assemble, 393;—-monkeys to storm 
Lanka with torches, 645;—-Nila to assemble monkey army, 385; pardons monkeys for devastation 
of Madhuvana, 529; portrayed as cruel, impetuous, cowardly, and as a libertine, 25; praises 
Hanuman, 529; —Kumbha, offers him respite, 649; promises Rama to search for and recover Sita, 
13, 357; qualities of, 25; Rama exhorts, to aid in search for Sita, 358; Rama exhorts to search for 
Sita, 358; gives, gold diadem, 726;—-gives, tribute given to him by kings, 788;—invites to 
asvamedha, 838;—places his palace at disposal of, 735;—praises, 789;—-sends back to Kiskindha, 
788-89; —sends Laksmana to exhort, 387; —unable to find and recover Sita without, help of, 25; 
Rama’s anger at, 386-87; reassures Rama of success in mission, 537—38;— that Sita has been 
found, 531; receives Vibhisana, 575; reconciles with Laksmana, 393; recovers wife Ruma, 381; 
requests help from Rama, 355, 396; sees destruction of Madhuvana, 528—29; sends Hanuman to 
meet Rama and Laksmana, 353—54;—monkeys to search for Sita, 13;—-monkeys to the four oceans 
for Rama’s consecration, 725; slaughters principal raksasas, 680; smashed to ground, escapes, 626; 
son of Rksarajas, 346, 350; son of Strya, 71, 346, 355; succeeds Rksarajas as king, 786; 
summoned to asvamedha, 838; Surya natural father of, 27, 71, 355; Tara coveted by, 384; Tara 
defends, 392—93;—and, offer funeral libations for, 379; Valin abducts wife of, 361;—exiles, 11, 25, 
345-46, 361;—-advises Angada to be submissive to, 376;— elder brother of, and rightful heir, 26, 
353, 360;—-gives, golden garland, 376;—-gives, sovereignty of monkeys, 376;—more powerful 
than 26;—routs, 364;— takes wife of, 359; Valin’s anger at, 360-61; waits on brahmans assembled 
for asvamedha, 838; wife of, 371, 374, 381, 391, 392, 408, 416, 454; wounds Kumbhakarna with 
fangs and claws, 625 

suicide: by fasting, 454; by hanging, 454; by poison, 454; by self-immolation, 454; by weapons, 454; 
Hanuman contemplates, 455; Rama threatens, 150; Sita contemplates, 473-74, 477—78;— threatens, 
163-64, 314;— threatens hanging as a means of, 314, 478 

Suka (minister of Ravana), 443, 749, 776-78; claims Ravana is victorious, 754; monkeys capture, 
556; Rama releases, 556; Ravana deploys to spy, 555—56;—rebukes and humiliates, 562; reports to 
Ravana, 556-57; spies for Ravana, 777; takes on the form of monkey, 556 

Sukesa: birth of, 732; Devavati wife of, 733; Malin, Malyavan, Sumalin sons of, 733; Siva grants 
boons to, 733; sons of, attack the world of the gods, 736—37;—-dwell in Lanka with their followers, 


734;—-gods ask Visnu to kill, 735;—harry gods and asuras, 733—35;—much more powerful than 
Ravana, 740;—none but Narayana capable of killing, 740;—practice fearsome austerities, 733 ;— 
receive boons from Brahma, 733;—request ViSvakarman to build mansion for, 733-74 (see also 
Malin; Malyavan; Sumalin) 

Suketu (son of Nandivardhana): king of the Iksvaku lineage, 122 

Suketu ( yaksa): father of Tataka, 78 

Siikra (preceptor of the demons). See Usanas Kavya 

Sumagadhi (river). See Magadhi 

Sumalin: austerities of, 733; battles gods, 739-40; boons of, 733, 735-36; Devavati mother of, 733; 
Dhimraksa son of, 734; emerges from Rasatala, 744,; flees to Lanka, 739-40; Kaikast daughter of, 
734; Kumbhinast (1) daughter of, 734; leaves Rasatala, 740; Savitra fights and kill, 769; sends 
Kaikast to ask Visravas to marry her, 741; serpent-chariot of, 769; urges Ravana to seize Lanka 
from Kubera, 744. See also Malin; Malyavan; SukeSa: sons of, attack the world of the gods 

Sumantra (minister and charioteer of DaSaratha), 52, 56, 60-62, 64, 66, 147, 170-71, passim; brings 
Bharata back from forest, 253; consoles Kausalya, 195;—Satrughna, 214; Dasaratha orders, to 
bring Rama, 133-34, 147; delivers Rama’s message to DaSaratha, 192—94; —Bharata to find Rama, 
218, 219, 232; —Rama into exile, 173—75;—Sita to forest, 794-95; fetches Rama to Dasaratha, 
133-34, 147-48, 168; grief of, 185, 191-92, 195; invites participants to Dasaratha’s sacrifice, 65; 
joins brothers in forest, 242; Kaikeyt orders, to bring Rama, 146; Laksmana extols Rama’s virtues 
to, 179; Rama dismisses, 184-87 

Sumati (1), 99-100; mother of Sagara’s 60,000 sons, 91; wife of Sagara, 90 

Sumati (2): son of Kakutstha, 99-100 

Sumeru (mountain): boon of, 763 

Sumitra, 230, 238, 243, 473, 477, 488, 589, 590, 711, 712, 714, passim; and the death of DaSaratha, 
201-2; consoles Kausalya, 177; DaSaratha gives half of a half of porridge to, 70;—-gives remaing 
porridge to, 70; departs for forest to bring Rama back, 219; eats celestial porridge, 70; follows 
Kausalya to heaven, 845; gives birth to two sons, Laksmana and Satrughna, 71; instructs Laksmana 
on conduct, 173; Kausalya and, go to meet Rama, 721; laments, 211; learns that Rama will be 
consecrated as prince regent, 135-36; meets Bharadvaja, 230; meets with Rama on Mount 
Citrakita, 243-44; mother of Laksmana, 22, 52, 71, 172, passim; Rama respectfully salutes, 723, 
725; receives new brides, 128; Satrughna respectfully salutes, 811 

sun: burns Sampati’s wings, 418; grows dim during battle between Rama and Ravana, 697; Hanuman 
tries to devour, 426-27, 783; Jatayus and Sampat fly into, 418, 421-22; wings of Sampati burned 
by, 418, 422. See also Stirya 

Sunahgepa: story of, 113-14 

Sundarakanda, 429-536; bija (heart) of Ramayana, 15; printed separately from Ramayana, 15; 
prognosticative text, 15; starting point for recitation of Ramayana, 15; synopsis of, 14-15 

Sundari (wife of Malyavan), 734 

sun god. See Strya 

Suparna: in Sagara story, 94. See also Garuda 

Suparsva (raksasa): dissuades Ravana from killing Sita, 674—75 

Suparsva (vulture): Sampati scolds, 423; son of Sampati, 419, 420; witnesses abduction of Sita, 420 

Supreme Being. See Visnu 

Suptaghna (raksasa): fights Rama, 581 

Surabhi (Surabht) (wish-fulfilling cow), 210, 228; children of, 280; grieves for her calves, 210-11; 
Ravana observes, 761; supplies milk for Ocean of Milk, 761 

Surasa: Kadri, sister of, 280-81; Krodhavasa mother of, 280; mother of serpents, 380, 434, 519; 
obstructs Hanum4n’s passage, 434—-35;—tecalled, 519-20 


Siirasena (city): Satrughna renames Madhuputi as, 817 

Siirasenas: country in northern quarter, 404 

Surastra, 402, 284-85 

Sirpanakha, 12, 29, 32, 33; admonishes Ravana, 299-300; appeals to Ravana’s duty as king, 299— 
300; attacks Sita, 285; birth of, 28-29, 741; demands Rama’s death, 301; describes Rama, 
Laksmana, and Sita to Ravana, 301; description of, 284, 741; goes to Lanka, 298; grief of, 288; 
inflames Ravana’s passion for Sita, 301; Kaikast mother of, 29, 741; Laksmana rejects and 
mutilates, 12, 285-86; lives in Dandaka forest, 764-65; mutilation of, 32, 52, 56, 285—-86;— 
explained to Khara, 286; Rama and Laksmana tease, 285; Ravana marries, to Vidyujjihva, 746; — 
questions, 300;—sends, to Dandaka forest, 764;—kills husband of, 29, 763; reports death of Khara 
and Diisana to Ravana, 52, 299; representations of, in Rama story, 33; reproaches Ravana for death 
of husband, 763; role of, in epic, 33; seduces Laksmana, 285;—Rama, 12, 33, 284-85; taunts 
Khara taunted by, 288; tells Khara about death of fourteen raksasas, 288—89;—about Rama killing 
raksasas, 288; tells Rama about Khara and Disana, 284; Visravas father of, 28-29, 741;—-curses, 
33, 741 

Sirya (sun god) (Aditya, Martanda, Vivasvant), 26, 36, 429, 432,569, 608, 630, 640, 698, 716, 735, 
780 784; does not burn Hanuman, 432; father of Rksarajas, 346; father of Sugriva, 27, 71, 355; 
grants boons to Hanuman, 432, 783, 786;—to Mount Sumeru, 403, 783; Hanuman invokes, 429; 
Hanuman mistakes for fruit, 783; lord of cows, 650; Rahu chariot of, 784; refrains from burning 
Hanuman, 783; son of Kasyapa, 251; weapon-spells of, 639, 685. See also sun 

Stryabhanu (yaksa): disappears, pulverized, 750; pierces Ravana, 749 

Suryavamsa. See Solar Dynasty 

Susena (monkey), 440; member of the southern search party, 400, declares prowess in jumping, 424 

Susena (monkey troop leader; father of Tara), 390, 563, 573; passim; arrival of in Kiskindha, 397; 
battles and kills Vidyunmalin, 581-82; father of Tara, 402, 580, 781; fights and kills Vidyunmalin, 
581-82; has Laksmana inhale aroma of the healing herbs, 27, 688; leader of western search party, 
402, 404, 407, 409; physician of monkeys, 27; reassures Rama that Laksmana is not dead, 687; 
sends Hanuman once more for healing herbs, 688; tells monkeys about healing herbs on the 
mountains Candra and Drona, 592 

stitas (bards), 35 

Sutiksna (ascetic): ashram of, 270, 274; auterities of, 270; directs Rama, to Agastya and Agastya’s 
brother, 275; Rama, Laksmana, and Sita visit, 52, 56, 269-71, 274-75; Sarabhafiga directs Rama 
to, 268 

Suvela (mountain): Rama encamps on, with chief monkeys, 574-76; Rama’s army encamps near, 
563,-64 

Suyajiia (minister of Dasaratha), 64 

Suyajfia (son of Vasistha), 165-66, 725 

Svayamprabha: daughter of Merusavarni, 412; description of, 411; fasting of, 412; friendship of, with 
Hema, 412; Hanuman tells, of search party’s adventures, 413; history of, 412; questions Hanuman, 
412; rescues southern search party from cave, 413; southern search party seeks refuge with, 413 

Sveta (king): abandons kingship, 824; Agastya gives celestial jewel to, 826; attains Brahmaloka, 825; 
austerities of, 825-26; condemned to eat his own corpse, 825—26; hunger and thirst of, in 
Brahmaloka, 825; story of, 824—26 

Sveta (monkey): son of Siirya, 564 

Svetaksa (guardian elephant [diggaja]), 280 

sword: Agastya gives, to Rama, 278; story of ascetic and, 272 

Syandika (river), 181 


synopsis: of Aranyakanda, 12—13; of Avodhyakanda, 11-12; of Balakanda, 9-11; of Kiskindhakanda, 
13-14; of Sundarakanda, 14-15; of Uttarakanda, 16-20; of Yuddhakanda, 15-16 


taking on form at will. See shape-shifting 

Taksa (son of Bharata): consecration of, in Taksasila, 846 

Taksaka: Ravana conquers, 299, 545;—abducts wife of, 299 

Taksasila (city): Bharata founds, 846-47 

Tamasa (river), 179; ashram of Bharadvaja at, 54; citizens of Ayodhya turn back at, 180; Rama and 
Sita spend first night in forest at, 179; Valmiki’s ashram on banks of, 54-55, 794 

Tamasa (weapon-spell), Ravana uses, against monkeys, 683; Visvamitra gives, to Rama, 80 

tamast (power of illusion), 764 

Tapana (rdaksasa): Gaja fights and kills, 581 

Tara (monkey troop leader), 365, 390, 622, 411, 415, 787, 788; advises Valin, 367, 374, 377; arrives 
in Kiskindha, 397; exhorts monkeys, 373; father of Tara, 781; fights and kills Kumbhahanu, 601; 
member of southern search party, 407, 409; minister of Valin, 781; number of troops of, 397; 
participates in Valin’s funeral, 378; suggest monkeys return to cave, 414—15; tells Ravana that 
Valin is gone, 781 

Tara (wife of Valin) 372; accepts Laksmana’s advice, 393; chief queen of Valin, 363; daughter of 
Susena, 376; daughter-in-law of Susena, 798; Sugriva by, 392—93; duty of, toward Angada, 375; 
fast of, abandoned, 377; fasting to death of, 375; foretells future, 376; gives blessings and mantras 
for Valin, 368; grief of, 373-77, 379; Hanuman consoles 375; hears information from Angada, 
367; instructs Angada, 377; lament for Valin of, 374, 376-77, 379; protector of monkeys and apes, 
375; reader of portents, 376; rejects Hanuman’s advice, 375; Sugriva covets, 384; Tara as father of, 
781;Valin as source of information of, 392; Valin rejects advice of, 367-68; as widow, 374, 377 

Tataka, 10, 32; Agastya curses, 32—33, 78; boon of, 78; originally a yaksa, 33, 78; daughter of 
Suketu, 78; forest of, 77-78; Marica son of, 78; power of illusion of, 79; Rama kills, 10, 79; wife 
of Sunda as yaksa, 78 

three-headed cobras, 75, 654 

three-strides of Visnu. See Visnu: three strides of 

time. See cosmic cycles; cosmic eras; cyclical time; Dvapara Yuga; Kali Yuga; Krta Yuga; Treta 
Yuga; yuga(s) 

Timidhvaja (an asura, also called, Sambara): Dasaratha kills, 141; Indra fights, 141; Rama kills son 
of, 177. See also Sambara 

Tisya: name of a degenerate yuga that comes about when unrighteousness eclipses righteousness, 
571. See also Kali Yuga 

Tisya constellation, 517 

trees, golden. See inauspicious omens: golden trees presage death 

Treta Yuga, 18, 22, 754, 821, 824; Ramayana takes place in, 38 

Trijata (raksasa woman), 587; assures Sita that Rama and Laksmana are alive, 589; dream of, 475— 
76; reassures Sita, 589; warns raksasa women to placate Sita, 476 

Trijata Gargya (brahman): Rama jokes with and gives cow to, 166 

Trikita (mountain) Lanka located on, 437, 538, 575, 715, 735 

Trikita (mountain), 583; Hanuman leaps onto, 437, 645; located on southern shore, 734; Ravana 
goes to, 745. See also Lamba 

Trimurdhan. See Trisiras (2) 

Trimiurti, 34—35 

Trisanku: becomes candadla, 110-11; as constellation, 174, 541; curse of, 41; descendant of Iksvaku, 
109; goes to heaven in bodily form, 122, 252; son of Prthu, 122, 252; story of his rise to heaven, 


109-12; Vasistha purohita of, 109-10; Vasistha and sons refuses to sacrifice for, 109-10; 
Visvamitra performs sacrifice for, 111—12 

Trisiras (raksasa troop leader) (1): attacks Rama, 294; fights Rama in Dandaka, 291; Rama fights and 
kills, 32, 52, 56, 294-95;—ecalled, 300, 652, 677; Ravana reports death of, to Marica, 303; vows 
to kill Rama, 294 

Trisiras (raksasa troop leader) (2): also called Trimtirdhan, 633-34; exhorts Ravana, 629; fights 
Angada, 633; Hanuman fights and kills, 634-35; killing of, recalled, 640, 715; Kumbhakarna 
paternal uncle of, 628; leads raksasas into battle, 629-30; son of Ravana, 630; strikes Hanuman 
with sword, 634; vows to kill Ravana’s enemies, 629 

Trnabindu, ashram of, 729-30; austerities of, 729; daughter of (see Trnabindu’s daughter); 
recognizes curse of Pulastya, 730 

Tmabindu’s daughter: becomes pregnant, 729; gives birth to Visravas, 730; Pulastya marries, 730; 
virtues of of, 30 

truth-act: of Anaranya, 756; of Sita, 19, 513-14, 843; of Vedavati, 753. See also oath; vow 

Tumburu (king of gandharvas), 228; Bharadvaja invokes, for hospitality to Bharata, 227; cursed by 
Vaisravana, 266-67; passion of, for Rambha, 267 

turtle: eating of, by brahmans and kshatriyas, 370 

Tvastr (divine craftsman), 663; Bharadvaja invokes, for hospitality to Bharata, 227; Indra cuts off 
heads of son of, 635; Sudamana divine weapon of, 80 


Uma. See Parvati 

umbrella: as a sign of sovereignty, 167, 178, 228, 249, 323, 337, 340, 353, 360-61, 457, 640; 
consecrated for vajapeya, 178, 853; white color of, as symbol of kingship, 131, 146, 148, 159, 302, 
380, 395, 448, 463, 604, 722, 724, 725 

universal destruction, fire of, 108, 116, 126, 388, 493, 504, 533, 606, 607, 624, 629, 637, 663,678, 
698, 762, 816, 832. See also cosmic destruction 

unrighteousness (adharma), 5, 17, 20, 37, passim 

pendra. See Visnu 

ipodghata (prologue) of Valmiki Ramayana, 4, 6, 9-10, 51-58 

Jrmila (gandharva woman), 85 

rmila (wife of Laksmana), Janaka gives, to Laksmana, 123, 262; marriage of, 125; wives of 

Dasaratha welcome, 128 

rvasi: Pururavas and, 319; story of, and Mitra and Varuna, 803-4 

sanas Kavya (Bhargava, Sukra, Usanas) (preceptor of the demons and constellation) 412, 415, 715; 

anger of 763; Araja daughter of, 827—28; ashram of, 827—28; ashram surrounds of, become 

Janasthana, 828; Bhargava, 541, 805-6, 827-28; curses Danda, 828;—forest, 763;—-curses Yayati, 

806, 807; Devayani daughter of, 805—6; instructs dwellers in his ashram emigrate, 828; orders 

Araja to remain near lake, 828; purohita of asuras, 599;—of Danda, 827;—of raksasas, 764; 

spares area around lake from destruction, 828; tells Ravana of Indrajit’s sacrifices, 764; Visnu kills 

mother of, 79; wealth of, 412 

Utopian realm of “Ramarajya”, 726-27 

utpida (unidentified organ), 472 

Uttarakanda, 728-855; anomalous events in, 17; Brahma instructs to listen to (Uttara), 844; 
categories of narrative material in, 16; cautionary tales in, 17; controversial episodes of, 16, 19; 
epilogue, 16—17; narrative of childhood of Hanuman in, 16; rajadharma in, 16; reprise of 
Ramayana theme, 17; role of Agastya in, 16-17, 19, 26, 29; synopsis of, 16—20; tells history of 
raksasas and Ravana, 16; two bards (Lava and KuSa) recite, 844; unusual features of, 19 


ae 


qc 


Vaidehi. See Sita 

Vaijayanta (city): Nimi founds, 802; south of Ayodhya, 141 

vaikhanasas (class of ascetics), 268, 302, 303, 400, 405 

Vaisnava form: of Rama, 854 

Vaisnava Hindus, 5n, 34 

vaisnava sacrifice: of Indra, 775; of Indrajit, 764 

Vaisnava theology: dasyabhava in, 26 

Vaisnava theory: of avataras (incarnations), 38 

Vaisnava tradition: Ramayana, as sacred text of, 4-5 

Vaisnava works, 35 

Vaisravana. See Kubera Vaisravana 

vaisya (social class), 40, 54, 60, 199, 822; born from the thighs of Manu, 280; in list of four social 
classes, 65, 219, 240, 280, 821, 842; role of, in the yugas, 821 

Vaitarani (river): river of hell, 325 

Vaivasvata (god of death), 111, 200-201, 321, 370, 376, 416, 475, 485, 604, 608, 640, 673, 820, 823; 
monkeys as sons of, 404;—-Gaja, Gavaksa, Gavaya, Sarabha, Gandhamadana, 564; Narada goes to 
heaven with, 760; Ravana fights, 757-60; —recalled. 613; Ravana kills warriors of, 758; Ravana 
resolved to kill, 757; servants of, 644; son of Stirya, 757. See also Dharmaraja; Kala; Krtanta; 
Manu; Mrtyu; Yama 

vajapeya sacrifice, 178, 764, 845, 853; of Rama, 726; umbrella consecrated for, 853 

vajra (decoration), 440 

vajra (thunderbolt of Indra), 71, 199, 210, passim; Hanuman invulnerable to, 786; Indra breaks 
Hanuman’s jaw with, 426, 785;—-cuts off mountains’ wings with, 433, 519;—kills Vrtra with, 832; 
—smashes Diti’s fetus with, 99; —strikes Kumbhakarna with, 813 

vajra (weapon), 80, 289, 441 

Vajra (weapon-spell), 80, 108 

Vajradamstra (raksasa), 443, 546, 547; Rama pierces, 583 

Vajrajvala: wife of Kumbhakarna and granddaughter of Vairocana, 746-47 

Vajramusti (raksasa): son of Malyavan 734; Mainda fights and kills, 581—82 

valakhilyas (class of ascetics), 104, 268, 302-3, 400 

Valin: abducts Sugriva’s wife, 361-62; acknowledges Rama as having rightful royal authority, 26; 
adoptive son of Rksarajas, 786; alliance of, with Ravana, 26, 782; Angada cremates, 379;—-grieves 
death of, 379;—-salutes, 377; Angada son of (see Angada); anger of, at Sugriva, 360-61; apes seek 
protection of, 377; arrow in, pulled out by Nila, 377; banishes Sugriva, 13, 25, 345—46, 361; 
becomes like a brother to Ravana, 782; begs forgiveness from Rama, 372; captures Ravana, 26, 
78 1—82; challenges Dundubhi to fight, 362—63; character synopsis of, 25—26; chases Sugriva 
around the entire earth, 408; confesses sins, 372, 375; cremation of, 375, 378-79; death of, 368-76; 
death of, as punishment, 371—72; description of, by Sugriva, 362; discourse of, on righteousness 
and statecraft, 369-70; elder brother and rightful heir, 26, 353, 360; enmity of, with Mayavin, son 
of Dundubhi, 360—61;—-with Sugriva of, 13, 26, 355-363, 408, 787; exiles Sugriva, 11, 25, 361; 
fights and kills Dundubhi Mayavin, 360—63;— recalled, 408; fights Sugriva, 13, 25 53, 56, 364, 
368; flies to four oceans with Ravana in armpit, 26, 782; freed from sin by punishment, 372; 
funerary libations for, by Sugriva, 360; funerary rites, of, 378—79; gives Sugriva golden garland, 
376;—sovereignty of monkeys, 376; golden necklace of, 368-69; —Indra gives, 363; golden 
garland of, 376, 781; Himalaya tells, Dundubhi is fit opponent, 636; hurls Dundubhi’s body a 
league away, 363; instructions of, at death, to Angada, 376; killing of, by Rama unjust, 370;— 
controversial, 14, 20, 26;—-Rama justifies, 370—72; kills Dundubhi, 360-61; Kabandha tells Rama 
about, 345-46; Matanga curses, 363-64; —recalled, 408; monkeys seek protection of, 377; more 


powerful than Sugriva, 26, 359; orders Sugriva to wait at cavern, 360-61; Rama consoles, 372; 
Rama fails to shoot, 364;—kills, 21, 26, 53, 56, 368, 418, 460, 511;—-shoots, from ambush, 13, 25, 
56, 364, 368;—-vows to kill, 13, 25, 53, 359, 361-62, 486; Ravana attacks and is defeated by, 16, 
26, 27, 30, 781-82; —chases after, 481-82; rebukes Rama for killing, 26, 369-70; reconciles with 
Sugriva, 375; rejects Tara’s advice, 367-68; Rksarajas adoptive father of, 346, 786; —makes, king 
of monkeys, 786; routs Sugriva, 364; Ruma, daughter-in-law of, 371; sandhya rites of, 781-82; 
slayer of danavas, 373; source of Tara’s information, 392; scatters blood on Matanga’s ashram, 
363; Sugriva blocks, in cave, 360, 361, 408;—fears, 346, 349, 353, 359, 361;—-makes alliance with 
Rama to kill, 13, 25, 30, 53, 56, 356-58, 364, 486, 716;—mistreats, 354;—-narrates history of 
conflict with, 13, 53, 358-61; —returns kingdom to, 361;—-younger brother of, 353; takes 
Sugriva’s wife, 25, 359, 361; travels the world in fear of, 361; Tara minister of, 731; Tara laments 
for, 374, 376-77, 379;—-says blessings and mantras for, 368;—-wife of, 372; son of Indra, 71, 345, 
368; violator of righteousness, 370—71; wives lament for, 374-75 

Valmiki, passim; agrees to Rama’s request to have Sita publicly prove her innocence, 841; ascetic, 
51, 842; ashram of, 6, 7, 10, 13, 17-19, 32, 38, 40, 794-98, 800, 812-14, 818-19; asks Narada if 
there is a truly great man in the world, 9, 51; austerities of, 797, 842; author of Ramayana, 3; 
Bharadvaja as disciple of, 54—55; birthday of, restricted holiday, 5; Brahma grants poetic 
inspiration to, 4, 9, 39, 55; —instructs, to compose Ramdyana, 55; —praises composition of, 844; 
visits, 9, 55; brings Sita to Rama’s asvamedha, 841-42; composes Ramayana, 6, 9-10, 55—57, 855; 
consoles Sita, 798; contemporary with epic characters and actor in epic drama, 38; creates sloka 
(poetry), 9, 55-56; curses hunter (Nisada) in metrical form, 9, 54—55; disciples (bards) of, sing the 
Uttara(kanda), 845; —identify, as author of the poem, 841; —recite Ramayana, 57-58, 839-41, 
844; —recite sloka, 55;—Rama acknowledges as sons, 842;—-Rama recognizes, as Sita’s sons, 841 
(see also Kusa; Lava); endowed with divine vision, 39; filled with pity at killing of kraujica bird, 
54; First Poet (Adikavi), 4; gives amulets to Lava and KuSa, 813; grief (Soka) of, becomes metrical 
and musical verse (s/oka), 55; hears story of Rama from Narada, 9, 51-54; ignorant of Rama story 
prior to Narada’s visit, 38; instructs disciples to perform Ramayana, 839-40; metrical structure of 
curse of, 54-55; names Lava and KusSa, 813; Narada narrates synopsis of Ramayana to, 51-54; 
portrays Rama, Laksmana, Bharata, and Sita as ideal role models, 20, 22—23; proclaims Sita’s 
innocence, 797; Rama instructs Laksmana to abandon Sita at ashram of, 794, 796, 800;—requests, 
to have the Uttara (kanda) performed, 844; Satrughna stays over at ashram of, 18, 812, 818; sends 
disciples to recite Ramayana, 839-42; shelters Sita, 17, 797-98; son of Pracetas (Pracetasa), 840, 
842; sons of Sita and Rama born in ashram of, 18, 813; suggests but does not explicitly describe 
Ravana as devotee of Siva, 30; teaches Ramayana to Lava and Kusa, his disciples, 6, 10, 57 (see 
also Kusa; Lava; Valmiki: disciples (bards) of, sing the Uttara(kanda)); tells story of Mitrasaha 
Saudasa, 812-13; testifies to legitimacy of Rama and Sita’s twin sons, 842; testifies to Sita’s 
innocence, 842; witnesses killing of Araurica, 54; world of, 34 

Valmiki Ramayana: alternative titles of, 3; Brahma asks Rama to hear, 844; cautionary tales in, 17, 
18, 24, 41; characters of, animals, 24—25;—-Bharata, 23;—-construct of binary, 20;—-DaSaratha, 23; 
—Hanuman, 26—27;—Indrajit, 3 1—32;—-Kaikeyl, 24; —Kausalya, 23—24;—Kumbhakarna, 31; — 
Laksmana, 22;—raksasa women, 32—34; —Rama, 20—21;—Ravana, 28—30;—as role models, 5;— 
Satrughna, 23;—Sita, 2 1-22:—-Sugriva, 25;—Valin, 25-26; —Vibhisana, 30-31; contested history 
of, 19; dating of, 3, 8, 34, 38; editions of, 7; emic hitory of, 34, 37-40; etic history of, 34; general 
overview of, 3—6; histories of, 34-41; as history, 5, 34-41, 37; history of, contested, 19;—differing 
perspectives of, 34; as literature poetic composition, 4, 41, 47; as literature, the First Poem 
(Adikavya), 4; Mahabharata and, as sister epics, 47; comparison between, 20; manuscripts, sub- 
recensions of, 7; moral and ethical, dharmasastra and—struggle between dharma and adharma, 5, 
20; narrative of, 8—9; recensions of, 7-9, 40, 44, 45; recitation of, 4, 6, 10, 17, 19, 57-58, 839-41, 


844;—by disciples (bards), 839-41;—by Lava and KuSa, 57-58, 844; —parayana (recitation), 15; 
—Satrughna hears, 81 8—19;—Sundarakanda as starting point for, 15;—-Valmiki teaches to 
disciples, 6, 10;—-ersification of, 8; religious history of, 4-5, 34-35, 41; social vision of, 40-41; 
story of, 9-20; structure, upodghdata of, 4, 6, 9-10, 51-58; structure of, meta-narrative of, 4;— 
meters of, 8-9; —Sundarakanda as bija (heart) of, 15; —Uttarakanda as reprise of, 17; synopsis 
of, by Narada, 51-54; text, history of, 4, 8, 44; structure of, 8—9; text of, 6-9; —Baroda critical 
edition of, 6, 8;—books (kandas) of, 9;— size of, 3; textual tradition of, manuscripts of, 7—8;— 
perishability of manuscripts of, 7; themes and motifs of, 19, 24—26;—-curse as, 16; discomfort, 19; 
titles of, 3-4; translation(s) of, based on various editions, 7;—-conventions in, 45—47;—history of 
current, 44-45; —Princeton University Press, 6; worshiped by Brahma, 855. See also Ramayana 

Vamadeva (minister of Dasaratha), 64 

Vamadeva (priest of Dasaratha), 60, 120, 203, 255; Dasaratha instructs, to install Rama as prince 
regent, 133 

Vamadeva (priest of Rama), 725, 820-21, 837, 841 

Vamana (apsaras), 228 

Vamana (guardian elephant [diggaja]), 60, 776 

Vamana (sage), 841 

vamanavatara (dwarf incarnation) of Visnu, 81—82 

vamsa(s) (royal lineage[s]), 35 

vamsavali(s) (dynastic list[s]), 36 

vanaras. See monkeys 

Varaha (mountain): city of Pragjyotisa located on, 403 

varna(s): See social classes 

Varuna: and the apsaras Urvasi, 803-4; becomes a hamsa, 754; grants boon to hamsa, 755;—to 
Hanuman, 786; goes tomusical recital 762; Mahodara battles, and sons, 762; Rama compared to, 
304, 321; Rama gives Visnu’s bow to, 128; Ravana battles sons and grandsons of, 761; refused sex 
by Urvasi, 803-4; regent of northern quarter, 402 ;regent of western quarter, 402, 407; releases 
semen into pot, 804; story of Urvast and Mitra and, 803-4; Vasistha enters semen of Mitra and, 
803; as world guardian, 731, 804 

Vasava. See Indra 

Vasistha: accompanies DasSaratha to Mithila for weddings, 120; addressed by brahmans upon 
Dasaratha’s death, 203; among few who remain conscious in presence of Rama Jamadagnya, 126; 
ashram of, 104, 798—99; authority in matters of kingship, 217; befriends Visvamitra, 105, 117; born 
from pot of semen, 804; brahman ascetic, 799; brings queen mothers to reunion of sons, 244; 
consecrates Rama along with other brahmans, 725; curses Mitrasaha, 813; —Nimi to be 
disembodied, 803; —Visvamitra, 108; Dasaratha instructs, to install Rama as prince regent, 133; 
dispatches messengers to Rajagrha, 204; Durvasas prophesies in ashram of, 798; enters semen of 
Mitra and Varuna, 803; explains origin of the world and lineage of Iksvakus, 251; enmity with 
Visvamitra, 11, 103-17; forces of, battle forces of Visvamitra, 106-7; gods propitiate, 117; grants 
permission for Dasaratha to go personally to RSyasrnga, 63; Iksvaku chooses, as purohita at birth, 
804; informs Rama of his impending consecration, 136; instructs Bharata to perform DaSaratha’s 
funerary rites, 213;—-Rama and Sita prior to the consecration, 136;—Sabala to produce elegant 
feast for Visvamitra and his army, 105; interprets omens, 125—26; leads brahmans in approving 
Dasaratha’s asvamedha, 64;—the court and gurus to Nandigrama, 257; limits curse of Mitrasaha, 
813; names Dasaratha’s sons, 71; Nimi chooses, to perform sacrifice, 802;—-curses, to be 
disembodied in return, 893; one of the seven seers, 728; orders arrangements for Dasaratha’s 
asvamedha, 65—66;—Sabala to produce army, 106; performs ceremony of the wedding thread, 124; 
—naming ceremony for Dasaratha’s four sons, 71;—-Rama’s rite of departure (mahaprasthana), 


853; purohita of Bharata, 203-6, 209, 212-14, 218-19, 225-26, 231, 235-36, 239, 243-44, 228, 
238, 244, 248, 251, 253, 255, 257, 725;—of DaSaratha, 52, 60, 62-66, 68, 71-73, 75, 120-26, 133, 
136-37, 339, 798-99;— of Iksvaku, 121, 804;— of the Iksvakus, 64, 75, 135, 203, 214;—-of 
Mitrasaha, 812—13;—-of Rama,723—25, 810-11, 820-21, 837, 841, 850-51, 853; —of Trisanku, 
109-10, 541; raksasa in guise of cook, offers, human flesh, 813; raksasa in the form of, demands 
meat, 812; rebuffs Trisanku, 109; receives new body, 804; recites genealogy of the solar dynasty, 
25 1—52;— lineage of DaSaratha to Janaka, 121—22; refuses to give up Sabala, 105; reminds 
Da§Saratha of necessity of honoring promise to Visvamitra, 75; renders useless weapon-spells of 
Visvamitra, 10, 108; requests new body from Brahma, 803; Sabala as wish-fulfilling cow of, 105— 
6; sends messengers to bring Bharata and Satrughna back to Ayodhya, 204; son of Brahma, 802-3; 
sons of, curse Trisanku, 1 10;—1rebuff Trisanku, 109; tells Rama not to displease subjects, 851; 
Trisanku approaches sons of, 109;—appeals to sons of, 109;—asks, to perform a sacrifice, 109; 
urges Bharata to accept kingship, 52, 209, 218;—-Bharata to undergo consecration, 218;— 
execution of Laksmana, 850;—-Rama to accept kingship, 252—53; visits ashram of Bharadvaja, 
225-26; ViSvamitra demands that, address him as “brahman.” 117; —destroys ashram of, 107; 
tries to take wish-fulfilling cow of, by force, 106; —tries to trade for Sabala, 105-6; welcomes 
Visvamitra, 104 

Vasu: founder of Girivraja, 84; Nrga consecrates, 801; son of Kusa, 84 

Vasuda (gandharva woman): wife of Malin, 734 

Vasudeva. See Visnu 

Vasudha (earth goddess), 734; Rama rages against, 843. See also Dharant; Madhavi 

Vasuki (serpent lord), 594, 690; dwells in Bhogavati, 299, 401, 760; gods and demons use as rope for 
churning, 97; Ravana conquers, 299, 545, 760 

Vasus (class of deities), 280, 316, 380, 403, 455, 481, 564, 709, 725, 768, 769, 770, 772, 842 

Vatapi: Agastya kills, 312; Agastya kills Ilvala and, 276; as demon ram, 275-76; and Ilvala kill 
brahmans, 275-76; story of, 275—76, 312 

vat of oil: preservation of bodies in, 202, 822 

Vayu (god of wind) (Matarisvan, Pavana), 46, 75, 525, passim; assists Hanuman in leapin of ocean, 
432; blocks all creatures’ vital functions, 784; Brahma and gods propitiate, 784-85; Brahma and, in 
story of Hanuman’s birth, 784—85; deprives worlds of breaths, 785; divine father of Hanuman, 426, 
783, passim; dwells in all beings, 84, 784; gives Rama golden and pearl necklaces at Indra’s 
command, 725-26; friendship of, with Mainaka, 519; gods propitiate, 426; Hanuman invokes, 429; 
Hanuman son of, passim; ordered to enter Siva’s semen, 88; as prdna, 84-85; prostrates himself 
before Brahma, 785; seduces and is rejected by Kusanabha’s daughters, 84-85, weapon-spell of, 
called Prathama, 80; weapon-spells of, 627. See also Anila; Maruta 

vedas, 39, 57, 59, passim; according, Manu bore brahmans, kshatriyas, viasyas, and stidras, 280; bow 
of Siva consist of, 646; Brahma primordial knower of, 785; Janaka well-versed in, 65; raksasa 
brahmans know, 463; Rama well-versed in, 51, 72, 482, 484, 561; is ordances of, 709; Ramayana is 
equal to, 54; RSyarnga learned in, 68; social classes first alluded to in, 40; Sumalin, Malyavan, and 
Malin learned in, 736; take form of brahmans, 853; Trnabindu’s daughter overhears recitation of, 
730 

Vedasruti (river), 181 

Vedavati: ascends to heaven, 753; asceticism of, 752—53; birth of, 753; enters the sacrificial fire, 753; 
Ravana seduces, 753; reborn as Sita, 753; Sita as reincarnation of, 21, 753-54; story of, 752-54; 
truth—act of, 16, 753 

vedic gods: incarnate themselves as monkeys, 10, 70—71; plead with Visnu to incarnate, 10, 68-69. 
See also gods 

verbal abuse of Sita by Rama, 15 


verse: Sloka type of, 8, 39, 55, 391 

Vibhandaka (son of Kasyapa, father of RSyasriga), 61-62 

Vibhisana (brother of Ravana), 15, 24, 26, passim; accompanies Rama to Ayodhya, 715—17; advises 
against hostilities, 547—548;—Rama to prepare army to fight Kumbhakarna, 614;—Rama to solicit 
aid of Samudra, 553;—-Ravana to return Sita, 547—48; alliance of with Rama, 5, 15, 56, 551-52, 
702; alone can see invisible Indrajit, 585; Anala minister of, 573; Anala eldest daughter of, 489; 
anointed as de jure king of the raksasas, 552, 561; as anomalous raksasa, 5, 284; assures monkeys 
that Rama and Laksmana are still alive, 591; austerities of 742, 765, 742; balks at performing 
funerary rites for Ravana, 702; begs righteousness as boon from Brahma, 743 ; birth of, 28-29, 
741; boards the Puspaka with his ministers, 715; boons of, 743; Brahma grants, immortality, 743; 
brings Sita to Rama, 705—6; brother of Ravana, 24, 31, 489, 548, 664, 667, 741, passim; cannot kill 
Indrajit, 668; character synopsis of, 30-31; consecration of, as king of Lanka, 15, 53, 553, 702-3; 
consoles raksasa women 702; conveys Rama’s instruction to Sita, 705; declares the killing of Sita 
to be illusion, 660; defects to Rama’s camp, 15, 549, 578; denied permission to follow Rama to 
heavenly world, 31, 553; dissuades Ravana from executing Hanuman, 512-13; distraught at sight 
of bodies of Rama and Laksmana, 591; does not deviate from righteousness, 742; enters inner 
apartments of Ravana to find Sita, 705; expects unconscious Rama and Laksmana, to revive, 586; 
expresses concern to Ravana, 764; fights Mitraghna, 581; fraternal conflict of, with Ravana, 26; 
Hanuman and Sugriva question, about means of crossing ocean, 552-53; Hanuman and, 
find Jambavan among dead and wounded, 643; has Sita mount palanquin, 705; holds a fly-whisk at 
consecration of Rama, 724—25; honors monkeys with gifts, 714—15; identifies raksasa warriors for 
Rama, 603-4; Indrajit pierces with a hundred arrows, 666;—reviles, as a traitor, 664;—-shoots with 
five arrows, 669; informs Ravana of abduction of Kumbhinasi (2), 765; invites Rama to stay in 
Lanka, 713; Jambavan asks, why, inquires only about Hanuman, 643; justifies his abandonment of 
Ravana, 664; Kaikast mother of, 741; kills Ravana’s chariot horses, 686; Laksmana intervenes to 
save, 686; marries Sarama, 747; as metaphor for treason, 31; ministers of, gather intelligence on 
Lanka and its forces, 573;—. taking form at will as birds, 18, 573; monkeys debate whether to 
trust, capture, or kill, 549-5 1;—1mistaking, for Indrajit, flee, 590-91; narrates the history of 
Kumbhakarna, 613; offers Rama bath and ointments, 713;—-Rama the use of the Puspaka, 56, 713; 
one of seven immortals (cirajivins), 31, 742; only virtuous child of Kaikast, 30, 741; orders area of 
Sita’s passage cleared of moneys, apes and raksasas,705—6;—Sita come in full view of the public, 
706; paragon of virtue through devotion to Visnu, 30; performs funerary rites for Ravana, 702; 
points out banyan tree where Indrajit performs sacrifices, 663—64; points out Indrajit’s sacrificial 
ground to Laksmana, 664—65; Praghasa minister of, 573; prevents execution of Hanuman, 512, 
523; questions wounded Jambavan, 643; rallies monkey army, 586, 590; Rama accepts gifts from, 
703;—declines hospitality of, 714;—-gives gifts to, 788;—-grants refuge to, and ministers, 55 1—52; 
—honors, 575;—instructs, to perform funerary rites for Ravana, 30, 701—2;—-orders Laksmana to 
anoint, as king of raksasas, 553;—orders to bring Sita, 705;— orders to rule Lanka, 789, 853;— 
reproaches for clearing area of spectators, 706;—-summons, to asvamedha, 838;— tells, he will live 
on as lord of the raksasas, 853; Ravana excoriates as traitor, 31, 548;— falsely tells Sita that, was 
captured, 565;— regrets not heeding advice of, 629;— regrets treatment of, 629; reassures Rama 
that Sita cannot have been killed, 660;—-Sugriva and monkeys, 642; rebukes Ravana, 548, 764; 
rejoices at death of Indrajit, 671; reports the death of Indrajit to Rama, 672;—to Rama on Lanka’s 
defensive preparations and forces, 31, 573, 603; reviles Indrajit, 664—65; as righteous advisor of 
Ravana, 305; as righteous raksasa, 5, 30, 284, 512, 742, 765; roams the gory battlefield with 
Hanuman at night, 642-43; Sampati minister of, 573; Sarabha minister of, 573; Sarama wife of, 
747; says Indrajit will become visible once his army is annihilated, 662;—-sacrifice affords Indrajit 
his invisibility, 660-61; sends ministers to spy on Ravana’s defensive arrangements, 573; 


slaughters raksasas with arrows, 667-68; speaks truth to power, 30; stationed at central 
encampment, 574; stations monkeys at gates of Lanka, 577; suggests telling frightened monkeys 
that Kumbhakarna is a mechanical man, 614; Sugriva reassures, 591; Susena heals, of wounds, 
672; takes refuge (saranam) with Rama, 31, 549, 551—52; tells despondent monkeys that Rama and 
Laksmana are not dead, 642; —Laksmana he must stop Indrajit from completing his sacrifice, 660, 
664; —monkeys that Rama and Laksmana are still alive, 586; tells Rama about Atikaya, 636; 
Rama of Kumbhakarna’s history and Brahma’s curse, 613—614;—-Ravana of abduction of 
Kumbhinast, 764;—Sita to do exactly as Rama says, 70;—Sita to do exactly as Rama says, 705; as 
traitor, 31, 548, 664; unmasks Suka and Sarana, 556, 562; urges Laksmana to attack Indrajit before 
his sacrifice is completed, 662; —Laksmana to kill Indrajit, 666, 668; —on monkeys, 668;—-Rama 
to abandon grief, 660;—Rama to send Laksmana to kill Indrajit, 660—61;—-Ravana to return S1ta, 
489, 547-49, 660; Visravas exempts, from curse, 29. 741; Visravas father of, 28-29, 741; vows to 
help kill the raksasas and assault Lanka, 552; warns Ravana of his impending death at Laksmana’s 
hands, 664—65; weeps for Rama and Laksmana, 591; wishes to attend Rama’s consecration, 715 

Vidhatr (the arranger), 158, 278 

Vidyujjihva (danava), 29, 33, 746; power of illusion of, 564; produces simulacra of Rama’s head and 
bow, 564-68; Ravana kills, 29, 763; Ravana marries Stirpanakha to, 746 

Vidyunmalin: Susena fights and kills, 581—82 

Vidyutkesa: birth of, 732; Salakatankata wife of, 732 

Vijaya (minister of Dasaratha), 60, 204 

Vinata (monkey): leader of eastern search party, 398, 407; failure of, to find Sita, 409 

Vinata (1): mother of Garuda and Aruna, 280-81 sons of, go by highest path in sky, 419 

Vinata (2) (raksasa woman): taunts Sita, 471 

Vindhya (mountain[s]), 394; Hanuman swears by, 489; obeys Agastya, 276; Sampati falls to, 422 

violence: Sita warns Rama to abjure, 271—72 

Viradha (danava or raksasa), 627; abducts Sita, 12, 265-67; asks Rama to bury in grave, 267; boon 
of, from Brahma, 266; burial of, 267;— recalled, 719; Kubera Vaisravana curses, 32, 266-67; 
parentage of, 266 (see also Jaya; Satahrada); Laksmana breaks right arm of, 266; Rama breaks 
right arm of, 266; Rama kills and frees from curse, 52, 266—67;—tecalled, 719; Rama kills 
recalled, 460, 474, 564, 677, 697, 716, 719; story of 265-67 

Virgil, 3 

Virocana: Manthara daughter of, 79; Mrtyu vows to kill, 759 

Virtpaksa (field marshal of Ravana), 443; Hanuman fights and kills, 502—3 

Virtpaksa (minister of Ravana), 729, 744, 769; son of Malyavan, 734 

Virtpaksa (one of the elephants who support the earth), 92 

Viriipaksa (raksasa hero), 683, 715, 728; Ravana sends forth to battle, 678; Sugriva fights and kills, 
680-81 

Virtipaksa (son of Ravana), 547; Laksmana fights and kills, 581; Ravana stations in central camp, 
572, 573 

Visala (city), 97, 99, 103 

Visnu (Govinda, Hari, Hrsikesa, Janardana, Kesava, Madhustidana, Narayana, Upendra, Vasudeva) : 
Agastya gives Rama bow of, 278; agrees to gods’ plea to incarnate, 10; arrow is primordial body 
of, 817; asks Brahma to grant heavenly worlds to devotees, 854;—-gods the means of killing 
Ravana, 69; battles raksasas (Hari), 737-38, 740;—Siva, 127; Bharata as one quarter of, 71; bound 
by ties of affection to Vrtra, 831; bow of, 126-28, 278, 295-96; Brahma calls Rama, 844, 849, 854; 
—exhorts Rama to recall his nature as, 844;—exhorts to return with brothers to essential Vaisnava 
form, 854;—instructs gods to take on various forms to aid, 70;—1eveals to Rama that he is, in his 
manifold forms, 709-10; Buddha as avatara ( incarnation) of, 21; chooses DaSaratha as father, 69; 


conch of, 403, 735, 737-40; creates Brahma, 849;—-Madhu and Kaitabha, 849; curse of Nrga to 
end at arrival of, in Krsna incarnation (Vasudeva), 801; declines to kill Vrtra, 831; discus of, 299, 
403; as divinity of Hinduism, 4; divine arrow of, 127—28, 810, 817; drives raksasas from Lanka, 
732; dwarf incarnation of, 81-82; essence of, divided between DasSaratha’s sons, 70—71; fights and 
kills Malin, 738-39; gods appeal to, for means of reviving Indra, 832;—ask, to kill sons of Sukesa, 
735;— perform asvamedha to, for Indra, 833; plead with, to incarnate, 10, 68-69; —request, to end 
incarnation, 19;—set task for, to take fourfold incarnation to destroy Ravana, 69;—-worship 
Laksmana as fourth part of, 851; history of discus of, 403; horn bow of, 737-38; ignorant of his 
own divine nature, 10; avatara (incarnation) of, to kill Ravana, 10; Indra appeals to, to kill Vrtra, 
83 1;— requests, to kill Ravana, 768; intended husband of Vedavatt, 753; javelin of Malyavan 
pierces, 740; judged greater than Siva, 127; Kala as son of, 849-50; Kausalya meditates on, 135 
(Janardana);—worships, 152; Kausalya meditates on, 135; kills Bhrgu’s wife, 79;—-danava 
Hayagriva on Cakravan, 403;—Paficajana on Cakravan, 403;—-Malin (Hari), 739; Krsna as avatara 
(incarnation) of, 35, 40; Lakmana recalls he is an inconceivable portion of, 608;—returns to his 
state as quarter of, 851;—-and Satrughna infused with portions of, 71; Maya is immemorial consort 
of, 854; Narada’s account of Rama story makes no explicit reference to Rama as avatara 
(incarnation) of, 9; nature of, is to protect all beings, 849; paralyzes Siva, 127; pierces Malyavan 
with javelin (Govinda), 740; plans to divide himself into three parts, 831; pleading of vedic gods 
with, to incarnate, 10; Prahlada asura devotee of, 30; as “preserver” in the Hindu “trinity,” 34; 
promises to kill Ravana and son, 768;—to kill sons of Sukesa (Janardana), 735-36, raksasas 
abandon Lanka in fear of, 731, 740, 744; —believe Rama is incarnation of, 571—72; Rama as 
Hrstkesa, 709; as incarnation of, 4, 11;—-as mighty as, 51;—as one-half of, 71;—-enters with 
brothers into blazing energy of, 854;—-glorifies, 137;—and Sita sleep in sanctuary of, 137;—as 
slayer of Madhu (Madhusiidana), 128, 709; as Upendra, “younger brother of Indra”, 709; Rama 
Jamadagnya (Parasurama) as avatara (incarnation) of, 11, 21;—has bow of, 127;—recognizes 
Rama as, 128; Ravana believes, not equal to him, 753; refuge of the worlds, 854; refuses to kill 
Ravana, 768;—-Vrtra, 831; sacrificial post of, 114; sets mind on human incarnation, 849; sets term 
of incarnation, 849; Siva tells god to seek refuge with, 735; sleeping of (Kesava), 383; as Supreme 
Being, 400, 403; takes birth to slaughter raksasas, 740; three strides of, 400, 418, 424, 426-27, 
468, 620; unlike most incarnations of, Rama remains on earth for long time, 21; role of, in Sagara 
story (Vasudeva), 92-93; Vibhisana as one of few demon devotees of, 30; wishes to kill Ravana, 
849; vows to kill raksasas (Hari), 736 yogic power of illusion of, 82 

Visravas (brahman sage): agnihotra rite of, 28, 741; birth of, 730; curses children, 28-29, 741;— 
Kaikast, 29, 741; Devavarnini wife of, 730; exempts Vibhisana from curse, 29; father of Kubera 
Vaisravana, 730;—of Kumbhakarna, 28-29, 740-41; —of Ravana, 28-29, 740-41; of Siipanakha, 
741;—of Vibhisana, 28-29, 740-41; Kaikasi wife of, 28; son of Pulastya, 28, 730; tells Kubera to 
abandon Lanka and found a city on Kailasa, 745 

Visvaci (gandharva woman), 227 

Visvadevas, 158, 768, 842 

visvajit rite, 68 

Visvakarman: artisan of the gods, 734, 747; Bharadvaja invokes, for hospitality to Bharata, 227; 
builds dwelling for Kubera, 399, 405;—dwelling of Varuna on western mountain, 403;—Lanka, 
419, 437, 715, 731, 734;—palace for Agastya, 401;—-palaces, 457;—residence for Garuda 
(Vainateya), 399;—-sleeping chamber for Kumbhakarna 747;—creates ornament Agastya gives to 
Rama, 824; fashions Puspaka, 446, 714, 770;—Visnu’s bow, 126, 278;—Visnu’s discus, 403; father 
of Nala, 15, 554; grants boon to Hanuman, 786;—to Nala, 554, 564; tells raksasas about Lanka, 
734 

Visvaksena, 709 


Visvamitra: acknowledged as a royal-seer, 109; ashram of, attacked by Marica, 32, 82—83;— recalled, 
305; asks DaSaratha to send Rama to kill raksasas, 10, 71-75, 305; attains preeminence among 
seers, |15;—-worlds to which royal seers aspire, 109; attends Rama’s sacrifice, 841; austerities of, 
107-17, 841; becomes a brahman-seer, 41, 103, 116—117;—recalled, 72; becomes a seer, 114; 
conflict of, with Vasistha, 104-17; creates new constellations, 112; curses Mahodaya and Vasistha’s 
sons, 111;—-own sons, 114;—-Rambha, 116-18; Dasaratha tries to go back on his word to, 73-74; 
Dasaratha’s aid requested by, 305; departs from Mithila, 125; enmity of, with Vasistha, 11, 103-17; 
enraged at DaSaratha’s turnabout, 75; genealogy of, 103; Ghrtaci seduces, 392; gives the Bala and 
Atibala mantras to Rama, 76;—mantras to Rama, 76; —weapon-spells and recovery mantras for 
Krsasvas to Rama, 80-81; Indra urges, to confer the weapon-spells, sons of Krsasva, 79; instructs 
Rama to kill Tataka, 78-79;—-Rama to save Ahalya from Gautama’s curse, 101; knows how to use 
divine weapon-spells (astras), 75; Laksmana accompanies Rama on journey with, 9, 75—102; 
Menaka infatuates 115; narrates history of Kama’s ashram and Siva’s burning of Kama, 76-77;— 
history of Malada and Karusa and the story of Tataka, 77—78;— stories of various places they pass 
through, 10, 56, 108;—-story of churning of the ocean of milk for nectar of immortality(amrta), and 
ensuing war between daiteyas and ddityas, 97-98; —story of Diti, Indra and the birth of the 
Marutas, 97-99;—-story of Indra, Gautama and Ahalya, 100—101;—-story of Kusanabha’s daughters 
and his own lineage, 84—86;—story of Lake Manasa and the origin of the Sarayt river, 77;—-story 
of the Ashram of the Perfected Being, 8 1—82;—-story of the Dwarf incarnation of Visnu, 8 1—82;— 
story of the founding of Visala and the lineage of Sumati, 99; —story of the marriage of Siva and 
Uma and the birth of Kartikeya, 87—-90;—-story of the sons of Sagara, the digging of ocean, descent 
of the Ganges, 90-97; one of the seven seers, 728; performs sacrifice for Trisanku, 111—12; 
purohitas of, unnamed, 105; Rama accompanies, to Mithila, 10, 83;—-defends sacrifice of, 10, 82— 
83; Rambha seduces, 115—16; receives divine weapons from Siva, 107; reports the reunion of 
Ahalya and Gautama to Satananda, 103; as royal-seer,105;—recalled, 72; sacrifice(s) of, raksasas 
disrupt, 10, 73-74. 82-83; —lasts for ten nights, 73;—-Rama guards for six nights, 82; sets out with 
Rama and Laksmana, 75; Siva grants weapon-spells to, 107; son of Gadhi, 72, 104—5, 108; sons of, 
107; story of career of, 11, 103-7; story of, and Menaka, 115; story of, and Rambha, 116-18; story 
of, and Sunahgepa, 113-14; story of, and Trisanku 110, 111-12; takes Rama and Laksmana to 
Mithila to see Janaka’s bow, 10—11, 83-108, 118-19; weapon-spells of, divine weapons of, 108; 
Vasistha befriends, 117;—renders useless weapon-spells of, 10, 108; visits Dasaratha, 63-64 

vital glow: as sign of life, 586, 589, 824 

Vitapavati (capital city of Kubera), 439, 650 

Vivasvant. See Stirya 

vow: of Angada to fast to death, 414, 416; of Afyana, 426; of Bhagiratha, 95—96; of the Bhargavas, 
126; of Bharata, 224, 253, 383, 810; of Bhrgu’s wife, 79; of Dasaratha, 169, 719; of great sages, 
77; of Hanuman, 853; of Indrajit, 640; of Janaka, 119-20; of Kakutsthas, 125; of Kausalya, 152; of 
Kubera, 748; of Parvati, 87; of Rama and Laksmana, 186; of Rama, 248, 283, 317, 335, 477, 484, 
511, 552-553, 588, 689, 699, 703, 706, 711; of Rama to slay Valin, 359, 361; of Rama and Sita, 
135; of Ravana, 591, 742, 773; of Satyavati, 86; of Sita, 705; of Siva, 76 ; of Sugriva, 416; of 
Valmiki, 57; of Vasistha, 75, 106; of Vibhisana, 742; of Visvamitra, 114, 116. See also oath; truth- 
act 

Vrtra, 736, 759, 768, 764, passim; asvamedha sacrifice of, 832—33; austerities of, 831; Indra kills, 
with vajra, 831—32; story of Indra and, 830-32 

vulture(s): fifth path in sky, that of, 419. See also Jatayus; Sampati 


water-offerings: to ancestors, 76, 87, 241, 242, 283, 379, 419, 420; of Ravana, 758; known as 
samvarta, 846. See also funerary libations 


weapon(s), 582, 584-85, 594, 601, 603, 647, 663, 675, 679, 685, 696; as a means of suicide, 454; of 
fourteen thousand raksdsas, 292-93; of monkeys, 525; of Rama to kill golden deer, 312. See also 
arrow(s); bow(s); discus; javelin(s); lance(s); serpent-eapons; sword; Glossary of Weapons 

weapon-spells (astras), 775; of Agni, 606, 639, 685, 689; of asuras, 685; of Brahma, 482, 493, 523, 
639, 641-42, 654, 655, 661; of gandharvas, 676, 685; of Garuda, 690; of gods, 689; of Indra, 628, 
670; of Indrajit, 584, 764; known as samvarta, 846; of Pasupati (Siva), 758; Rama receives from 
Vivamitra, 10; Ravana as master of, 738; of Rudra (Siva), 626, 684; Samharas know how to use, 
75; of Siva (Pasupati), 764; Siva gives to ViSvamitra, 107; sons of Késasva as, 75; of Siirya, 639, 
685; thwart each other, 698; Vasistha renders useless, of Visvamitra, 108; of Vayu, 627; of 
vidyadharas called Nandana, 80; VisSvamitra gives, to Rama, 10, 80—81;—knows how to use, 75; of 
Yama, 639 

western quarter: description of, 402-4; dispatching of search party to, 402—4, 407; Susena, leader of, 
search party, 400, 407 

western search party: dispatching of, to western quarter, 402-4; failure of, to find Sita, 409; Susena 
as leader of, 400, 407 

widow(s): Dasaratha’s wives as, 245; exile of king leave earth, 183, 213, 222, 245; Kaikey1 must live 
as, 175, 244; Lanka to become a city of, 329, 474; raksasa women as, 676, 700; Sita does not have 
the signs of, 588;—should not be, 588;—thinks she is, 566; Stirpanakha as, 33, 763; Tara as, 374, 
377; wives of Valin as, 379; women abducted by women as, 762; women never become in Rama’s 
kingdom, 54, 727 

wife/wives: commander of army as, 425; description of consorts of Ravana and, 29-30, 446-50; of 
Dasaratha, fasting of, 223;—reunited with him in heaven, 845; of Valin lament, 374—75;—fast to 
death of, 375 

wind: ceases to blow during battle between Rama and Ravana, 697 

wind god. See Vayu 

wine: Gdityas accept, 98; asuras do not accept, 98; flower, 451; of the gods, 761; madhu, 390; 
maireya, 105, 227, 229, 390, 791 

winter. See rainy season 

woman/women: abducted by Ravana, 16, 29, 30; abducted by Ravana curse him, 763; asceticism of, 
797 (see also Anasiiya; asceticism; austerities; Sabari; Sita; Svayamprabha; Vedavati); dharma of, 
157-58, 161, 162-63, 172, 197, 109, 260; dress and anoint Sita, 705; inner apartments of (see inner 
apartments); Lanka compared to, 437—38, 440; obedience of, to husbands, 158, 260; prohibition on 
killing, 215; propriety of, performing sandhya rituals, 458; Ravana abducts, 62—63;in Valmtki’s 
ashram, 797. See also apsaras(es); raksasa women; Ravana: wives and courtesans of, described; 
yaksa woman/women 

women’s quarters. See inner apartments 

world guardian(s) (lokap@la[s]), 131, 156, 280, 725; Brahma makes Kubera, 731; Indra as, 731; 
Kubera as, Ravana subjugates, 545; Ravana threatens to send to abode of Yama, 748; Varuna as, 
731, 804 


Yadu: and Yayati, 805—7; son of Yayati and Devayani, 805; Yayati curses to father yatudhdanas, 807; 
Yayati loves than Ptru, 805 

yajna (sacrifice[s]), 40. See also sacrifice(s) 

Yajfiakopa (raksasa), 547; Rama fights, 581; son of Malyavan, 734 

Yajnasatru (raksasa), 291; Rama strikes, 583 

yaksa(s), 68-69, 74-75, 78, passim; Brahma creates, 732; creatures of the night, 87; etymology of 
word, 732; Kubera king of, 405; Kubera lives on Kailasa surrounded by, 545; Ravana battles 


Kubera Vaisravana and, on Kailasa, 749-51; Visnu tells gods to father sons on, 70. See also 
Manibhadra/Manicara; Samyodhakantaka; Suketu; Stryabhanu 

yaksa woman/women, 734; Ravana abducts, 762—63 See also Tataka 

yak-tail fly whisks: as sign of kingship, 145, 148, 228, 267, 302, 323, 361, 380, 395, 448, 463, 509, 
640, 722, 724, 725 

Yama (god of death): becomes a crow, 754; Brahma protects Ravana from, 760; grants boon to 
Hanuman, 786; king of ancestors, 757; Mrtyu accompanies, in battle against Ravana, 759-60; must 
not falsify word of Brahma, 760; Narada warns of Ravana’s intentions, 757—58; Ravana fights, 
757-60; regent of southern quarter, 292, 403; rewards crow, 755; vanishes from Ravana’s sight, 
760; Vatapi goes to house of, 276; vows to kill Ravana, 759-60; weapon-spells of, 639; as world 
guardian, 731. See also Dharmaraja; Kala; Krtanta; Mrtyu; Vaivasvata 

Yamuna (river), 17, 18, 35, 146, 188, 206, 256, 398, 716, 718, 817, passim; Lavana harasses sages 
who live near, 807-8; Rama crosses, 190; Satrughna camps on banks of, 814; Satrughna. crosses, 
815; water for Rama’s consecration brought from confluence of, with Ganges, 146 

yatudhana{s] (type of raksasa): Angada allows, to capture him, 579; battle monkeys, 605, 625, 631; 
central encampment of Ravana garrisoned by, 539; described, 441—42; Khara has army of, 290, 
292; engage in vedic recitation, 440; wake up Kumbhakarna, 610 

Yavadvipa (island), 399 

Yavanas (peoples), 106; produced from wish-fulfilling cow, 107 

Yavanas (region): located in northern quarter, 404 

Yayati: and Yadu, 805-7; consecrates Piru, 807; curses Yadu to father yatudhanas, 807; Devayani 
disfavored wife of, 805; enters ashram, 807; exchanges old age with son Piru, 805—7; Indra and, 
339; Puru younger son of, 805—7; son of Nahusa, ascends to Indra’s world, 339; story of 805—7; 
Usanas Kavya curses, 806, 807 

Yogavasisthamaharamayana, 41 

younger brother: Laksmana as ideal of, 5, 21 

Yuddhakanda, 537-727; descriptions of battles in, 15; longest kanda, 15; synopsis of, 15—16 

Yudhajit: army of, battles gandharvas, 846-47; Bharata’s maternal uncle, 124, 206-7, 845-46; 
desires to conquer the country of the gandharvas, 845—46; dispatches Gargya as messenger, 845— 
46; king of Kekaya and Bharata’s maternal uncle, 130; son of king of Kekaya, 124; takes Bharata 
and Satrughna to his home, 130 

yuga(s): determined by the balance of righteousness and unrighteousness, 571; in Hinduism, 4, 32, 
37-38; Narada’s account of, 821—22; theory of righteousness (dharma) in, 37-38, 821-22; 
Vedavatt born in Krta, 753-54; Vedavati reborn as Sita in Treta, 753-54. See also Dvapara Yuga; 
Kali Yuga; Krta Yuga; Tisya; Treta Yuga 

Yupaksa (minister of Ravana): informs Kumbhakarna of the Lanka’s siege, 612 

Yupaksa (Ravana’s field marshal): Hanuman fights and kills, 502—3 

yuvardja (heir-apparent/prince regent), 11, 46 


