THE VISNU-PURANAM 
BOOK I 


? 


NAT: 





CHAPTER 1 
WTS ATT: 11 


(HSMM, ware vit AxereT we: , 
WUP A ATES) 
ge TA Mad aTyeara 
fart & gusta aaet feanraa 
TAEASTY CHM AEGST YT VI 


OM ! glory to Vasudeva'— Victory be to 
you, Pundarikaksa, adoration be’ to you, 
Visvabhavana; glory be to you, HrsikeSa, 
Mahapurusa, and Pirvaja’. 


Wea Ta TSA: FA 

TUT fear fas Ferhat cet eT 
WIA-FTHANe-MTG- TT FT: 

a atseg faconifa-sfa-qit|: 1 21 


May that Visnu, who is the existent, 
imperishable, Brahma, who is ISvara,° who is 
spirit;* who with the three qualities’ is the 
cause of creation, preservation, and 
destruction; who is the parent of nature, 
intellect, and the other ingredients of the 
universe’; be to us the bestrew of 
understanding, wealth and final emancipation. 


wort fant fasrgt genet] wioracr a 
Te worey aaaha YUOt ATAAATAI 3 UI 
SirerayuUrst AgaargareTy| 

TUM adage A AGATA ¥ I 
TI yfat Fayalfgeatray 

aaa: ufos wforoentrarer a & 


Having adored Visnu’, the lord of all, and 
paid reverence to Brahma and the rest’; having 
also saluted the spiritual preceptor, I will 
narrate a Purana equal in sanctity to the Vedas, 
Maitreya,” having saluted him reverentially, 


thus addressed PardSara, the excellent sage, the 
grandson of Vasistha, who was versed in 
traditional history and the Puranas; who was 
acquainted with the Vedas and the branches of 
science dependent upon them; and skilled in 
law and philosophy; and who had performed 
the morning rites of devotion. 

AAT sara 


wan fe aceaaraataafiact Wz 
ecioirenitt walter Aart AERA GH 
MAMA AAS AY ATHATAT 
ard WAMRAG wast Ashe afew: ii 
aisehreants aig: ag wat gar Tra 
aye Fae aa TENANT afaqeata 2 


TTS We Tea Wes 

CAAT a Sa Aa ACA AT AN 8 I 

Son sat Sa WAT 

WAG-UadA FT WA TAM FAI Voll 

Walds Heart Warot ya 

Maitreya said— Master! I have been 
instructed by you in the whole of the Vedas, 
and in the institutes of law and of sacred 
science; through your favour, other men, even 
though they be my foes, cannot accuse me of 
having been remiss in the acquirement of 
knowledge. I am now desirous, oh you who 
are profound in piety! to hear from you, how 
this world was, and how in future it will be? 
What is its substance, oh Brahman, and 
whence proceeded animate and inanimate 
things? Into what has it been resolved, and 
into what will its dissolution again occur? 
How were the elements manifested? Whence 
proceeded the gods and other beings? What 
are the situation and extent of the oceans and 
the mountains, the earth, the sun, and the 
planets? 





2 THE VISNU-PURANAM 
Sarat aa aI AY Watufir an gen Ufarenia weal ara erga Aa: | 
aeury acufaacay ugar AMAA TIA APTA: WT Vl 
HOUTA TRIS FTA FST VIN enivertteraeranut wes: | 


tafinttarnas afit arent 

ASMSMUTTT AMTAZ SATA TN 83 

AT Aeloerat Aa VATA AA 

Netra Wed taal ASA evi 

Ter] Wareraat Haar aT APA 

AATSTAA A TAT ATT AST TA BG Ut 

What are the families of the gods and 
Others, the Manus, the period, called 
Manvantaras, those termed Kalpas, and their 
sub-divisions, and the four ages: the events 
that happen at the close of a Kalpa, and the 
terminations of the several ages''!: the 
histories, oh great Muni of the gods, the sages, 
and kings; and how the Vedas were divided 
into branches (or schools), after they had been 
arranged by Vyasa; the duties of the 
Brahmanas, and the other tribes, as well as of 
those who pass through the different orders of 
life ? All these things | wish to hear from 
you, grandson of Vasistha. Incline your 
thoughts benevolently towards me, that I may, 
through your favour, be informed of all I 
desire to know. 


UU Sara 
arg Baa ada onitatster waar 
faq: far 8 sary afasr agarea Bi 2 ii 
feeanfrargent teen aferet maT 
FTAA: HA ALATA ATATYET: 11 Vo tt 
Aas THA Wa faargnea Warery! 
TAHA PAA, UA Freres: 1 Ve 
Wa: Pattaanay Ag Wt: Tala: | 
ayaa wenn afasy afvars: 1 ee 
AAAAAHAT At HAT aS! 
Tera ae foyer fast Tar 2011 
Teraeg safer Ble Waa St: 
Sad At H: HA Ut: HATH TAN 2 


aaara eat Ble aA AT ASR HAN 23 
stat fromatdatchrrarantihr: | 
aa & facndag ararann fe aaa: ee 


ParaSara replied— Well inquired, pious 
Maitreya, You recall to my recollection that 
which was of old narrated by my father's 
father, Vasistha, J had heard that my father had 
been devoured by a Raksasa employed by 
Visvamitra: violent anger seized me, and I 
commenced a sacrifice for the destruction of 
the Raksasas: hundreds of them were reduced 
to ashes by the rite, when, as they- were about 
to be entirely extirpated, my grandfather Vasis 
tha thus spoke to me: Enough, my child; let 
your wrath be appeased : the Raksasas are not 
culpable: your father's death was the work of 
destiny. Anger is the passion of fools; it 
becomes not a wise man. By whom. It may be 
asked, is any one killed? Every man reaps the 
consequences of his own acts. Anger, my son, 
is the destruction of all that man obtains by 
arduous exertions, of fame, and of devout 
austerities; and prevents the attainment of 
heaven or of emancipation. The chief sages 
always shun wrath: be not you, my child, 
subject to its influence. Let no more of these 
unoffending spirits of darkness be consumed. 
Mercy is the might of the righteous’” 


Ud aaa Heat AETerM 

SOMRAA MA MATRA 2 & 

Ta: Wea: B Wary atest APTA: | 

AMY TAT UA UOT TROT: YAN EM 
fraraea caret: HararaferE: | 

ANAS WENT AA GSAT: 1 9 

at veft agree yore ara 

WT TARGA VAP MrSior Aerie 2 21 
Vat ANS: HSA Ad: Hea: 

TAA ACTS SATA WSTATAN 28 


BOOK I, CHAP. 1 


3 





quuraigaaat wary aca vfeeata 
SAAT WAT AIT AAPL 3 ol 
Wad a fran a adoaanet ala: 
TAMA TA AT TEA 3 vh 
TT UTA We afasr afer: | 
YR Bech F Wana waearfan 3 Vt 


Being thus admonishcd by my venerable 
grandsire, I immediately desisted from the rite, 
in obedience to his injunctions, and Vasistha, 
the most excellent of sages, was connect with 
me. Then arrived Pulastya, the son of 
Brahma,'> who’ was received by my 
grandfather with the customary marks of 
respect. The illustrious brother of Pulaha said 
to me: Since, in the violence of animosity. you 
have listened to the words of your progenitor, 
and have exercised clemency, therefore you 
shall become learned in every science: since 
you have forborne, even though incensed, to 
destroy my posterity, I will bestow upon you 
anothcr boon, and you shall become the author 
of a summary of the Puranas;’* you shall know 
the true nature of the deities, as it really is; 
and, whether engaged in religious rites, or 
abstaining from their performance,’’ your 
understanding, through my favour, shall be 
perfect, and exempt from doubts. Then my 
grandsire Vasistha added: Whatever has been 
said to you by Pulastya, shall assuredly come 
to pass. 


sft yet afasa yore a eiram 

aeth ad Balt aed adayeaaet TAN 3s 

ase aarage a Bae uftqesct 

quordfeat ware at Prater sere 3 wt 

faa: Vergy Aa WI aaa Ae 

feafa-danaratsat Tratset AT TB GM 
sf sttfeeapacroy wermigh weratseareat: 11 8 


Now truly all that was told me formerly by 
Vasistha, and by the wise Pulastya, has been 
brought to my recollection by your questions, 
and I will relate to you the whole, even all you 
have asked. Listen to the complete 


compendium of the Purdnas, according to its 
tenor. ‘he world was produced from Visnu : it 
exists in him: he is the cause of its continuance 
and cessation: he is the world.'° 

kk 


NOTES 

1. 3 FWA aqe@ara = An address of this kind, to 
one or other Hindu divinity, usually introduces 
Sanskrit compositions, especially those considered 
sacred. The first term of this mantra or brief prayer. 
Om or Omkdara, is well known as a combination of 
letters invested by Hindu mysticism with peculiar 
sanctity, In the Vedas it is said to comprchend all 
the gods; and in the Puranas it is directed to be 
prefixed to all such formulae as that of the text. 
Thus in the Uttara Khanda of the Padma Purana: 
'The syllablé Om, the mysterious name, or Brahma, 
is the leader of all prayers: let it therefore, O 
lovely-faced, (Siva addresses Durga.) be employed 
in the beginning of all prayers:’ 31ER: Wal we 

Was:1 set waa aga Aa A YMA 
According to the same authority, one of the 
mystical imports of the term is the collective 
enunciation of Visnu expressed by A, of Sri his 
bride intimated by u, and of their joint worshipper 
designated by M. A whole chapter of the Vayu 
Purana is devoted to this term. A text of the Vedas 
is there cited: aifteyaet ger ‘Om. the 
monosyllable Brahmé;' the latter meaning either the 
Supreme Being or the Vedas collectively, of which 
this monosyllable is the type. It is also said to 
typify the three spheres of the world, the three holy 
fires, the three steps of Visnu etc. 3ifteta wal Fareaat 
aarearasTaa: 1 fesypsraradi Frequent meditation 
upon it, and repetition of it, ensure release from 
worldly existence, eWeek wa wWHiarafeqq Fe 
aed OTE Wary 
Tease: | sraet Peper card fea wretreraera: 1 See 
also Manu, II. 76. Vasudeva, a name of Visnu or 
Krsna, is according to its grammatical etymology, a 
patronymic derivative implying son of Vasudeva. 
The Vaisnava Puranas, however, devise other 
explanations: see the next chapter, and again, b. VI. 
C5: 

2. In this stanza occurs a series of the 
appellations of Visnu: I. Pundarikaksa, having eyes 
like a lotus, or heart-pervading; or Pundarika is 
explained supreme glory, and Aksa imperishable: 


4 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





the first is the most usual etymon, 2. Visvabhavana, 
the creator of the universe, or the cause of the 
existence of all things. 3. Hrshikesa, lord of the 
senses. 4. Mahapurusa, great or supreme spirit; 
purusa meaning that which abides or is quiescent in 
body (puri sete). 5. Purvaja, produced or appearing 
before creation; the Orphic ‘tp@toy ovos'. In the 
fifth book, c. 18, Visnu is described by five 
appellations, which are considered analogous to 
these; or, I, Bhitdtma, one with created things, or 
Pundarikaksa; 2. Pradhénatma, one with crude 
nature, or Visvabhavana : 3. Indriyatm4, one with 
the senses, or Hrshikesa : 4. Paramatma, supreme 
spirit, or Mahapurusa : and Atma, soul; living soul, 
animating nature and existing before it, or Pirvaja. 

3. Brahma, in the neuter form, is abstract 
supreme spirit: and Igvara is the Deity in his active 
nature, he who is able to do or leave undone, or to 
do any thing in any other manner than that in which 
it is done: HiAHiAaM He Waa: | 

4. Puman which is the same with Purusa, 
incorporated spirit. By this and the two preceding 
terms also the commentator understands the text to 
signify that Visnu is any form of spiritual being that 
is acknowledged by different philosophical 
systems, or that he is the Brahma of the Vedanta, 
the Isvara of the Patafijala, and the Purusa of the 
Samkhya school. 

5. The three qualities, to which we shall have 
further occasion to advert, are Satya (4), 
goodness or purity, knowledge, quiescence; Rajas, 
foulness, passion, activity; and Tamas, darkness, 
ignorance, inertia. 

6. Pradhanabuddhyddisth. This predicate of the 
Deity distinguishes most of the Puranas from 
several of the philosophical systems, which 
maintain, as did the earliest Grecian systems of 
cosmogony, the eternal and independent existence 
of the first principle of things, as nature, matter, or 
chaos. Accordingly, the commentator notices the 
objection. Pradhana being without beginning, it is 
said how can Visnu be its parent? To which he 
replies, that this is not so, for in a period of worldly 
destruction (Pralaya), when the Creator desists 
from creating, nothing is generated by virtue of any 
other energy or parent. Or, if this be not 
satisfactory, then the text may be understood to 
imply that intellect (Buddhi) etc, are formed 


through the materiality of crude nature, or 
Pradhana. 

7. Visnu is commonly derived in the Puranas 
from the root Vis, to enter, entering into, or 
pervading the universe, agreeably to the text of the 
Vedas, acgel | "Having created that 
(world), he then afterwards enters into it; being, as 
our comment observes, undistinguished by place, 
time, or property; APS ATA | 
According to the Matsya Purana the name alludes 
to his entering into the mundane egg: according to 
the Padma Purana, to his entering into or com- 
bining with Prakrti, as Purusa or spirit: © C4 ary 
fay ypomiiaas €1 In the Moksa Dharma of the 
Mahabharata, s. 165, the word is derived from the 
root vi. signifying motion, pervasion, production, 
radiance; or, irregularly, from krama, to go with the 
particle vi, implying, variously, prefixed. 

8. Brahma and the rest is said to apply to the 
series of teachers through whom this Purana was 
transmitted from its first reputed author Brahma, to 
its actual narrator, the sage ParaSara. See also b, VI. 
c. 8. 

9, The Guru, or spiritual preceptor, is said to be 
Kapila or Sarasvata: the latter is included in the 
series of teachers of the Purana, Pardsara must be 
considered also as a disciple of Kapila, as a teacher 
of the Samkhya philosophy. 

10. Maitreya is the disciple of Parasara, who 
relates the Visnu Purana to him; he is also one of 
the chief interlocutors in the Bhagavata, and is 
introduced in the Mahabharata (Vana Parva, s. 10.) 
as a great Rsi, or sage, who denounces 
Duryodhana’s death. In the Bhdgavata be is also 
termed Kausharavi, or the son of Kusharava. 

11. One copy reads Yuga dharma, the duties 
peculiar to the four 14 ages, or their characteristic 
properties, instead of Yuganta. 


12. Sacrifice of Parasara. The story of Pardsara's 
birth is narrated in detail in the Mahabharata (Adi 
Parva, s. 176). King Kalmdsapada meeting with 
Sakti, the son of Vasistha, in a narrow path in a 
thicket, desired him to stand out of his way. The 
sage refused : on which the Raja beat him with his 
whip, and Sakti cursed him to become a Raksasa, a 
man-devouring spirit. The Raja in _ this 
transformation killed and ate its author, or Sakti, 
together with all the other sons of Vasistha, Sakti 


BOOK I, CHAP. 1 


5 


a ae 


left his wife Adrisyanti pregnant, and she gave birth. 


to Parasara, who was brought up by his 
grandfather. When he grew up, and was informed 
of his father's death, he instituted a sacrifice for the 
destruction of all the Raksasas, but was dissuaded 
from its completion by Vasistha and other sages or 
Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha, and Kratu. The Mahabharata 
adds, that; when he desisted from the rite, he 
scattered the remaining sacrificial fire upon the 
northern face of the Himalaya mountain, where it 
still blazes forth at the phases of the moon, 
consuming Raksasas, forests, and mountains. The 
legend alludes possibly to some trans-Himalayan 
volcano. The transformation of Kalmasapada is 
ascribed in other places to a different cause; but he 
is every where regarded as the devourer of Sakti or 
Saktri, as the name also occurs. The story is told in 
the Linga Purana (Purvarddha, s. 64) in the same 
manner, with the addition, conformably to the 
Saiva tendency of that work, that Pardsara begins 
his sacrifice by propitiating Mahadeva Vasistha's 
dissuasion, and Pulastya's appearance, are given in 
the very words of our text; and the story concludes, 
‘thus through the favour of Pulastya and of the wise 
Vasistha, ParaSara composed the Vaisnava (Visnu) 
Purana, containing ten thousand stanzas, and being 
the third of the Puréna compilations 
(Puranasamhita). The Bhagavata (b. III. s. 8) also 
alludes, though obscurely, to this legend. In 
recapitulating the succession of the narrators of part 
of the Bhagavata, Maitreya states that this first 
Purana was communicated to him by his Guru 
Purasara, as he had been desired by Pulastya: Wrara 
Fa AW Sages A: WIR:) YAR WMI) ie. 
according to the commentator, agreeably to the 
boon given by Pulastya to Parasara, saying, 'You 
shall be a narrator of Puranas; (raw wares) The 
Mahabharata makes no mention of the 
communication of this faculty to Parasara by 
Pulastya; and as thé Bhagavata could not derive this 
particular from that source, it here most probably 
refers unavowedly, as the Linga does avowedly, to 
the Visnu Purana. 

13. Pulastya, as will be presently seen, is one of 
the Rsis. who were the mind-born sons of Brahm. 
Pulaha. who is here also named, is another. 
Pulastya is considered. as the ancestor of the Raks 
asas, as he is the father of Visravas, the father of 


Ravana and his brethren, Uttara Ramayana, 
Mahabharata, Vana Parva. s. 272. Padma Purana 
Linga Purana s. 63. 


14. Purdna sarmhité kartté bhavan bhavisyati. 
You shall be a maker of the Samhita or 
compendium of the Puranas or of the Visnu Purana, 
considered aS.a summary or compendium of 
Pauranic traditions, in either sense it is 
incompatible with the general attribution of all the 
Puranas to Vy4sa. 


15. Whether performing the usual ceremonies of 
the Brahmanas. or leading a life of devotion and 
penace. which supersedes the necessity of rites and 
sacrifices. 


16. These are, in fact. the brief replies to 
Maitreya's six questions (p. 3). or. How was the 
world created? By Visnu how will it be? At the 
periods of dissolution it will be in Visnu. Whence 
proceeded animate and inanimate things? From 
Visnu. Of what is the substance of the world? Vis 
nu. Into what has it been. and will it agnir be. 
resolved? Visnu. He is therefore both the 
instrumental and material cause of the universe. 
‘The answer to the "whence" replies to the query as 
to the instrumental cause: "He is the world” replies 
to the inquiry as to the material cause:' 3-4 
aa C Wht GA SUAS | 
‘And by this explanation of the agency of the 
materiality, etc. of Visnu. as regards the universe, 
(it follows that) all will be produced from, and al] 
will repose in him:, fay: wasmguer- 
wqHyealewsysy froitcefrat aa rant; We 
have here precisely the TO nav of the Orphic 
doctrines, and we might fancy that Brucker was 
translating a passage from a.Purana when he 
describes them in these words: "Continuisse Jovem 
(lege Visnum) sive summum deum in se omnia. 
omnibus orfum ex se dedisse, omnia ex se genuisse. 
et ex sua produxisse essentia. Spiritum esse 
universi qui omnia regit vivificat estque; ex quibus 
necessario sequitur omnia in eum reditura." Hist. 
Philos. I. 388. Jamblichus and Proclus also testify 
that the Pythagorean doctrines of the origin of the 
material world from the Deity, and its identity with 
him, were much the same.—Cudworth. |. c. p. 348. 


RRKEK 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





CHAPTER 2 
fadiatseara: 
(faazegit:, ofextra =) 


UTS Sara 
SATA Yara Fara UTA 
wearers fara Vara eI 
aa ferreaaty eta YISUT A 
STASAT AMT TRAE 2 
CRTRATRUTS WA TRTAY FA: 
eae feos gfmeran 3 1 
wihafaaret sass Ser: 
We TaeTeY fereoret TTT YN 


Parasara said, Glory to the unchangeable, 
holy, eternal, supreme Visnu, of one universal 
nature, the mighty over all : to him who is 
Hiranygarbha. Hari, and Sankara,’ the creator, 
the preserver, and destroyer of the world: to 
Vasudeva, the libcrator of his worshippers: to 
him, whose essence is both single and 
manifold; who is both subtile and corporeal, 
indiscretc and discrete: to Visnu, the cause of 
final emancipation.’ Glory to the supreme Vis 
nu, the cause of the creation, existence, and 
end of this world; who is the root of the world, 
and who consists of the world.’ 

Say farrarerairarearanarany| 
wore Wayanad TERT & 1 
WARIS TATA: | 
avaeaeaa urbaeerd: Pera & 1 
faeyy afaeoy faarea ferdt at wer wey 
WOT AAT OTT AAT TST TTI 9 1 
seorenfey ae yeh eearenef rT: 

OB: Ward Warmer: frac 
Asis Yoaneara yy Warde! 
WAM FAT we ATTA BNF 


- Having glorified him who is the support of 
all things; who is the smallest of the small;* 
who is in all created things; the unchanged, 


_imperishable” Purusottama;° who is one with 


true wisdom, as truly known;’ eternal and 
incorrupt; and who is known through false 
appcarances by the nature of visible objects:” 
having bowed to Visnu, the destroyer, and lord 
of creation and preservation; the ruler of the 
world; unborn, imperishable, undecaying: I 
will relate to you that which was originally 
imparted by the great rather of all (Brahma), in 
answer to the questions of Daksa and other 
venerable sages, and repeated by them to 
Purukutsa, a king who reigned on the banks of 
the Narmada. It was next related by him to 
Sarasvata, and by Sarasvata to me.” 


UL: WTO TTT: Tear: | 
wuaniifefreorfasrrafaatsta: 1 Rol 
sTaerafarremat ufcoraecsrate: | 

ahead: Wadd ah I: Were Barer Veni 
ada Wes saa Ft A: 

dd: A argeatd fasta: ators een 
Agel UH Persea | 
Ueartaed Ft ar Fanta Frterq V3 tt 
dea WANA AHA aaTad| 

TAT GRRRIUT HTTSTT ST PATTI NI 
Wel Tau we yor: werd fisn 

AM TA BY HAT TTT BG I 
WMH UTA TE ATI 

wyatt Ut: Ys afew: wTT Taq LEM 
WAAR HATA TATATTST: | 

wurfor Fafranbreahaaralaeda: 11 Von 
ah fampenerh Yar: Stet Va aI 
Mish TeHaa Wet wer ema Vet 


Who can describe him who is not to be 
apprehended by the senses: who is the best of 
all things; the supreme soul, self-existent: who 
is devoid of all the distinguishing 
characteristics of complexion, caste, or the 
like; and is exempt from birth, vicissitude, 
death, or decay: who is always, and alone: 
who exists every where, and in whom all 


BOOK I, CHAP. 2 7 


things here exist; and who is thence named the Vedas, and teaching truly their doctrines, 
Vasudeva’? He is Brahma,’ supreme, lord, explain such passages as the following as 
eternal, unborn, imperishable, undecaying; of intending the production of the chief principle 


one essence; ever pure as free from defects. (Pradhdna). 


He, that Brahma, was all _ things; 
comprehending in his own nature the 
indiscreet and discrcte, He then existed in the 
forms of Purusa and of K4la. Purusa (spirit) is 
the first form of the supreme; next proceeded 
two other forms, the discrete and indiscrete; 
and Kala (time) was the last. These four— 
Pradhana (primary or crude matter), Purusa 
(spirit), Vyakta (visible substance), and Kala 
(time)—the wise consider to be the pure and 
supreme condition of Visnu.’’These four 
forms, in their due proportions, are the causes 
of the production of the phenomena of 
creation, preservation, and destruction. Visnu 
being thus discrete and indiscrete substance, 
spirit, and time, sports like a playful boy, as 


Wet a Ut aay TAH 

ate SATA BRT 
AAMT INAN 

Waits Gal TATRA 2 3 1 
fant: crEar Ural fe asst 

Bu wert yeas fam 
aaa Asa gd fag 

BUPAL AT Ag HT HTT VII 
WHat died enaadiawensy J ad 
AEA MHATAASATEAT WAT TAT 1 BGM 
srifeatrary aren arses fest fee 
TYATA TARA ATTA TAT N 2G Ul 


TU dace yas Ufa crate 


you shall learn by listening to his frolics.”” 


MSR BU Aq Aq Wager: | aerated ae feather aie 

Wheat wate: went Fret wewaretant ¢¢ 11 aera aeons utadai 29 1 
eet AICTE aT MARAT TET WCAC STAT: | 
werwapliaatt da wafehrcafEra 2 ol WaT: MAA: Wale VTA B21 
faqut aanrenfrrfemarerara| wart qersntt vfavareraar eft: 

ae Aatarae sarat J WeraTaTN 2 git aera WAT Wiser STATETA 2 FU 
qecrefadl fagran gereanfer:| SOT SATATATT TT: AAT ATE 


WAM Arana ATA WAIT: 113 oN 
Ua Atal TEL AMT YEA: | 

T Ugiaisarsmal warrashs a Tear: 11 3 eI 
faery Teraurfefiran 


Usha & atart waa 22 


That chief principle (Pradhana), which is 
the indiscrete cause, 1s called by the sages also 
Prakrti (nature): it is subtile, uniform, and 
comprehends what is and what is not (or both 
causes and effects); is durable, self-sustained, A®taSUS Ta fay: WaeAT 3 
illimitable, undecaying, and stable; devoid of "There was neither day nor night, nor sky 
sound or touch, and possessing neither colour nor earth, nor darkness nor light, nor any other 
nor form; endowed with the three qualities (in things, save only One, unapprehensible by 
equilibrium); the mother of the world; without intellect, or That which is Brahma and Puman 
beginning; and that into which all that is (spirit) and Pradhana (matter)"'®. The two 
produced is resolved.’* By that principle all forms which are other than the essence of 
things were invested in the period subsequent unmodified Visnu, are Pradhana (matter) and 
to the last dissolution of the universe, and Purusa (spirit); and his other form, by which 
prior to creation’’. For Brahmanas learned in those two are connected or separated, is called 


8 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





Kala (time)'’, When discrete substance is 
aggregated in crude nature, as in a foregone 
dissolution, that dissolution is termed 
elemental (Prakrta). The deity as Time is 
without beginning, and his. end is not known; 
and from him the revolutions of creation, 
continuance, and dissolution unintermittingly 
succeeds: (or when, in the latter season, the 
equilibrium of the qualities (Pradhana) exists, 
and spirit (Puman) is detached from matter, 
then the form of Visnu which is Time abide?"*. 
Then the supreme Brahma, the supreme soul, 
the substance of the world, the lord of all 
creatures, the universal soul, the supreme 
ruler, Hari, of his own will having entered into 
matter and spirit, agitated the mutable and 
immutable principles, the season of creation 
being arrived, in the same manner as fragrance 
affects the mind from its proximity merely, 
and not from any immediate operation upon 
mind itself: so the Supreme influenced the 
elements of creation’’. Purusottama is both the 
agitator and the thing to be agitated; being 
present in the essence of matter, both when it 
is contracted and expanded” Visnu, supreme 
over the supreme, is of the nature of discrete 
forms in the atomic productions, Brahma and 
the rest (gods, men. etc.) 


TUTara AAT Sasatsarasy 
Tera: ater fea 3 31 
Then from that equilibrium of the qualities 
(Pradhana) presided over by soul’', proceeds 
the unequal development of those qualities 
(constituting the principle Mahat or Intellect) 
at the time of creation”. 


maT ert Hl AAT! 
aikaat waea arreey fat weary! 
WaT VY wa Aifarsaq 3 v1 
dentate serfestea are: | 
faaNSUMESTY WEA ATATTTI 3 & 
qatsarnt eq: a faryorarreny 

QM WAT WEPL ASAT A AMN*A 3 & tl 
wafer fapater: wreaths Aa: | 


TAT VATA PRAT 

WMT TAHT Ware: BW AATAUITI 3 911 

sare fagater: wetat wast zi 

THA AIR AGT OT AA 3S 

SAT VAY WAM Taro 

The Chief principle then invests that Great 
principle, Intellect, and it becomes three fold, 
as affected by the quality of goodness, 
foulness, or darkness, and invested by the 
Chief principle (matter) as seed is by its skin. 
From the Great principle (Mahat) Intellect. 
threefold Egotism, (Ahank4ra)", denominated 
Vaikdrika. ‘pure;' Taijasa, ‘passionate;, and 
Bhutadi. rudimental.” is produced; the origin 
of the (subtile) elements and of the organs of 
sense; invested, in consequence of its three 
qualities, by Intellect, as Intellect is by the 
Chief principle. Elementary Egotism then 
becoming productive, as the rudiment of 
round, produced from it Ether, of which sound 
is the characteristic, investing it with its 
rudiment of sound. Ether becoming 
productive, engendered the rudiment of touch; 
whence originated strong wind. the property of 
which is touch; and Ether, with the rudiment 
of sound, enveloped the rudiment of touch. 


dal agafaalon Beast Wast TF sl 
Sifted aaron 
WAY F AY BIA WANG ¥ ol 
Rife faqneatot wat wast zi 
aaa TAS TareMafoT aA ATH Vit 
Tena amet Saat BArgag! 
fasatonfs arsifa wert aafsttn x 2 il 
PAA HT TAT ART TAM UT Hes | 
afaraterg ana aa aT Aya ¥ 3 
aaraToafagrarter stfastaretay fe a 

A Mat athe ered + Wewnfasteari x xt 
TATA SAAS J ATTA 
CARATS Aaa SMG It 


Wentest aaa Sat Santer: BAT: | 


BOOK I, CHAP. 2 





wae verifaen rer saa a USAT EI 
peadnrancad afganta & faa 

UT Hit wel aH A WIAs vEAhivn 
fanifirearaia: ad tar sea 


Then wind becoming productive, produced 
the rudiment of form (colour); whence light 
(or fire) proceeded, of which, form (colour) is 
the attribute; and the rudiment of touch 
enveloped the wind with the rudiment of 
colour. Light becoming productive, produced 
the rudiment of taste; whence proceed all 
juices in which flavour resides; and the 
rudiment of colour invested the juices with the 
rudiment of taste. The waters becoming 
productive, engendered the rudiment of smell; 
whence an aggregate (earth) originates, of 
which smell is the property’. In each several 
element resides its peculiar rudiment; thence 
the property of tanmatrata” (type or rudiment) 
is ascribed to these elements. Rudimental 
elements are not endowed with qualities, and 
therefore they are neither soothing, nor 
terrific, nor stupefying’’. This is the elemental 
creation, proceeding from the principle of 
egotism affected by the property of darkness. 
The organs of sense are said to be the 
passionate produces of the same principle, 
affected by foulness; and the ten divinities?’ 
proceed from egotism affected by the principle 
or goodness; as does Mind, which is the 
eleventh. The organs of sense are ten: of the 
ten, five are the skin. eye, nose, tongue, and 
car; the object of which, combined with 
Intellect, is the apprehension of sound and the 
rest: the organs of excretion and procreation, 
the hands, the feet, and the voice, form the 
other five; of which excretion, generation, 
manipulation, motion, and speaking, are the 
several acts, 


sTanvrargasdita afect yfaat qari xe tt 
wrentfatrpoerery! MyM: | 

VN aT Fetes farvrarety T BATU e 
aMrarat: vrata Geta faa 


AMAT] WT: ALAA FCAT: WG oll 

Then, ether, air, light, water, and earth, 
severally united with the properties of sound 
and the rest, existed as distinguishable 
according to their qualities, as soothing, 
terrific, or stupefying; but possessing various 
energies, and being unconnected, they could 
not, without combination, create living beings, 
not having blended with each other. 


TARTASATGIMT CLAITATATA: | 
WHAT ATTA HG 8H 


Yeanfawaard WATE at 
Tear faved wusyqencater Any VN 


THAN faery AerqyTITAT| 
YORAASUS arya! FEL Aenea! 
Wet TeRTeT fat: TAA & 3 
CARTRUIS A SHAT TULA: | 


FaAMTTERARUN Wat STATA: NG YI 


Having combined, therefore, with one 
another, they assumed, through their mutual 
association, the character of one mass of entire 
unity; and from the direction of spirit, with the 
acquiescence of the indiscrete Principle”, 
Intellect and the rest, to the gross elements 
inclusive, formed an egg’’, which gradually 
expended like a bubble of water. This vase 
egg, O sage, compounded of the elements, and 
resting on the waters, was the excellent natural 
abode of Visnu in the from of Brahma; and 
there Visnu, the lord of the universe, whose 
essence is inscrutable, assumed a perceptible 
form, and even he himself abided in it in the 
character of Brahma.*” 


SSAA AT TUG Teta: | 

MMe MARAT ARAN ATT IG GI 
Vaya Meataciaags: | 
aferangssag far! Weargvarga: ny GN 
antagurrenanrern arteat Ale: | 

Sa ayers yofgtear Fa 4 ot 
Nealdd Td: Aa: Uieat FEL 
Uharramrs Baht: wdsay 


10 


ARHARTAA ST ATA & C1 


Its womb, vast as the mountain Mcru, was 
composed of the mountains; and the mighty 
Oceans were the waters that filled its cavity. In 
that egg, O Brahman, were the continents and 
seas and mountains, the planets and divisions 
of the universe, the gods, the demons, and 
mankind. And this egg was externally invested 
by seven natural envelopes, or by water, air, 
fire, ether, and Ahankara the origin of the 
elements, each tenfold the extent of that which 
it invested; next came the. principle of intelli- 
gence; and finally, the whole was surrounded 
by the indiscrcte Principle: resembling thus 
the cocoa-nut, filled ulteriorly with pulp, and 
exteriorly covered by husk and rind. 


By Wu aa tad fda aft: 

Tan Yearesy Wray faget waradan & 3 
WSS TIT aad aewfaaewn 
Pea TAT HUTT TA: 11 § 0 
Asal WHIT SR VA: 


Arahaengnts veracafaitear: 1 gu 
a water yer sores 


TUS AT WY AT UATE 2 

Wiss Ga: ule aft gereagas & 311 

Affecting then the quality of activity, Hari, 
the lord of all, himself bccoming Brahma, 
engagcd in the creation of the universe. Visnu 
with the quality of goodness, and of 
immeasurable power, preserves created things 
through successive ages, until the close of the 
period termed a Kalpa; when the same mighty 
deity, Janardhana.”’ invested with the quality 
of darkness, assumes the awful from of Rudra, 
and swallows up the universe. Having thus 
devoured all things, and converted the world 
into one vast ocean, the Supreme reposes upon 
his mighty serpent couch amidst the deep: he 
awakes after a season, and again, as Brahma, 
becomes the author of creation. 


ufsferavatune verfaonigrenfaranry 
Stat aft ware Wet HATE YI 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


eet Gata war fay: were wie a 
sigad art deat a tas wy 
GATTI TA ATATRTTAT AT 
wareart aot years fe Aer & EI 
a wa Wayayt fayeat wasera: | 
Unies aasala yA g 
GUa OS: Ua aan 

a Ua Urata @ Mead aI 
Teraaenhrsagia- 

fawyafiey axel awa: 61 

ofa sitfaenrgzroy semrigh fgdratseara: 


Thus the one only god, Janarddana, takes 
the designation of Brahma, Visnu, and Siva, 
accordingly as he creates, preserves, or 
destroys.°* Visnu as creator, creates himself; 
as preserver, preserves himself; as dcstroyer, 
destroys himself at the end of all things. This 
world of earth, air, fire. water, ether, the 
senses, and the mind; all that is termed spirit,” 
that also is the lord of all elements, the univer- 
sal from, and impreishable: hence he is the 
cause of creation, preservation, and 
destruction; and the subject of the vicissitudes 
inherent in elementary nature°* He is the 
object and author of creation: he preserves, 
destroys, and is preserved. He, Visnu, as 
Brahma, and as all other beings, is infinite 
form: he 1s the supreme, the giver of all good, 
the fountain of all happiness.” 

wa 


NOTES 


1. The three hypostases of Visnu. Hiranyagarbba 
is a name of Brahma; he who was born from the 
golden egg. Hari is Visnu, and Sankara Siva. The 
Visnu who is the subject of our text is the supreme 
being in all these three divinities or hypostases, in 
his different characters of creator, preserver and 
destroyer. Thus in the M4rkandeya: ‘Accordingly. 
as the primal all-pervading spirit is distinguished by 
attributes in creation and the rest. so he obtains the 
denomination of Brahma, Visnu, and Siva. In the 
capacity of Brahma he creates the worlds; in that of 
Rudra be destroys them; in that of Visnu he is 


BOOK I, CHAP. 2 


11 





quiescent. These are the three Avasthas (lit. 
hypostases) of the self-born. Brahma is the quality 
of activity : Rudra that of darkness; Visnu, the lord 
of the world, is goodness: so. therefore, the three 
gods are the three qualities They are ever combined 
with. and dependent upon one another, and they are 
never for an instant separate; they never quit each 
other.’ 

qe years: at anifeq Weta: | 

aM a warrana Tenfaen erat 

Halea Yad Ary Seed Wereaha | 

fampeastt arerareralsae: Kaya: 

Tal TAM TAT Et fas; Ura wT: | 

HA WI A SH Us WS FA TM: it 

saa ad sae aTeAA | 

arnt fran erat carafe WEI 

The notion is one common to all antiquity, 
although less philosophically conceived, or perhaps 
less distinctly expressed, in the passages which 
have come down to us. The tpeis a'pikas vrooT 
aceis of Plato are said by Cudworth (I. 111), upon 
the authority of Plotinus, to be an ancient doctrine, 
maraia dcea and he also observes, “Orpheus, 
Pythagoras, and Plato have all of them asserted a 
trinity of divine hypostases; and as_ they 
unquestionably derived much of their doctrine from 
the Egyptians, it may reasonably be suspected that 
the Egyptians did the like before them." As 
however the Grecian accounts, and those of the 
Egyptians, are much more perplexed and 
unsatisfactory than those of the Hindus, it is most 
probable that we find amongst them the doctrine in 
its most original as well as most methodical and 
significant from. 

2. This address to Visnu pursues the notion that 
he. as the supreme being, is one. whilst he 1s all: he 
is Avikara, not subject to change; Sadaikariipa, one 
invariable nature: he is the liberator (tara), or he 
who bears mortals across the ocean of existence: he 
is both single and manifold (ekanekaripa): and he 
is the indiscrete (avyakta) cause of the world, as 
well as the discrete (vyakta) effect: or the invisible 
cause, and visible creation. 

3. Jaganmaya, made up. or _ consisting 
substantially (44). of the world. Maya in an affix 
denoting 'made' or consiting of,' as Kastha maya., 
made of wood.’ The world is therefore not regarded 


by the Pauraniks as an emanation or an illusion, but 
as consubstantial with its first cause. 

4. Aniyansam anniyasam ‘the most atomic of the 
atomic;' alluding to the atomic theory of the Nyaya 
or logical school. 

5. Or Acyuta; a common name of Visnu, from a, 
privative, and chyuta. fallen; according to our 
comment, 'he who does not perish with created 
things.' The Mahabharata interprets it in one place 
to mean. ‘he who is not distinct from final 
emancipation;‘and in another to signify, 'exempt 
from decay, (#4éF: ). A commentator on the Kasi- 
knanda of the Skanda Purana explains it. -be who 
never declines (or varies) from his own proper 
nature;' TaTaATeeaT | 

6. This is another commen title of Visnu, 
implying supreme, best (Uttama), spirit (Purusa), or 
male. or sacrificc, or. according to the Mahabh. 
Moksa Dharma, whatever sense Purusa may bear: 

Gea Ua sed aq we Ue 

FA FOS SM Vs TOIT: it 

7. Paramarthatas, ‘by or through the real object, 
or sense; through actual truth,’ 

8. Bhranti darSanatas ‘false appearances,’ in 
opposition to actual truth.,By the nature of visible 
objects, (Hu#eaEIM) : Artha is explained by drisya 
‘visible,; swartipena by ‘the nature of: that is, visible 
objects are not what they seem to be. independent 
existences; they are essentially one with their 
original source: and knowledge of their true nature 
or relation to Visnu, is knowledge of Visnu himself. 
This is not the doctrine of MayA, or the influence of 
illusion, which alone, according to Vedanta 
idcalism, constitutes belief in the existence of 
matter: a doctrine foreign to most of the Puranas 
and first introduced amongst them apparently by 
the Bhagavata. 

9. A different and more detailed account of the 
transmission of the Visnu Purana is given in the last 
book. c. 8. 

10. The ordinary derivation of Vasudeva has 
been noticed above (p. I): here it is derived from 
Vas, 'to dwell,’ from Visnu's abiding in all things, 
and all in him: wae WT aaraat The 
Mahabharata explains Vasu in the same manner, 
and Deva to signify radiant, shining : 


wed aT arrafa Bet yay sacha arg: | 
qe ga Attn Pfaea: arqarel tase arqea: 1 


12 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





He causes all things to dwell in him. and he 
abides in all: whence he is named Vasu: being 
resplendent as the sun, he is called Deva: and he 
who is both these, is denominated Vasudeva., See 
also b. VI. c. 5. 

11. The commentator argues that Vasudeva must 
be the Brahma, or supreme being, of the Vedas, 
because the same circumstances are predicated of 
both, as eternity, omnipresence, omnipotence, etc.; 
but he does not adduce any scriptual text with the 
name Vasudeva. 

12. Time is not usually enumerated in the 
Puranas as an element of the first cause, but the 
Padma Purana and the Bhagavata agree with the 
Visnu in including it. It appears to have been 
regarded at an earlier date as an independent cause: 
the commentator on the Moksa Dharma cites a 
passage from the Vedas, which he understands to 
allude to the different theories of the cause of 
creation: a: canal Prafadearan sary aia: Wee | 
Time, inherent nature, consequence of acts, self- 
will, elementary atoms, matter, and spirit, asserted 
severally by the Astrologers, the Buddhists, the. 
Mimansakas. the Jains, the Logicians, the 
Samkhyas. and the Vedantis. Kpovoé was also one 
of the first generated agents in creation, according 
to the Orphic theogony. 

13. The creation of the world is very commonly 


considered to be the Lila (+e), sport or 
amusement, of the Supreme Being. 
14. The attributes of Pradhdna. the chief 


(principle or element). here specified, conform 
generally to those ascribed to it by the Sarkhya 
philosophy (Samkhya Karika, p. 16, etc,), although 
come of them are incompatible with its origin from 
a first cause. In the Sarnkhya this incongruity does 
not occur; for there Pradhana is independent, and 
coordinate with primary spirit. The Puranas give 
ris¢ to the inconsistency by a lax use of both 
philosophical and pantheistical expressions. The 
most incongruous epithets in our text are however 
explained away in the comment. Thus nitya (fe), 
‘eternal’ is said to mean Lohans not liable to 
increase or diminution:’ fret Bewet gaafeer) 
Sandasadatmaka (Bees), ‘comprehending 
what is and what is not.' means ‘having the power 
of both cause and affect, ( 7) as 
preceding from Visnu, and as giving origin to 
material things. Anadi, ‘without beginning,’ means 


‘without birth’ (F491), not being engendered by 
any created things but proceeding immediately 
from the first cause. '.The mother,’ or literally ° the 
womb of the world (sTenft), means ‘the passive 
agent in creation,’ operated on or influenced by the 
active will of the Creator. The first part of the 
passage in the text is a favourite one with several of 
the Puranas, but they modify it and apply it after 
their own fashion. In the Visnu the original is, 

AG BN Ay A MARTH: | 

Treat wet: Gea Ae semen 

rendered as above. The Vayu, Brahmanda. and 
Kirma Puranas have 

HAH SL AoA AaTaass | 

werd wefasa qareercahata: (I 

The indiscrete cause, which is uniform, and both 
cause and effect, and whom those who are 
acquainted with first principles call Pradhana and 
Prakrti— is the uncognizable Brahma, who was 
before all: sfaga Het Wadd! But the application 
of two synonyms of Prakrti to Brahma seems 
unnecessary at least. The Brahma Purana corrects 
the reading apparently: the first line is as before : 
second is, WU Yes ae fae fags The 
passage is placed absolutely; There was an 
indiscrete cause eternal, and cause and effect, 
which was both matter and spirit (Pradhana and 
Purusa), from which this world was made. Instead 
of $431 ‘such’ or 'this,' some copies read 23: ‘from 
which Isvara or god (the active deity or Brahma) 
made the world., The Hari Varhsa has the same 
reading, except in the last term, which it makes 34% 
that is. according to the commentator, 'the world, 
which is Isvara. was made. The same authority 
explains this indiscrete cause, avyakta karana, to 
denote Brahma, "the creator; ¢ a fafs wari aor 
Getta! an identification very unusual, if not 
inaccurate, and possibly founded on 
misapprehension of what is stated by the Bhavisya 
Purana: Gad Homers Fred Werererh | aehte: a yea 
ae sels sreasai wa a waravs eff ‘That male or 
spirit which is endowed with that which is the 
indiscrete cause. etc, is known in the world as 
Brahma: he being in the egg, ac.’ The passage is 
precisely the same in Manu, I. 11; except that we 
have '‘visista, instead of ‘visistha:' the latter is a 
questionable reading, and is probably wrong: the 
sense of the former is.’detached;' and the whole 


BOOK I, CHAP. 2 


13 





means very consistently, ‘embodied spirit detached 
from the indiscrete cause of the world is known as 
Brahma., The Padma Purana inserts the first Wer 
line, etc., but has Heelfas wat gordifa fafasa: | 
"Which creates undoubtedly Mahat and the other 
qualities:, assigning the first epithets, therefore, as 
the Visnu does to Prakrti only. The Linga also 
refers the expression to Prakrti alone, but makes it a 
secondary cause: HAH Yat TTA A Ww 
yea wa yarerafras:: 'An indiscrete cause, 
which those acquainted with first principles call 
Pradhana and Prakrti proceeded from that Isvara 
(Siva), This passage is one of very many instances 
in which expressions are common to several 
Purdnas that seem to be borrowed from one 
another, or from some common source older than 
any of them, especially in this instance, as the same 
text occurs in Manu. 


15. The expression of the text is rather obscure; 
'All was pervaded (or comprehended) by that chief 
principle before (recreation), we the (last) 
destruction: waa watarnte wri 4 yermreq! The 
ellipses are filled up by the commentator. This, he 
adds, is to be regarded as the state of things at a 
Maha Pralaya, or total dissolution, leaving, 
therefore, crude matter, nature, or chaos, as a 
coexistent clement with the Supreme. This, which 
is conformable to the philosophical doctrine, is not 
however that of thc Puranas in general, nor that of 
our text, which states (b. V1. c. 4), that at a Prakrta, 
or elementary dissolution. Pradhana itself merges 
into the deity. Neither is it apparently the doctrine 
of the Vedas, although their language is somewhat 
equivocal. 

16. The metre here is one common to the Vedas, 
Tristubh, but in other respects the language is not 
characteristic of those compositions. The purport of 
the passage is rendered somewhat doubtful by its 
close, and by the explanation of. commentator. The 
former is, Uh Yurae gel yarederiai ‘One 
Pradhaénika Brahma Spirit: that, was. The 
commentator explains Pradhanika. Pradhdna eva. 
the same word as Pradhana; but it is a derivative 
word, which may be used attributively. implying 
"having, or conjoined with. Pradhana., The 
commentator. however, interprets it as the 
substantive; for he adds, There was Pradhana and 


Brahma and Spirit; this traid was at the period of 


dissolution;' waft aaa yaaa sata wes area 
He evidently, however, understands their conjoint 
existence as one only; for he continues, ‘So, 
according to the Vedas, then there was neither the 
non-existent {invisible cause, or matter) nor the 
existent (visible effect, or creation): 4 
afcaraerdraerderi meaning that there was only 
One Bcing, in whom matter and its modifications 
were all comprehended. 


17, Or it might be rendered. "Those two other 
forms (which proceed) from his supreme nature; 
famy: taeqrend: that is, from the nature of Visnu, 
when he is Nirupadhi, or without adventitious 
attributes: frearefeey: caeuqs ‘other’ (3127); the 
commentator states they are other or separate from 
Visnu only through Maya, illusion,’ but here 
implying ‘falsc notion; the elements of creation 
being in essence one with Visnu, though in 
existence detachcd and different. 

18. Pradhana, when unmodificd, is, according to 
the Sankhyas and Paurdniks, nothing more than the 
three qualities in equilibrio, or 15 goodness, 
foulness, and darkness neutralising each other; 
(Samkhya Karika, p. 52.) so in the Matsya Purana: 
ea wenrdea wpeyqeed, arerafeeiarast yet: 
uftatftial! This state is synonymous with the non- 
evolution of material products, or with dissolution; 
implying however, scparate existence, and detached 


from spirit. This being the case, it is asked what 


should sustain matter and spirit whilst separate, or 
renew their combination so as to renovate creation 
? It is aswered, Time, which is when everything 
else is not; and which, at the end of a certain 
interval, unites Matter, Pradhana, and Purusa. and 
produces creation. Conceptions of this kind are 
evidently comprised in the Orphic triad, or the 
ancient notion of the co-operation of three such 
principles in creation, as Phanes or Eros, which is 
the Hindu spirit or Purusa; Chaos, matter or 
Piadhana : and Chronos. or Kala time. 

19, Pradhana is styled Vyaya ‘that which may be 
expended;' or Parinémin ‘which may be modified:, 
and Purusa is called Avyaya ‘inconsumable;’ or 
aparinamin. ‘immutable.’ The expressions wWava 
having entered into,’ and sama ‘agitated,’ recall 
the made in which divine intelligence, mens, vove, 
was conceived by the ancients to operate upon 
matter: 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





DONV. ..cceee PPOVTIOV KOOLOV ANAVTA 
Mintes Kata coovea Gonoiv-: 
vi as in a more familiar passage: 
Spiritus intus alit totamque infusa per artus 
Mens agitat molem et magno se corpore miscet: 


or perhaps it more closely approximates to the 
Phoenician cosmogony. io which a spirit mixing 
with its own principles gives rise to creation. 
Brucker, [. 240, As presently explained, the mixture 
is not mechanical; it is an influence or effect 
exerted upon intermediate agents, which produce 
effect,; as perfumes do not delight the mind by 
actual contact, but by the impression they make 
upon the sense of smelling, which communicates it 
to the mind. The entrance of the supreme Visnu 
into spirit as well as matter is less intelligible than 
the view elsewhere taken of it, as the infusion of 
spirit, identified with the Supreme, into Prakrti or 
matter alone. Thus in the Pradma Purana: 


BISA WHAM: Gea: Wad 8 Fereqa: | 
B wa wena wReraaare i 


‘He who is called the male (spirit) of Prakrti, is 
here named Acyuta; and that same divine Visnu 
entered into Prakrti.. So the Brhat Naradiya: Wad 
aT YI WIE) The lord of the world, who 
is called Purusa, producing agitation in Prakrti.' 
From the notion of influence or agitation produced 
on matter through or with spirit, the abuse of 
personification led to actual or vicarious admixture. 
Thus the Bhagavata, identifying Maya with Prakrti, 
has, 


PIAGET J AAA TOT EaTA TST: | 
qeaneayey deamnerd aaa 


"Through the operation of time. the Mighty One, 
who is present to the pure. implanted a seed in 
Maya endowcd with qualities, as Purusa, which is 
one with himself.’ B. III. s. 5. And the Bhavisya: 
‘Some learned men say that the Supreme Being, 
desirous to create beings, creates in the 
commencement of the Kafpa a body of soul (or an 
incorporcal substance): which soul created by him 
enters into Prakrti: and Prakrti .being thereby 
agitated, creates many material elements:' 3Fa 3 
wera vata TAA Asmara We Seal Bard 
whi Ysera Terarel fagayftaen: wars at Te: FRerRg 
ver far za wart anfitd oa god faery ae 


But these may be regarded as notions of a later 
date. In the Mahabharata the first cause is declared 
to be ‘Intellectual,’ who creates by his mind or will: 
ame aa oyaisft fag a neff opnfefert 
CHIMNASAMR: 1 'The first (Being) is called 
Manasa (intellectual). and is so celebrated by great 
sages: he is God, without beginning or end. 
indivisible, immortal, undecaying.’ And again: 
wifaet fafa are wAaisgaq! The Intellectual 
created many kinds of creatures by his mind.‘ 

20. Contraction, Sankoca (H#4:), is explained 
by SAmya (411), sameness or equilibrium of the 
three qualities, or inert Pradhana: and Expansion, 
Vikasa (faar:), is the destruction of this 
equipoise, by previous agitation and consequent 
development of material products. 

21. The term here is Ksetrajfia. ‘embodied spirit' 
or that which knows the Ksétra or 'body” implying 
the combination of spirit with form or matter, for 
the purpose of creating. 

22. The first product of Pradhana sensible to 
divine, though not to mere human organs, is, both 
according to the Sarnkhya and Pauranic doctrines, 
the principle called Mahat, literally ‘the Grcat.' 
explained in other places, as in our text. “the 
production of the manifestation of the qualities:’ 
Treas: ! or, as in the Vayu, Waararsaart 
Her Wess F1 We have in the same Purana, as well 
as in the Brahmanda and Linga, a number of 
synonyms for this term. as, Fat Aer fasten yafs: 
wate: wat fafa: eafa: dfafeyt dre a8:1 They 
are also explained, though not very distinctly, to the 
following purport: Manas is that which considers 
the consequences of acts to all creatures, and 
provides for their happiness. Mahat, the Great 
principle, is so termed from being the first of the 
created principles, and from its extension being 
greater than that of the rest. Mati is that which 
discriminates and distinguishes objects preparatory 
to their fruition by Soul. Brahma implies that which 
effeets the development and augmentation of 
created things. Pur is that by which the coneurrence 
of nature occupies and fills all bodies. Buddhi is 
that which communicates to soul the knowledge of 
good and evil. Khyati is the means of individual 
fruition. or the faculty of discriminating objects by 
appropriate designations, and the like. ISvara is that 
which knows all things as if they were present. 
Prajfia is that by which the properties of things arc 


BOOK I, CHAP. 2 


1S 





known. Citi is that by which the consequences of 
acts and species of knowledge are selected for the 
use of soul. Smriti is the faculty of recognising all 
things, past, present, or to come. Samvit is that in 
which all things are found or known, and which is 
found or known in all things: and Vipura is that 
which is free from the effects of contrarieties, as of 
knowledge and ignorance, and the like. Mahat is 
also called Isvara, from, its exercising supremacy 
over all things; Bhava, from its elementary 
existence : Eka. or ‘the one’, from its singleness; 
Purusa, from its abiding within the body; and from 
its being ungenerated it is called Swayambhu.,” 
Now in this nomenclature we have chiefly two sets 
of words; one, as Manas, Buddhi, Mati, signifying 
mind, intelligence, knowledgc, wisdom, design . 
and the other, as Brahma, Isvara, etc., denoting an 
active creator and rulcr of the universe: as the Vayu 
adds. Het Of faged dream: fage 1 'Mahat, 
impciled by the desire to create, causes various 
creation:, and the Mahabharata has Hem aaatean | 
‘Mahat created Ahamkdra.’ The Puranas generally 
employ the same expression, attributing to Mahat 
or Intelligence the act of creating. Mahat is 
therefore the divine mind in creative operation, the 
vovgodiaxoojyiov TE cai navTov aditog of 
Anaxagoras; ‘an ordering and disposing mind. 
which was the cause of all things., The word itself 
suggests some relationship to the Phoenician Mot, 
which, like Mahat. was the first product of the 
mixture of spirit and matter, and the first rudiment 
of creation: “Ex connexione autem ejus spiritus 
prodit mot....... hine seminium omnis creature et 
omniuin rerum creatio.” Brucker, J. 240. Mot. it is 
true, appears to be a purely material substance, 
whilst Mahat is an incorporeal substance; but they 
agree in their place in the cosmogony, and are 
something alike in name. How far also the 
Phoenician system has been accurately described, is 
matter of uncertainty. See Samkhya Karika. p. 83. 
23. The scnse of Ahankara cannot be very well 
rendered by any European term. It means the 
principle of individual existence, that which 
appropriates perceptions, and on which depend the 
notions, I think. 1 feel. I am. It might be expressed 
by the proposition of Descartes reversed: “Sum 
ergo cogito, sentio.” etc. The equivalent emyloyed 
by Colebrooke, egotism, has the advantage of an 
analogous etymology, Ahankara being derived 


from Aham (31@), I,’ as in the Hari Vaméa: we feafa 
Verars Wot: Ba ANd! ‘He (Brahma), oh Bharata, 
said, I will create creatures,’ Sec also Samkhya 
Karika, p. 91. These three varities of Ahank&ra are 
also described in the Samkhya Karika, p. 92. 
Vaikarika. that which is productive, is the same as 
the Satvika, or that which is combined with the 
property of goodness. Taijasa Ahankara is that 
which is endowed with Tejas, ‘heat, or 'cncrgy,' in 
consequence of its having the property of Rajas, 
‘passion’ or ‘activity;' and the third kind. Bhitadi. or 
‘elementary,’ is the Tamasa. or has the property of 
darkness. From the first kind proceed the sense; 
from the last, the rudimental unconscious elements 
: both kinds, which are equally of themselves inert. 
being rendered productive by the cooperation of the 
second, the energetic or active modification of 
Ahankara. which is therefore said to be the origin 
of both the senscs and the elements. 

24. The successive series of rudiments and 
elements, and their respectively engendering the 
rudimcuts and elements next in the order, occur in 
most of the Puranas, in ncarly the same words. The 
Brhannaradiya Purana observes, Gureey 

ai ‘They (the elements) in 
successive order acquire the property of causality 
one to the other.' The order is also the same; or 
other akasa), wind or air (vayu). fire or light (tejas), 
water and earth : except in one passage of the 
Mahabharata (Moksa Dharma, c. 9). where it is 
ether, water, fire, air. earth. The order of 
Empedocles was ether, fire, earth, water, air. 
Cudworth, 1. 97. The investment (4varana) of each 
element by its own rudiment, and of each rudiment 
by its preceding gross and rudimental elements, is 
also met with in most of the chief Puranas. as the 
Vayu, Padma. Linga, and Bhagavata; and traces of 
it are found amongst the ancient cosmogonists : for 
Anaximander supposed, that ‘when the world was 
made. a certain sphere or flame of fire, separated 
from mattcr (the Infinite), encompassed the air, 
which invested the earth as the bark does a trce;' 
Kara TH WEVULV TOVOE TOV KOGLLOV GTOKPLYTNVaL, 
KaL tiva 6k tovtov dAoyos aBaipav mEepi~ 
OVAVAL TH MEPL THY yHV aepl, ws Tadévipw 
dAotov Euseb. Pr. 1. 15. Some of the Puranas. as 
the Matsya, Vayu. Linga. Bhagavata. and 
Markandeya, add a description of a participation of 
properties amongst the elements, which is rather 


16 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





Vedanta than Samkhya. According to this notion, 
the elements add to their characteristic properties 
those of the elements which precede them. Akasa 
has the single property of sound: air has those of 
touch and sound: fire has colour, touch, and sound; 
water has taste, colour. touch, and sound: and earth 
has smell and the rest. thus having five properties: 
or, as the Linga Purana describes the series, Ste 


fg aisha: @ wera wees waa 
Snare aaron sri fare Tarte: 1 weecasia 
Sy WT was treme sen ep af: ceaery 
wea 

25. Tanmatra, 'rudiment, or ‘type,’ from Tad 
‘that.’ for Jasmin ‘in that’ gross element, and mdtra 
‘subtile or rudimental form (Hage €4)1 The 
rudiments are also the. characteristic properties of 
the elements: as the Bhagavata; a AIT TM: Weel 
fag yexgeaai: | ‘The rudiment of it (ethcr) is also its 
quality, sound; as a common designation may 
denote both a person who sees an object which is to 
be seen:’ that is. according to the commentator, 
suppose a person behind a wall called aloud, “An 
elephant! an elephant!" the term would equally 
indicate an elephant was visible, and that somebody 
saw it, Bhag. IL. 5. 

26. The properties here alluded to arc not those 
of goodness etc. but other properties assigned to 
perceptible objects by the Sarhkhya doctrines, or 
Santi. ‘placidity'; Ghorata, ‘terror; and Moha, 
‘dulness’ or 'stupefaction.' v. Karika. v. 38. p. 112. 

27. The Bhagavata. which gives a similar 
statement of the origin of the elements, senses, and 
divinities, specifies the last to be Dis (space), air, 
the sun, Pracetas, the Asvins, fire, Indra, Upendra. 
Mitra, and Ka or Prajapati, presiding over the 
senses, according to the comment, or severally over 
the ear, skin, eye, tongue, nose, speech, hands, feet, 
and excretory and generative organs, Bhag. IT. 5. 
oi, 

28. Avyaktanugrahena. The expression 1s 
something equivocal, as Avyakta may here apply 
either to the First Cause or to matter. In either case 
the notion is the same, and the aggregation of the 
clements is the effect of the presidence of spirit, 
without any active interference of the indiscrete 
principle The Avyakta is passive in the evolution 
and combination of Mahat and the rest. Pradhana 


is, no doubt, intended. but its identification with the 
Supreme is also implied. The term Anugraha may 
also refer to a classification of the order of creation, 
which will be again adverted to. 

29, It is impossible not to refer this notion to the 
same origin as the widely diffused opinion of 
antiquity, of the first manifestation of the world in 
the form of an cgg. "It seems to have been a 
favourite symbol, and very ancient, and we find it 
adopted among many nations.’ Bryant, III. 165. 
Traces of it occur amongst the Syrians. Persians’ 
and Egyptains; and besides the Orphic egg amongst 
the Greeks, and that described by Aristophanes, 
Téxtev part of the ceremony in the mpa@tiotov 
Vunventov vvé 1 peAavontepos Woy, part of the 
ceremony in the Dionysiaca and other mysteries 
consisted of the consecration of an egg; by which 
according to Porphyry, was signified the world: 
Epunvever 56 16 wdov t6v KOQuOV, Whether this 
egg typified the ark. as Bryant and Faber suppose, 
is not material to the proof of the antiquity and 
wide diffusion of the belief that the world in the 
beginning existed in such a figure. A similar 
account of the first aggregation of the elements in 
the form of an egg is given in all the Puranas, with 
the usual epithet Haima or Hiranya, ‘golden.’ as it 
occurs in Manu, I. 9. 

30. Here is another analogy to the doctrines of 
antiquity relating to the mundane egg: and as the 
first visible male being, who, as we shall hereafter 
see, united in himself the nature of eithcr sex. 
abode in the egg. and issued from it; so “this first- 
bom of the world, whom they represented under 
two shapes and characters, and who sprung from 
the mundane egg, was the person from whom the 
mortals and immortals were derived. He was the 
same as Dionusus, whom they styled. Yasagantsi 
Arps wars | stared poorer cat wu fEyft 

31. Janaérddana is derived from Jana, 'men,' and 
Arddana. ‘worship;’ the ‘object of adoration to 
mankind’. 

32 This is the invariable doctrine of the Puranas. 
diversificd only according to the individual divinity 
to whom they ascribe idcntity with Paramatman or 
Paramesvara. In our text this is Vishhu: in the Saiva 
Puranas, as in the Linga. it is Siva: in the Brahma- 
vaivartta itis Krsna. The identification of one of the 
hypostases with the common source of the triad 
was an incongruity not unknown to other 


BOOK I, CHAP. 3 





theogonies; for Cneph, amongst the Egyptians, 
appears on the one hand to have been identified 
with the Supreme Being, the indivisible unity, 
whilst on the other he is confounded with both 
Emeph and Ptha, the second and third persons of 
the triad of hypostages. Cudworth, 1.4.18, 

33. 'The world that is termed spirit;' Foret Tq 
explained by the commentator, Yevaasa! 'which 
indeed bears the appellation spirit; conformably to 
the text of the Vedas. ¥e8 Wad Fai this universe is 
indeed spirit.’ This 1s rather Vedanta than Sarkhya, 
and appears to deny the existence of matter: and so 
it does as an independent existence; for the origin 
and end of infinite substance is the Deity or 
universal spirit: but it does not therefore imply the 
non-existence of the world as real substance. 

34. Visnu is both Bhutesa. "lord of the elements.’ 
or of created things, and Visvaripa ‘universal 
substance:, he is therefore, as one with sensible 
things, subject to his own control. 

35. Varenya, 'most excellent;, being the same, 
according to the commentator, with supreme 
felicity: WAM GRIT | 


E23 A 


BOOK I, CHAP. 3 


CHAPTER 3 


qararseara: 


(sat: wiahara: sRafaacony, 
TATA MBUUIH) 
HAA sara 


PRUETT YG ATATTAA: | 
aa Unifeaed Tes UTAH VI 


Maitreya.- How can creative agency be 
attributed to that Brahma, who is without 
qualities, illimitable, pure, and free from 
imperfection? 


UU Sarat 
WHT: TASMAN: | 
MASA TATA ATM MTAKTHT: tH 
var WaT Ae! wae VaTNTAT 
afaatr sat wt wary Teraa 3 il 
ATU WTA Tan Areafwaas: | 


17 


Parasara said—The essential properties of 
existent things are objects of observation, of 
which no foreknowledge 1s attainable; and 
creation, and hundreds of properties, belong to 
Brahma, as inseparable parts of his essence, as 
heat, oh chief of sages, is inherent in fire.’ 
Hear then how the deity Narayana, in the 
person of Brahma, the great parent of the 
world, created all existent things. 


sera: sired fag fer warrarca: i vi 
Pat wea as argent Byatt 
AAU ASS WUT ATH Gh 
rere feist TAR Tar 

a ate Fale @ uforoiomera & 
TITS WIA STOTT At 


F-PIRATTTATTTATATOT, TTI 9 


Brahma is said to be born: - a familiar 
phrase, to signify his manifestation; and, as the 
peculiar measure of his presence a hundred of 
his years is said to constitute his life: that 
period is also called Param, and the half of it, 
Pararddham.’ I have already declared to you, 
oh sinless Brahman, that Time is a form of 
Visnu: hear now how it is applied to measure 
the duration of Brahma, and of all other 
sentient beings, as well as of those which are 
unconscious, as the mountains, oceans, and the 
like. 


aret ween fra qe 
cigherrenen ang fayrtingtaea ferfer: ac it 
Tae YeAae BT 
STAUAOT TARA WTA: WeTRATAH 118 
a: wghreert af Eset eferarrat 

srt afar Ufagarnpat FETAH ot 
feardiaeed aad 

aggy greaviaeatgurt Frater A eeu 
aah Af % aa Heafey war 
feat Beanir greng: yas VI 
ATA: Bet: WAT Yat warhereterat 
PEATE TL TON BRAT FE As 


PAPAS: Great WaT 

area: a 7 faga: Haanfedira: 1 evi 

ad Aa BITE alee aq 

Weal A WEas Teron feast wn wai 

TEN feast gery! way wae 

Warr UITOTSS TET aareTHT FOTN gE it 

Oh best of sages! fifteen twinklings of the 
eye make a Kastha; thirty Kasthads, one Kala; 
and thirty Kalas, one Muhirtta’. Thirty 
Muhiirttas constitute a day and night of 
mortals: thirty such days make a month, 
divided into two half-months: six months form 
an Ayana {the period of the sun's progress 
north or south of the ecliptic): and two Ayanas 
compose a year. The southern Ayana is a mght 
and the northern a day, of the gods, Twelve 
thousand divine years, each composed of 
(three hundred and sixty) such days, constitute 
the period of the four Yugas, or ages. They are 
thus distributed: the Krta age has four 
thousand divine years; the Treta three 
thousand; the Dvapara two thousand; and the 
Kali age one thousand: so those acquainted 
with antiquity have declared. The period that 
precedes a Yuga is called a Sandya, and it is of 
as many hundred years as there are thousands 
in the Yuga: and the period that follows a 
Yuga, termed the Sandydmsa, is of similar 
duration. The interval between the Sandya and 
the Sandyamsa is the Yuga, denominated Krta, 
Treta, etc. The Krta, Treté, Dvapara, and Kali 
constitute a great age, or aggregate of four 
ages: a thousand such aggregates are a day of 
Brahma, and fourteen Manus reign within that 
term. Hear the division of time which they 
measure’. 


HART: YU: VER MPRA FAT: | 
Tanne fe grat Uiged a Wea We 
WGA ASMA Ailsear aaa: | 
Waa WAT: SH: TST TATA 86 Ht 
Bet sraueenior feerat cera afer: 
WIS Aaa AeaTatranst Wi 231 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


fiorniereg wat: terre: tera fas 

Tafa Fae war 201 

farter weeniin aretsanterd faan 

WIA PAS Waa 2 ei 

AEM VI Aleit TAIAS: VAT 

Sra Afar Are weet wera We UH 

aar fe cee we Aetret yarieary 

Seven Rsis, certain (secondary) divinities, 
Indra, Manu, and the kings his sons, are 
created and perish at one period’; and the 
interval, called a Manvantara, is equal to 
Seventy-one times the number of years 
contained in the four Yugas, with some 
additional years: this is the duration of the 
Manu, the (attendant) divinities, and the rest, 
which is equal to 852,000 divine years, or to 
306,720,000 years of mortals, independent of 
the additional period,. Fourteen times this 
period constitutes a Brahma day, that is, a day 
of Brahma; the term (Brahma) being the 
derivative form. At the end of this day a 
dissolution of the universe occurs, when all the 
three worlds, carth, and the regions of space, 
are consumed with fire. 


Set went araral weetan Prater: 11 23 
WTS | Tea TAM ATTA | 
ATTA: Ver AAT ASA: tl Bi 
areata Sears oA : | 
cerarart fe at uit ded Bee WA Bu 
ay sean aire ated T aA 
wre fe Tee alot TETAS EI 
UH SAY TTS THOS TTI 
TRASH: Uret Sea TM V1 
faders wares aia @ feat 
arg sa medise wert: uftathran ect 
ofa sitfareorgeroy weraigt aera: areata: 
The dwellers of Maharloka (the region 
inhabited by the saints who survive the world), 
distressed by the heat, repair then to Janaloka 


(the region of holy men after their decease). 
When the three worlds are but one mighty 


BOOK I, CHAP. 3 


19 





ocean, Brahma, who is one with Narayana, 
satiate with the demolition of the universe, 
sleeps upon his serpent-bed-contemplated, the 
lotus born, by the ascetic inhabitants of the 
Janaloka-for a night of equal duration with his 
day; at the close of which he creates anew. Of 
such days and nights is a year of Brahma 
composed; and a hundred such years constitute 
his whole life.’ One Pararddha*, or half his 
existence. has expircd, terminating with the 
Maha Kalpa’ called Padma. The Kalpa (or day 
of Brahma) termed V4araha is the Rest of the 
second period of Brahméa's existence. 


NOTES 


]. Agency depends upon the Raja guna, the 
quality of foulness or passion, which is an 
imperfection. Perfect being is void of all qualities, 
and ts therefore inert. 

Omnis enim per se divom natura necesse est 

Immortali aevo summa cum pace fruatur : 

but if inert for ever, creation could not occur. 
The objection is rather evaded than answered. The 
ascribing to Brahma of innumerable and 
unappreciable properties is supported by the 
commentator with vague and scarcely applicable 
texts of the Vedas. 'In him there is neither 
instrument nor effect : his like, his superior, is 
nowhere seen :, 7 Wea areal ami a faa a 
aanarattss gyadi 'That supreme soul is the 
subjugator of all. the ruler of all. the sovereign of 
all : 4 raat wees aah wader wre: weenfieaa: | In 
various places of the Vedas also it is said that his 
power is supreme, and that wisdom. power, and 
action are his essential properties : wer whafdfada 
qad tatest saracfsHa Yi The origin of creation is 
also imputed in the Vedas to the rise of will or 
desire in the Supreme: Fs#rmaqd ae i wary) 'He 
wished I may become manifold. I may create 
creatures. The Bhdgavata expresses the same 
doctrine : 'The Supreme Being was before all things 
alone, the soul and lord of spiritual substance : in 
consequence of his own will he is secondarily 
defined, as if of various minds: Wrasse arden 
STO TAY: | SRSTPTATaA ARATTRTARMN: 1 This 
will however, in the mysticism of the Bhagavata, is 
personified as Maya : @ af weer des: ufe: 
weer aren ae Te aa PA fy ‘She (that 


desire) was the energy of the Supreme, who was 
contemplating (the uncreated world); and by her. 
whose name 1s Maya, the Lord made the universe.’ 
This, which was at first a mere poetical 
personification of the divine will. came, in such 
works, as the Bhagavata, to denote a female 
divinity, co-equal and co-eternal with the First 
Cause. It may be doubted if the Vedas authorize 
such a mystification, and no very decided vestige of 
it occurs in the Visnu Purana, 

2. This term is also applied to a different and still 
more protracted period. See b. VI. c. 3. 

3. The last proportion is rather obscurely 
expressed : dq fF fafa. 'Thirty of them 
(Kalas) are the rule for the Muhirtta.’ The 
commentator says it means that thirty Kalas make a 
Ghatika (or Ghani), and two Ghatikas a Muhirtta, 
but his explanation is gratuitous, and is at variance 
with more explicit passages elsewhere, as in the 
Matsya free worse waaged: 1 : Muhirtta is thirty 
Kalas. Ja these divisions of the twenty-four hours 
the Karma, Markandeya, Matsya, Vayu and Linga 
Puranas exactly agree with our authority. In Manu. 
1, 64, we have the same computation, with a 
difference in the first article, eighteen Nimesas 
being one Kasthé. The Bhavisya Purana follow 
Manu in that respect, and agrees in the rest with the 
Padma, which has, 

15 Nimesas = 1 Kastha 30 Kasthas = 1 Kala 

30 Kalas =1Ksana 12 Ksanas = | Muhirtta 

30 Muhiirttas = 1 day and night. 

In the Mahabharata, Moksa Dharma, it is said 
that thirty Kalis and one-tenth, or, according to the 
commentator, thirty Kalis and three Kasthas make a 
Muhirtta. A still greater variety, however, occurs in 
the Bhagavata and in the Brahma Vaivartta Purana 


These have, 

2 Paramanus == 1 Anu  3Anus =1 Trasarenu 

3 Trasarenus == | Truti 100 Trutis == 1 Vedha 

3 Vedhas = |] Lava 3 Lavas = 1 Nimesa 

3 Nimesas = 1 Ksana 5 Ksanas =] Kastha 

1} Kasthés = 1 Laghu 1S Laghus = 1 Narika 
2Narikés = 1 Muhirtta 6 or 7 Narikds = 1 Yama. Or 


watch of the day or night 
Allusions to this or either of the proceeding 
computations, or to any other, have not been found 
in either of the other Puranas: yct the work of 
Gopala Bhatta, from which Colebrooke states he 
derived his information on the subject of Indian 


20 


weights and measures (A. R. 5. 105); the Sarnkhya 
Parimana, cities the Varaha Purana for a peculiar 
computation. and quotes another from the Bhavis 
ya, different from that which occurs in the first 
chapter of that work, to which we have referred. 
The principle of the calculation adopted by the 
astronomical works is different: it is, 6 respirations 
(Prana)=l Vikala; 60 Vikalas==l Danda; 60 
Dandas=| sydereal day. The Nimesa. which is the 
base of one of the Pauranik modes, is a twinkle of 
the eye of a man at rest; whilst the Param4nu which 
is the origin of the other, and apparently more 
modern system, considcring the works in which it 
occurs, is the time taken by a Paramanu. or mote in 
the sun-beam, to pass through a crevice in a shutter. 
Some indications of this calculation being in 
common currency, occur in the Hindustani terms 
Renu (Trasarenu) and Lamhu (Laghu) in Indian 
horometry (A.R.5.81); whilst the more ordinary. 
system seems derived from the astrunomical works, 
being 60 Tilas=] Vipala; 60 Vipalas=1 Pala; 60 
Palas=1 Danda or Ghari. Ibid. 

4. These calculations of time are found in most 
of the Puranas, with some addition, occasionally, of 
no importance, as that of the year of the seven Rsis, 
3030 mortal years, and the year of Dhruva, 9090 
such years, in the Linga Purana in all essential 
points the computations accord, and the scheme, 
extravagant as it may appear, seems to admit of 
easy explanation. We have, in the first place, a 
computation of the years of the gods in the four 


ages, OF, 
Krta Yuga ... 4000 
Sandya 400 
Sandyansa ... 400 
4800 
Treté Yuga 3000 
Sandya 300 
Sandyansa 300 
3600 
Dvapara Yuga 2000 
Sandya 200 
Sandyansa 200 
2800 
Kali Yuga 1000 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


Sandy4a 100 

Sandyansa 100 
1200 
12000 


If these divine years are converted into years of 
mortals, by multiplying them by 360. a year of men 
being a day of the gods, we obtain the years of 
which the Yugas of mortals are respectively said to 
consist: 


4800x360 = ] 728,000 
3600x360 = ].296,000 
2400x360 864,000 
1200x360 432,000 
4,320,000 a Mahayuga. 


So that these periods resolve themselves into 
very simple elements: the notion of four ages in a 


deteriorating series expressed by descending 
arithmetical progression, as 4, 3, 2,1; the 
conversion of units into thousands; and the 


mythological fiction, that these were divine years, 
each composed of 360 years of men. It does not 
secm necessary to refer the invention to any 
astronomical computations, or to any attempt to 
represent actual chronology. 

5. The details of these, as occurring in each 
Manvantara, are given in the third book. c. | and 2. 

6. aati dena after eeraafa:! One and 
seventy enumerations of the four ages, with a 
surplus.’ A similar rcading occurs in several other 
Puranas, but none of them state of what the surplus 
or addition consists; but it is, infact, the number of 
years required to reconcile two computations of the 
Kalpa. The most simple, and probably the original 
calculation of a Kalpa. is its being 1000 great ages, 
or ages of the gods: Utes CMaea Cart BTA 
daar at q wea wae sea aaetd cad 
tiae=adit Bhavisya Purana Then 4,320,000 years, 
or a divine age, x ]000=4,320,000,000 years, or a 
day or night of Brahma. But a day of Brahma is 
also seventy-one times a great age multiplied by 
fourteen: 4,320,000x71x14=4,294,080,000; or less 
than the preceding by 25,920,000; and it is to make 
up for this deficiency that a certain number of years 
must be added to the computation by Manvantaras. 
According to the Sirya Siddhanta, as cited by 
Davis (A. R. 2. 231), this addition consists of a 


BOOK I, CHAP. 4 


21 





Sandhi to each Manvantara, equal to the Satya age, 
or 1,728,000 years; and one similar Sandhi at the 
commencement of the Kalpa: | 

thus  4,320,000x71=306,720,000+1,728,000= 
308,448,000 x 14=4318,272,000+1,728,000 
4320,000,000. The Pauraniks, however, omit the 
Sandhi of the Kalpa, and add the whole 
compensation to the Manvantaras. The amount of 
this in whole numbers is 1,851,428 in each 
Manvantara. or 
4,320,000x7 1=306,720,000+ 1,85 1,428== 
308,571,428 x 14 = 4319,999,992: leaving a very 
small inferiority to the result of the calculation of a 
Kalpa by a thousand great ages. To provide for this 
deficiency, indeed, very minute sub-divisions are 
admitted into the calculation; and the commentator 
on our text says, that the additional years, if of 
gods, are 5142 years. 10 months, 8 days, 4 watches, 
2 Muhirttas, 8 Kalas, 17 Kasthas, 2 Nimesas, and 
1/7th; if of mortals, 1,851,428 years, 6 months, 24 
days. 12 Naris. 12 Kalas, 25 Kasthas, and 10 Nimes 
as. It will be observed, that in the Kalpa we have 
the regular descending series 4, 3. 2, with cyphers 
multiplied ad libitum. 

7. The Brahma Vaivartta says 108 years, but this 
is unusual. Brahma's life is but a Nimesa of Krsna, 
according to that work, a Nimesa of Siva. 
according to the Saiva Purana. 

8. In the last book the Pararddha occurs as a very 
different measure of time, but it is employed here 
in its ordinary acceptation. 

9. In theory the Kalpas are infinite; as the Bhavis 
ya: Beant Beara Baa: | anh arash 
"Excellent sages, thousands of millions of Kalpas 
have passed, and as many are to come.’ In the Linga 
Purana, and others of the Saiva division, above 
thirty Kalpas are named, and some account given of 
several but they are evidently _ sectarial 
embellishments. The only Kalpas usually specified 
are those which follow in the text : the one which 
was the last, or the Padma. and the present or 
Varaha. The first is also commonly called the 
Brahma; but the Bhagavata distinguishes the 
Brahma, considering it to be the first of Brahma's 
life. whilst the Padma was the last of the first 
Pararddha. The term Mah, or great Kalpa applied 
to the Padma is attached to it only in a general 
sense; Or. according to the commentator. because it 
comprises, as a minor Kalpa, that in which Brahma 
was born from a lotus. Properly, a great Kalpa is 
not a day, but a life of Brahma; as in the Brahma 


Vaivartta: Tas we: arefaheretta:) aoren 
FEM Wawiea: Tat:t! Chronologers compute a 
Kalpa by the life of Brahma. Minor Kalpas, as 
Samvartta and the rest, are numerous.’ Minor 
Kalpas here denote every period of destruction, or 
those in which the Samvartta wind, or other 
destructive agents, operate. Several other 
computations of tune are found in different 
Puranas, but it will be sufficient to notice one 
which occurs in the Hari VarnSa. as it is peculiar, 
and because it is not quite correctly given in M. 
Langlois’ translation It is the calculation of the 
Manava time. or time of a Manu. 


10. divine years =a day and night of a Manu. 
10 Manava days = his fortnight. 
10 Manava form. = his month. 
12 Manava months = his season, 
6 Manava seasons = his year, 


Accordingly thc commentator says 72000 divine 
years make up his year. The French translation has, 
“dix annees des dieux font un jour de Manu; dix 
jours des dieux font un pakcha de Manu," etc. The 
error lies in the expression "jours des dieux” and is 
evidently a mere inadvertence : for if ten years 
make a day, ten days can scarcely make a fortnight. 

kk 


BOOK I, CHAP. 4 | | 21 


innenemnacerateemasteitarieaeettrmmmtenitnmmmman immense en etme nnnanenneiinnnenneiinibabennnaaimsiddindmemmnnemimnanannan ten taper nadan = arta no innnn sane ane annnnmaaanann ann aamanmnemnnns neneanee aipniian ad tana ranean a Uap eee TU TEE TTT TTT TE EE En 


CHAPTER 4 


qa Searea: 


(Serra wiley) 
qq sara 


Ta ATAU A BEATS TAT TEM 
Vet Vay Tareas TETAA it 


Maitreya said—Tell me. mighty sage. 
How, in the commencement of the (present) 
Kalpa, Narayana, who is named Brahma, 
created all existent things.’ 


UU SATA 
WAT: WA WTA Far ATAU: 
warafaatacar ser aay Frere 21 


Pardsara replied~ In what manner the 
divine Brahmd, who is one with Narayana, 
created progeny, and is thence named the lord 


22 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





of progeny (Prajapati). the lord god. you shall 
hear. 

SiraHeaaa PTAA: WY: | 

AAT TEM YT SeATaTTI 3 1 

ana: waster: wrarata a wy: | 

TRAE WTaAS: MAA I 

Sa Wale ett ATAU wife 

Teaeiaui Fa Wa: WATT G I 

At the close of the past (or Padma) Kalpa. 

the divine Brahma endowed with the quality of 
goodness, awoke from his night of sleep, and 
beheld the universe void. He, the supreme 
Narayana, the incomprehensible, the sovereign 
of creatures, invested with the form of 
Brahma, the god without beginning, the 
creator of all things; of whom. with respect to 
his name Narayana, the god who has the form 
of Brahma, the imperishable origin of the 
world, this verse is repeated. 

STAT AN Slt WaT BG a ATTA: 

Sat WET AT: We AA ATT: AE I 

WIT: Wal Meat Tay wy: 

STAN AGS HYSMT: WaTaft: 9 tt 

TH A AAT aeafey sat FTI 

aeramifean dae ans AUST Il 

"The waters are called Nara, because they 

were the offspring of Nara (the supreme 
spirit); and as in them his first (Ayana) 
progress (in the character of Brahm&) took 
place, he is thence named Narayana the whose 
place of moving was the waters)."* He, the 
lord, concluding that within the waters lay the 
earth, and being desirous to raise it up, created 
another form for that purpose; and as in 
preceding Kalpas he had assumed the shape of 
a fish or a tortoise, so in this he took the figure 
of a boar. 


aca BaAETa: adh 

Fert: Ferran waren Tee waa: 1s 
weed: fad: wrarehrga: | 
Waar Aart AAA AMAT: 11 Qo ll 


Having adopted a form composed of the 
sacrifices of the Vedas’, for the preservation of 
the whole earth, the eternal, supreme, and 
universal soul, the great progenitor of created 
beings, eulogized by Sanaka and the other 
saints who dwell in the sphere of holy men 
(Janaloka); he, the supporter of spiritual and 
material being, plunged into the ocean. 


fries df der tat UrereraerarTary 
Ga MUTA RAT, HAT TAT VAM 
The goddess Earth, beholding him thus 


descending to the subterrene regions, bowed in 
devout adoration, and thus glorified the god: 


ylaeqarey 

THA TATA GAT VGA 

WET a aAMISE Tage VI 

ASSEN Yoo ANME WATS 

TATA EL TAT TATA | 23 UI 

THA TUT, FETAL AAS A 

WAAAY Heys FT AAI vil 

Prthvi (Earth) said— Hail to you, who are 
all creatures; to you, the holder of the mace 
and shell: elevate me now from this place, as 
you have upraised me in days of old. From 
you have I proceeded; of you do I consist; as 
do the skies, and all other existing things. Hail 
to you, spirit of the supreme spirit, to you, soul 
of soul; to you. who are discrete and indiscreet 


matter; who are one with the elements and 
with time. 


wa at edgar a oat fata 
Unifag wat TelfaOpRg ATTN 24 Il 
aarfarfacan wenet siedenrateltaadl 

We wade fas ferns aetfahT 1 26 
WaT A Wt wal aa ATs SEPA 

AIM Aga auf fatwa: gon 
aN Ut Gel Aa Ais Ware: | 
STYCARATTET BAY Alar WAATEAAA Re I 
aq feaferrrar are Aawte eaaaty: | 


BOOK I, CHAP. 4 


ZS 





ae B Aq Uivade aguaftact wan 211 


You are the creator of all things, their 
preserver, and their destroyer, in the forms, oh 
lord, of Brahma. Visnu, and Rudra, at the 
seasons of creation, duration, and dissolution. 
When you have devoured all things, you 
reposes on the ocean that sweeps over the 
world, meditated upon, oh Govinda, by the 
wise. No one knows your true nature, and the 
gods adore you only in the forms it has 
pleased you to assume. They who are desirous 
of final liberation, worship you as the supreme 
Brahma; and who that adores not Vasudeva, 
shall obtain emancipation? Whatever may be 
apprehended by the mind. whatever may be 
perceived by the senses, whatever may be 
discerned by the intellect, all is but a form of 
you. 


ANSE ACMA ATT ATT aTESTAT| 
meatus arasuatrered dat fe ATTN oN 
TURIAMANT TA Weary] 


RAT AM WE SHAT WT 2 eH 


UU Fae ST ATA TT 

te AAR SUC ATTRAA AT II 2 2 

wa Qered aaah a aaTEat st 

atleast werent AaaTvahaet WITT V3 

Tare ast Tea 

Watch Ua Tales WATT TAIT 

ace wet TNA a Pa AA AT Bw 

I am of you, upheld by you; you are my 
creator, and to you I fly for refuge: hence, in 
this universe, Madhavi (the bride of Madhava 
or Visnu) is my designation. Triumph to the 
essence of all wisdom, to the unchangeable, 
the imperishable: triumph to the eternal; to the 
indiscreet, to the essence of discrete things: to 
him who is both cause and effect; who is the 
universe; the sinless lord of sacrifice; ‘triumph. 
You are sacrifice; you are the oblation; you are 
the mystic Omkara; you an the sacrificial fires; 
you are the Vedas, and their dependent 
science,; you are, Hari, the object of all 
worship.’ The sun, the stars, the planets, the 


whole world; ail that is formless, or that has 
form; all that is visible, or invisible; all, Purus 
ottama, that I have said, or left unsaid; all this, 
Supreme, you are. Hail to you, again and 
again! hail! all hail! 
WIC Sata 

Ud Meare Yee ylsata: | 

arraeart: sitar ast ufcerea 24 

Ta: Waharcsy et Tacwat 

WeTaue: casi 


a aaae eee ore 
Shiga at yearhronet 

ATA HAC ATA 
werTerarare fe aL Aeteliry 

WreeaeTa FAT 291 
wake arent aycrafaara 

THMCASH, HaAMAAaAHa: | 
TAA: Uta: Warhet 

fag wt & Frad vata 2c i 
Sfrarerer TeTRHRa- 

Teresa Tet fererrezt 
fagadt dena wih 

TARA FAA FAFA 28 
a yeqeraiiercay 

cle wa a Raara air: | 
PST AAT NT 


ATT ATARI 3 0 1 


PardSara said—The auspicious supporter of 
the world, being thus hymned by the earth, 
emitted a low murmuring sound, like the 
chanting of the SAma Veda; and the mighty 
boar, whose eyes were like the lotus, and 
whose body, vast as the Nila mountain, was of 
the dark colour of the lotus leaves, ‘uplifted 
upon his ample tusks the earth from the lowest 
regions. As he reared up his head, the waters 
shed from his brow purified the great sages, 
Sanandana and others, residing in the sphere 
of the saints. Through the indentations made 
by his hoofs, the waters rushed into the lower 


24 


worlds with a thundering noise. Before his 
breath, the pious denizens of Janaloka were 
scattered, and the Munis sought for shelter 
amongst the bristles upon the scriptural body- 
of the boar, trembling as he rose up, 
supporting the earth, and dripping with 
moisture. Then the great sages, Sanandana and 
the rest, residing continually in the sphere of 
saints, Were inspired with delight, and bowing 
lowly they praised the stern-eyed upholder of 
the earth. 
HATO UTA As 

WH Wereaaniha ws 

VANS ARAL TTS AT UTA} al 
wey aareta gady ety Uefa aes 
Sarorirgista aeerer eat: wal BATAAN 3 2 
facet Tae ae salad gered force 
THAT Tere Brot wens gai Sa 
SHuswmaemae wragaranhkaeraarae 
Ypasisannsta Sa TAA TTY WHA 3 YU 
Tannery varmnfeheatrsnat far 
fara far: octadsfa wate aetsfa ararea 
cpmfasensratag yauset ae fererdt a 
famed: waret fart aiterieattratcag a 3&1 

MAT IAAT 
aeat aq aye Aaa 
ware te: 
feart fase faut ve TN 01 
TUT AAS RT HTT: Te 


AAT USAT AA SAAT CTTAATT TN 3 CI 


The Yogis said~ Triumph, lord of lords 
supreme; KeSava, sovereign of the earth, the 
wielder of the mace, the shell, the discus, and 
the sword: cause of production, destruction, 
and existence. You are, oh god : there is no 
other supreme condition, but you. You. lord, 
are the person of sacrifice: for your feet are the 
Vedas; your tusks are the stake to which the 
victim is bound; in your teeth are the 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


offerings; your mouth is the altar; your tongue 
is the fire; and the hairs of your body are the 
sacrificial grass. Thine eyes, oh omnipotent 
are day and night; your head is the seat of all, 
the place of Brahma; your mane is all the 
hymns of the Vedas; your nostrils are all 
oblations: oh you, Whose snout is the ladle of 
oblation; whose deep voice is the chanting of 
the Sima Veda; whose body is the hall of 
sacrifice; whose joints are the different 
ceremonies; and whose ears have the 
properties of both voluntary and obligatory 
riles;’ do you who arc eternal, who are in size 
a mountain, be propitious. We acknowledge 
you, who has traversed the world, oh universal 
form, to be the beginning, the continuance, 
and the destruction of all things: you are the 
supreme god. Have pity on us, oh lord of 
conscious and unconscious beings. The orb of 
the earth is seen seated on the tip of your 
tusks, as if you had been sporting amid a lake 
where the lotus floats, and had borne away the 
leaves covered with soil. The space between 
heaven and earth is occupied by your body, oh 
you of unequalled glory, resplendent with the 
power of pervading the universe, oh lord, for 
the benefit of all. You are the aim of all: there 
is none othcr than you, sovereign of the world: 
this is your might, by which all things, fixed or 
movable, are pervaded. 


AAA SPAT AAA aT 
MAMA WAT ATTA 3 VU 
WraSIMae Wea: | 

SAR UPA MUAY WEA ¥ ol 
qq Wafhe: Yauraaisfat wT 
Wares ways aed TTT ¥ 8h 
Wate waaay ware safari 
SHUM Pal ASAT ¥ 21 


This form, which is now beheld, is your 
form, as one essentially with wisdom. Those 
who have not practised devotion, conceive 
erroneously of the nature of the world. The 
ignorant, who do not perceive that this 


BOOK I, CHAP. 4 


25 





universe is of the nature of wisdom, and Judge 
of it as an object of perception only, are lost in 
the ocean of spiritual ignorance. But they who 
know true wisdom, and whose minds are pure, 
behold this whole world as one with divine 
knowledge, as one with you, oh god. Be 
favorable, oh universal spirit: raise up this 
earth, for the habitation of created beings. 
Inscrutable deity, whose eyes are like lotuses, 
give us felicity. 

wealfensfs way Mears plaster 

AYR Waa vi AY SarenetarA x3 I 

winghwtaad soraraanhean 

HAAT TASTY Vi AY TASHA XXII 


Oh lord, you are endowed with the quality 
of goodness : raise up, Govinda, this earth, for 
the general good. Grant us happiness, oh lotus- 
eyed. May this, your activity in creation, be 
beneficial to the earth. Salutation to you. Grant 
us happiness, oh lotus-eyed. 


UU Saray 

ues deqaarise wrens Tete: | 

saert fart fara zreraiey tartan 6 & i 

wearaht aye vedt afte fer 

fara Geer a wet ais cera we 

wa: fafa wat grat yfseat aista area 

aor fast amare: WIT iN 

wea Wicermaenry war pirat 

Steet waraur Waatareaifisa: i ¥ cu 

Para4sSara said— The supreme being thus 
eulogised, upholding the earth, raised it 
quickly, and placed it on the summit of the 
ocean, where it floats like a mighty vessel, and 
from its expansive surface does not sink 
beneath the waters. Then, having levelled the 
earth, the great eternal deity divided it into 
portions, by mountains: he who never wills in 
vain, created, by his irresistible power, those 


mountains gain upon the earth which had been 
consumed at the destruction of the world. 


afant tat: Hear Gags werary! 


YATI Har Waa WAHCTATI se 

TAS SaaS A WA BW: 

wart Of wratqaaret sfF: 114 ol 

Pianta yearat wiation 

WATSON AAT SF STV HATG U 

fated qarar ara faferederd 

Aad aah Ie WSS AAARANTUG I 

afr sftfarapyeret weratgt gaifeara: 

Having then divided the earth into seven 
great portions cr continents, as it was before, 
he constructed in like manner the four (lower) 
spheres, earth, sky, heaven, and the spherc of 
the sages (Maharloka). Thus Hari, the four- 
faccd god, invested with the quality of 
activity, and taking the form of Brahma, 
accomplished the creation: but he (Brahmé) is 
only the instrumental cause of things to be 
created; the things that are capable of being 
created arise from nafure as a common 
material cause: with the exception of one 
instrumental cause alone, therc is no need of 
any other cause, for (imperceptible) substance 
becomes perceptible substance according to 
the powers with which it is originally imbued." 

See 
NOTES 

1. This creation is of the secondary order, or 
Pratisarga; water, and even the earth, bemg in 
existence, and consequently having been preceded 
by the creation of Mahat and the elements. It is also 
a different Pratisarga from that described by Manu. 
in which Svayambhu first creates the waters, then 
the egg : one of the simplest forms, and perhaps 
therefore one of the earliest in which the tradition 
occurs. 

2. This is the well known verse of Manu. I. 8, 
rendered by Jones. “The waters are called Nara. 
because they were the production of Nara. or ‘the 
spirit’ of God; and since they were his first Ayana. 
or place of motion, he thence is named Narayana, 
or ‘moving on the waters.” Now although there can 
be little doubt that this tradition is in substance the 
same as that of Genesis, the language of the 
translation is perhaps more scriptural than is quite 


26 


THE VISNU-FURANAM 





warranted. The waters, it is said in the text of 
Manu, were the progeny of Nara. which Kulliika 
Bhatta explains Paramatma, the supreme soul; that 
is, they were the first productions of God in 
creation. Ayana. instead of ‘Place of motion,’ is 
explained by Asraya, ‘place of abiding.’ Narayana 
means, therefore, he whose place of abiding was 
the deep. The verse occurs in several of the 
Puranas, in general in nearly the sante words. and 
almost always as a quotation, as in our text: By 
TeeTaT Wits | The Linga, Vayu. and Markandeya 
Puranas, citing the same. have a somewhat different 
reading; or. aT AR a ara ser aA AIA: | Boy We 
SA TA ARTA: Fas! ‘Apa (is the same (as) 
Nara. or bodies (Tanava); such, we have heard 
(from the Vedas), is the meaning of Apa. He who 
sleeps in them. is thence called Narayana, The 
ordinary sense of Tanu is either ‘minute’ or ‘body.’ 
nor does it occur amongst the synonyms of water in 
the Nirukta of the Vedas. It may perhaps be 
intended to say. that Nara or Apa has the meaning 
of ‘bodily forms, in which spirit is enshrined, and of 
which the waters, with Visnu resting upon them are 
a type; for there is much mysticism in the Puranas 
in which the passage thus occurs. Even in them. 
however, it is introduced in the usual manner, by 
describing the world as water alone, and Visnu 
reposing upon the deep ; warta der afeay.... Bon 
Aer) gary alee ae Vayu Purina The 
Bhagavata has evidently attempted to explain the 
ancient text: yeuses fafteta get ww fatrda. 
eS Seas, | YN aaa, 
TAQ VEsUaea| TA ARTI A Bars: YeasRaT: | 
"When the embodied god in the beginning divided 
the mundane egg, and issued form. then, requiring 
an abiding place, he created the waters: the pure 
created the pure. In them. his own created be abode 
for a thousand years, and thence received the name 
of Narayana : the waters being the product of the 
embodied deity :' i. e. they were the product of 
Nara or Visnu, as the first male or Virat. and were 
therefore termed Nara : and from there being his 
Ayana or Sthana, his ‘abiding place’ comes his 
epithet of Narayana. 

3. The Varaha form was thosen, says the Vayu 
Purana because it is an animal delighting to sport in 
water, but it is described in many Puranas, as it 1s in 
the Visnu, as, a type of the ritual of the Vedas, as 
we shall have further occasion to remark. The 


elevation of the earth from beneath the ocean in this 
form, was, therefore, probably at first an allcgorical 
representation of the extrication of the world from a 
deluge of iniquity by the rites of religion. 
Geologists may perhaps suspect, in the original and 
unmystified tradition, an allusion to a geological 
fact, or the existence of lacustrine mammalia in the 
early periods of the earth. 

4, Yajfiapati, 'the bestower of the beneficial 
results of sacrifices., 

5. Yajnapurusa, “the male or soul of sacrifice;' 
explained by Yajfiamirtti, ‘the form or 
personification of sacrifice :' or Yajfiaradhya, ‘he 
who is to be propitiated by it.' 

6. Varaha Avatara. The description of the figure 
of the boar is much more particularly detailed in 
other Puranas. As in the Vayu: “The boar was ten 
Yojanas in breadth, a thousand Yojanas high; of the 
colour of a dark cloud; and his roar was like 
thunder; his bulk was vast as a mountain; his tusks 
were white, sharp, and fearful; fire flashed from his 
eyes like lightning, and he was radiant as the sun; 
his shoulders were round, fat and large; he strode 
along like a powerful lion; his haunches were fat, 
his loins were slender, and his body was smooth 
and beautiful.” The Matsya Purana describes the 
Varaha in the same words, with one or two 
unimportant varieties. The Bhagavata indulges in 
that amplification which marks its more recent 
composition, and describes the Varaéha as issuing 
from the nostrils of Brahma. at first of the size of 
the thumb, or an inch long, and presently increasing 
to the stature of an elephant. That work also 
subjoins a legend of the death of the demon 
Hiranyaksa, who in a preceding existence was one 
of Visnu's doorkeepers, at his palace in Vaikuntha. 
Having refused admission to a party of Munis, they 
cursed him, and he was in consequence born as one 
of the sons of Diti. When the earth, oppressed by 
the weight of the mountains, sunk down into the 
waters, Visnu was beheld in the subterrene regions, 
or Rasatala. by Hira-nyaksa in the act of carrying it 
off. The demon claimed the earth, and defied Visnu 
to combat; and a conflict took place, in which 
Hiranyaksa was slain. This legend has not been met 
with in any other Purana, and certainly does not 
occur in the chief of them, any more than in our 
text In the Moksa Dharma of the Mahabharata, c. 
35, Visnu destroys the demons in the form of the 


BOOK I, CHAP. 5 





Varaha, but no particular individual is specified, 
nor does the elevation of the earth depend upon 
their discomfiture. The Kalika Upapurdna has an 
absurd legend of a conflict between Siva as a 
Sarabha. a fabulous animal, and Visnu as the 
Varaha, in which the latter suffers himself and his 
offspring begotten upon earth to be slain. 

7. This, which is nothing more than the 
development of the notion that the Varaha 
incarnation typifies the ritual of the Vedas, is 
repeated in most of the Puranas in the same or 
nearly the same words. 

8. This seems equivalent to the ancient notion of 
a plastic nature: “All parts of matter, by reason of a 
certain life in them, being supposed able to form 
themselves artificially and methodically to the 
greatest advantage of their present respective 
capabilities.” This, which Cudworth (c. Ill) calls 
hylozoism, is not incompatible with an active 
creator: “not that he should, avtovpyav anavta, 
set his own hand to every work, which, as “Aristotle 
says, would be, unbecoming God; but, as in the 
case of Brahma and other subordinate agents, that 
they should occasion the various developments of 
crude nature to take place, by supplying that will. 
of which nature itself is incapable. Action being 
once instituted by an instrumental medium, or by 
the will of an intellectual agent, it is continued by 
powers or a vitality inherent tin nature or the matter 
of creation itself. The efficiency of such 
subordinate causes was advocated by Plato, 
Aristotle, and others; and the opinion of Zeno. as 
stated by Laertius, might be taken for a translation 
of some such passage as that in our text : “Eat de 
ovate eC avtne KOcuevn Kata amepuatKave 
Aoyove, ALOTMAOVHA TE KM avetovaa ta E& 
AaVTNS EV MOpOUEvars Epo@vors, Kat tOwMvtTa 
dpwaa a'h oWV anex18n Nature is a habit moved 
from itself, according to seminal principles; 
perfecting and containing those several things 
which in determinate times are produced from it, 
and acting agreeably to that from which it was 
secreted.” Intell, system, I. 328. So the 
commentator illustrates our text by observing that 
the cause of the budding of rice is in tts own seeds, 
and its development is from itself, though its 
growth takes place only at a determinate season , 1n 


consequence of the instrumental agency of the rain. 
fouek 


BOOK I, CHAP. 5 


a7 


CHAPTER 5 


USNS: 


(eatérat wisn) 
aya saraq 


an wad taisat eafafagerrary 

ayer freyqarery searrafereteara:n en 

AO Tages aang Wreafest 

wal Vea Fa ATA aa AraAT EU 

Maitreya said—- Now unfold to me, O 
Brahman, how this deity created the gods, 
sages, progenitors, demons, men, animals, 
trees, and the rest, that abide on earth, in 
heaven, or in the waters: how Brahma at 
creation made the world with the qualities, the 
characteristics, and the forms of things’, is 
called the first creation. 


WK Jara 


Wa arma yup quater: 
Gar wad aisut sarahaeary wy: BN 


Parasara said— I will explain to you, 
Maitreya, listen attentively, how this deity, the 
lord of all, created the gods and other beings. 


Ols fatarerear aeuay Gen Ya 
Srey: TT: wget wt 
TAT Het ARTETA RATT: | 
otfaan: wermear wrgyat Wee Nt 
daaatea: wit earaat whet aerars 


SSCAS HHI AAA ANTATH 1G 

Whilst he (Brahma) formerly, in the 
beginning of the Kalpas, was medicating on 
creation, there appeared a creation beginning 
with ignorance, and consisting of darkness. 
From that great being appeared fivefold 
ignorance, consisting of obscurity, illusion, 
extreme illusion, gloom, utter darkness,” The 
creation of the creator thus plunged in 
abstraction, was the fivefold (immovable) 
world, without intellect or reflection, void of 


28 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





perception or sensation, incapable of feeling, 
and destitute of motion,’ 


Qe AM Faster PerTteAaeaay 

at BBS WTA YAH 

wTeaftearaa: wiferdpenraaada 

mead fete waa: a freer: Bac 

unread faweararent: wrat water: 

SMTeUS TSA ATA Ne 
| SRAM SSTAMT srsfayreareraar: | 

TAMA Ves AGM WAITTN ot 

Since immovable things were first created, 
this is called the first creation. Brahma, 
beholding that it was defective, designed 
another; and whilst he thus meditated, the 
animal creation was manifested, to the 
products of which the term Tiryaksrotas is 
applied, from their nutriment following a 
winding course’. These were called beasts, 
etc., and their characteristic was the quality of 
darkness, they being destitute of knowledge, 
uncontrolled in their conduct, and mistaking 
error for wisdom; being formed of egotism 
and self-esteem, labouring under the twenty- 
eight kinds of imperfection’, manifesting 
inward sensations, and associating with each 
other (according to their kinds). 

AMM WA ATTA S AAAS TTA 

TARGA AABKAATTAN 2 UN 

a GaMitagen aferateaaga4n: 

WHIT ASAT FRAATANHAT: VAT LV 


qed satay I yA: 

afery wisvaq wiser TET 23 0 
WAST M Aal Veal VT WIAA 
HATA AL ANAT TAMIA Ow 
AOSTA ETAT TTA RTA: | 

WAST VITA MAT AIHA U4 
Taneagy waa adsatearrag a 

YET MATRA ATATH RAT THUS EteAT NRE 
Ta F eager sae afer: 


WHIT aeteey WAST: ATH Ai Von 

Beholding this creation also imperfect, 
Brahma again medicated, and a third creation 
appeared, abounding with the quality of 
goodness, termed Urdhvasrotas."*The beings 
thus produced in the Urdhvasrotas creation 
were endowed with pleasure and enjoyment, 
unencumbered internally or externally, and 
luminous within and without. This, termed the 
creation of immortals, was the _ third 
perfomance of Brahma, who, although well 
pleased with it, still found it incompetent to 
fulfil his end. Continuing therefore his 
medications, there sprang, in consequence of 
his infallible purpose, the creation termed 
Arvaksrotas’, from indiscrete nature. The 
products of this are termed Arvaksrotasas, 
from the downward current (of their 
nutriment). They abound with the light of 
knowledge, but the qualities of darkness and 
of foulness predominate. Hence they are 
afflicted by evil, and are repeatedly impelled 
to action. They have knowledge both 
externally and internally, and are. the 
instruments (of accomplishing the object of 
creation. the liberation of soul). These 
creatures were mankind. 

sed caterer: at: wer ya 

weet wet: Ut fagat geroreg Wu Ven 

amar fates ae a aya: 

aaitaadiag wt Ura: TA es 

See WHT: Wh: Ways ghagyss: | 

qermingheg Gert ft WaT: BAT Von 

fraigalang a: Wreeeterarr: W Tea 

SHLAA: THY STAT A OTT 2 AU 

I have thus explained to you, excellent 
Muni, six® creations. The first creation was 
that of Mahat or Intellect, which is also called 
the creation of Brahma’. The second was that 
of the rudimental principles (Tanmé§tras), 
thence termed the elemental creation (Bhita 
sarga). The third was the modified form of 


egotism, termed the organic creation, or 
creation of the senses (Aindriyaka). These 


BOOK I, CHAP. 5 


29 





threc were the Prakrta creations, the 
developments of indiscrete nature, preceded 
by the indiscrete principle’. The fourth or 
fundamental creation (of perceptible things) 
was that of inanimate bodies. The fifth. the 
Tairyag yonya creation, was that of animals. 
The sixth was the Orddhasrotas creation, of 
that of the divinities. 

ANSAAATA: WT: TAT: TF AAT 

AUST: Wl: WAH AAGT Be 2 Vl 

Welt Ana: UN: WHA A: Sar: 

Wad AHasta Bary ATA: Ta V3 


The creation of the Arvaksrotas beings was 
the seventh, and was that of man. There is an 
eighth creation, termed Anugraha, which 
possesses both the qualities of goodness and 
darkncss.'' Of these creations, five are 
sccondary, and thrce are primary’. But there 
is a ninth, the Kaumara creation, wae is both 
primary and secondary". 


sad A AANA Fa Ut: Waa: 
Wad dada wa Weer: 
Baal srrdiores ferry aiqiresfan 2x 


These arc the nine creations of the great 
progenitor of all, and both as primary and 
secondary, are the radical causes of the world, 
proceeding from the sovereign creator. What 
clse dost you desire to hear ? 


waa sara 
aro afaa: wat tarda yy wa 
fererrrantatireant cael GRaTRTAH 2 4 11 


Maitreya said— You have briefly related to 
me. Muni, the creation of the gods and other 
beings: I am desirous, chief of sages, to hear 
from you a more ample account of their 
creation. 


TUG Bara 
aaa: Yes: HeeMH Mey AT: 
CHANT DAT Ua SATACAT EM 
RATA: YUE WAT Taig faen: | 
gan: ada: Ole wat wa aT: Vor 


vat cargulag % aTguiar aqEay 
FAA TATA 2 U 
FRAARTATTAT STAT WATT: | 
fagansttrg yerraa BRT AA Ve 
Sere aatAry aaa ATA 

OY eA aaa Wane fara 3 011 
fagagre: Mirae va: WT: 
Wa: ARM Waa Tao FET 3 et 


SAT MF ATA Tamra fer 
aat fe aferat warage gaat fear 3 2 


aaa ASA ATS ATA! 
fagererarrer fraceeT TART 3 3 tt 
sera Fr BET TTEATAAT TT: 

a aregarsvad wear arena eats 3 eu 


PardSara said— Created beings, although 
they are destroyed (in their individual forms) 
at the periods of dissolution, yet being affected 
by the good or evil acts of former existcncc, 
they are never cxemptcd from their 
consequences; and when Brahma creates the 
world anew, they are the progeny of his will, 
in the fourfold condition of gods, men, 
animals, or inanimate things. Brahma then, 
being desirous of creating the four orders of 
beings, termed gods, demons, progenitors, and 
men, collected his mind into itself.'* Whilst 
thus concentrated, the quality of darkness 
pervaded his body; and thence the demons (the 
Asuras) were first born, issuing from his thigh. 
Brahma then abandoned that form which was 
composed of the rudiment of darkness, and 
which, being deserted by him, became night. 
Continuing to crcate, but assuming a different 
shapc, he experienced pleasure; and thence 
from his mouth proceeded the gods, endowed 
with the quality of goodness. The form 
abandoned by him, became day, in which the 
good quality predominates; ard hence by day 
the gods are most powerful, and by night the 
demons. He next adopted another person, in 
which the rudiment of goodness also 
prevailed; and thinking of himself, as the 


30 


father of the world, the progenitors (the Pitrs) 
were born from his side. The body, when he 
abandoned it, became the Sandya (or evening 
twilight), the interval between day and night. 


THAT ATS A AT AT: 
THTATAET ATaT EAT FESTA 3 & A 
TANYA AIT A UAT: WTA: | 

Reet Wawa aie wena arfsrerterezi 3 € 1 


Brahmaé then assumed another person, 
pervaded by the quality of foulness; and from 
this, men, in whom foulness (or passion) 
predominates, were produced. Quickly 
abandoning that body, it became morning 
twilight, or the dawn. 


weer afer wen: frac 
Aaa WearaNa Taned waar Bu 3) 
TOCA WS Gea aeareaahs A WA: 


Te’ yrerafor Heo Fuss 0 


At the appearance of this light of day, men 
feel most vigour; while the progenitors are 
most powcrful in the evening season. In this 
manner, Maitreya, Jyotsné (dawn), Ratri 
(night), Ahar (day), and Sandhya (evening), 
are the four bodies of Brahma invested by the 
three Qualities”. 


THafarana AAS TUS ATA! 
AT: AS TAT AAT HH AVC AAS 2 


TRAAATHLSA MSTA ANAT: | 

faRU: PAST MAAS MMAR: WAN Y o 

Ter It WAATAT Sey Waa a 

HY: TAM SIT | A aA WANT w vt 

Next from Brahma, in a form composed of 
the quality of foulness, was produced hunger, 
of whom anger was born: and the god put forth 
in darkness beings emaciate with hunger, of 
hidcous aspects, and with long beards. Thosc 
beings hastened to the deity. Such of them as 
exclaimed, Oh preserve us! were thence called 
Raksasas'’: others, who cried out, Let us eat, 
were denominated from that expression Yaks 

7 
as’. 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


SMTA AL FET HOT: Vitae ATT: 

| Srey fora aa: warttert afew VI 
ado asway aul garaged: BAT: | 
aa: HSl WATTS wee fara w 3 
aufa afar sare fafgrarsrar: | 
PAN Wi MATA WIAA TATUM Sv Ut 
fred wigt ari wrerahaa 3 faa 


Beholding them so disgusting, the hairs of 
Brahma were shrivelled up, and first falling 
from his head, were again renewed upon it: 
from their falling they became serpents, called 
Sarpa from their creeping, and Ahi because 
they had deserted the head.'* The creator of 
the world, being incensed, then ereated fierce 
beings, who were denominated goblins, 
Bhitas, malignant fiends and eaters of flesh. 
The Gandharvas were next born. imbibing 
melody drinking of the goddess of speech, 
they were born, and thence their appellation’ 

UA GPT May Tal Teak ST v4 Ut 

Wd: WMBIasMy azifs qaausaad 

areal SHE SESE D SCC CIASGLE Gt FEAT SEU 

BEATS Wel UIA w warraher: 

piscine at WOM Taary WAN Xl 

sprang WAT 

SE cette Teaqerer TART yet 

The divine Brahma, influenced by their 
material energies, having created these beings, 
made others of his own will. Birds he formed 
from his vital vigour; sheep from his breast, 
goats from his mouth; kine trom his belly and 
sides; and horses, elephants, Sarabhas, 
Gavayas, deer, camels, mules, antelopes, and 
other animals, trom his feet: whilst from the 
hairs of his body sprang herbs, roots, and 
fruits. 


TARTS gen Heres fear 

UeT we: We Fa F aera ¥ el 
THT: Tear Far ST SSA: TAT: | 

War TPA WL Mga Pats AG ott 


BOOK I, CHAP. 5 


31 





araet fg seit amt: were: | 

Steet: UTA: WET: VHT AAA G BH 

O foremost or the Bramanas! Brahma 
having created, in the commencement of the 
Kalpa various plants, employed them in 
sacrifices, in the beginning of the Treta age. 
Animals were distinguished into two classes, 
domestic (village) and wild (forest): the first 
class contained the cow, goat, the hog, the 
sheep, the horse, the ass, the mule: the latter, 
all beasts of prey, and many animals with 
cloven hoofs, the elephant, and the monkey. 
The fifth order were the birds; the sixth, 
aquatic animals; and the seventh, reptiles and 
insects””, 

Thee a maga gent WATT 

aap a ai Fay waa WEN 21 

auf Wea Saas Brag aM 

TEL AM Tata as aero WEIN & 3 

SN WAS AT MEST ABM 

aeunhs a UBT IS WET G Xl 

wenfergraratorarararararera =) 

SIG A AMM FAUST WET 4 4! 

From his eastern mouth Brahma then 
created the Gayatri metre, the Rgveda. the 
collection of hymns termed Trivrt, the 
Rathantara portion of the Sdmaveda, and the 
Agnistoma sacrifice: from his southern mouth 
he created the Yajurveda, the Tristubh metre. 
the collection of hymns called Panchadsa, the 
Brhat S4ma, and the portion of the Sama-veda 
termed Uktha: from his western mouth he 
created the Sdma-veda, the Jayati metre, the 
collection of hymns termed Saptadasa, the 
portion of the Sama called Vairtpa, and the 
Atiratra sacrifice: and from his northern mouth 
he created the Ekavirhsa collection of hymns, 
the Atharva-veda. the Aptoryamd rite, the 
Anustubh metre, and the Vairaja portion of the 


Sama-veda’! : 


Sarena sent mesarearer SAT 
ATAU BRT ATR WATAAT GG 


a: YA: Waalat a ners frame: 

Sar Tryarr WATAAATATaT AUIFTH 4 9 

Aaa AI: UPN 

werd U ard da afed WTS Y C1) 

aq AUG Tat Tan wrartigag fay: 

aat & ay aeaiitr wrep eat whafet ye 

Wea TF Met PRET: YA: TA 

feared year aaleaigarya 

aataat: Weed THM AL eT Waa § ofl 

In this manner all creatures, great or small, 
proceeded ffom his limbs. The _ great 
progenitor of the world having termcd the 
gods, demons, and Pitrs, created, in the 
commencement of the Kalpa, the Yaksas, 
Pisachas (goblins), Gandharvas and the troops 
of Apsarasas the nymphs of heaven, Nards 
(centaurs, or beings with the limbs of horses 
and human bodies) and Kinnaras beings with 
the heads of horses), Raksasas, birds, beasts, 
dcer, serpents, and all things permanent or 
transitory, movable or immovable. This did 
the divine Brahmi, the first creator and lord of 
all: and these things being created, discharged 
the same functions as they had fulfilled in a 
previous creation, whether malignant or 
benign, gentle or cruel, good or evil, true or 
false; and accordingly as they are actuated by 
such propensities will be their conduct. 


sirariy aay eeity a a Wy: 

arred fahrarey ada Sra TAN & 2h 

ATM BT MAT Haat BT WS 

Aga Vaal Carat Tea: Wg VW 

aa ANT wat aes ah 

an Famarant adaraa asaciq § 31 

aoRgg eres ANTfeT Te 

Syed wt area aa sat BMPSHN & YI 

Huediaat Us aeael F yA: WA: 

Fagarsifagentsat geererinwetfet: nl & 
ofa sitar wanist varnisena: 


32 


And the creator displayed infinite variety in 
the objects of sense, in the properties of living 
things, and in the forms of bodies: he 
determined in the beginning, by the authority 
of the Vedas, the names and forms and 
functions of all creatures, and of the gods; and 
the names and appropriate offices of the Rsis, 
as they also are read in Vedas. In like manner 
as the produces of the seasons designate in 
periodical revolution the return of the same 
season, so do the same circumstances indieate 
the reeurrence of the same Yuga, or age; and 
thus, in the beginning of cach Kalpa, does 
Brahma repeatedly create the world, 
possessing the power that is derived from the 
will to create, and assisted by the natural and 
essential faculty of the object to be created. 


KKK 


NOTES 

1. The terms here employcd are for qualities. 
Gunas; which, as we have alrcady noticed, are 
those of goodness, foulness, and darkness. The 
characteristics, or Swabhdavas, are the inherent 
properties of the qualities, by which they act, as, 
soothing, terrific, or stupefying: and the forms. 
Swuripas. are the distinctions of biped, quadruped, 
brute, bird, fish, and the like. 

2. Or Tamas. Moha, 
Andhatamisra; they are the five kinds of 
obstruction, viparyyaya, of soul's liberation, 
according to the Samkhya : they are explained to 
be, 1. The belief of material substance being the 
same with spirit, 2. Notion of property or 
possession, and consequent attachment to objects, 
as children and the like, as being one’s own, 3. 
Addiction to the enjoyments of sense; 4. Impatience 
or wrath; and 5. Fear of privation or death. They 
are called in the Pataniyjala philosophy, the five 
afflixations, Klesa, but are similarly explained by 
Avidya, ‘ignorance;’ Asmita, 'selfishness,, literally 
'‘l-am-ness : ‘Raga, ‘love;’ Dwesha, hatred :’ and 
Abhinivesa, (aftfray:), ‘dread of temporal 
suffering.’ Samkhya Kariké, p. 148—150. This 
creation by Brahma in the Varaha Kalpa begins in 
the same way, and in the same words, in most of 
the Puranas. The Bhagavata reverses the order of 


Mahamoha, Tamisra. 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


these five products, and gives them, Andhatamisra, 
Tamisra, Mahamoha, Moha, and Tamas; a variation 
obviously more immethodical than the usual 
reading of the text, and adopted, no doubt, merely 
for the sake of giving the passage an air of 
originality. 

3. This is not to be confounded with elementary 
creation, although the description would very well 
apply to that of crude nature, or Pradh&ana : but, as 
will be seen presently, we have here to do with 
final productions, or the forms in which the 
previously created elements and faculties are more 
or less perfectly aggregated. The first class of these 
forms is here said to be immovable things; that is, 
the mineral and vegetable kingdoms; for the solid 
earth, with its mountains and rivers and seas, was 
already prepared for their reception. The ‘fivefold’ 
immovable creation is indeed, according to the 
comment, restricted to vegetables, five orders of 
which are enumerated, or, 1. trees : 2. shrubs; 3. 
climbing plants: 4, creepers : and 5. grasses. 

4, Tiryak. ‘crooked;' and Srotas, ‘a canal.' 

5. Twenty-eight kinds of Badhas (ata), which 
in the Sarhkhya system mean disabilities, as defects 
of the senses, blindness, deafness, etc.; and defects 
of intellect, discontent, ignorance, and the like. S. 
Karika, p. 148, 151. In place of Badha, however, 
the more usual reading, as in the Bhagavata, 
Varaha. and Markandeya Puranas, is Vidha (7a), 
‘kind,’ sort., as smfasigtrerat: | implying twenty- 
eight sorts of animals. These are thus specified in 
the Bhagavata. III. 10 : Six kinds have single hoofs, 
nine have double or cloven hoofs, and thirteen have 
five claws or nails instead of hoofs. The first are the 
horse, the mule, the ass, the yak, the sarabha, and 
the gaura, or white deer. The second are the cow, 
the goat, the buffalo, the hog, the gayal, the black 
deer, the antelope, the camel, and the sheep. The 
last are the dog, shacal, wolf, tiger, cat, hare, 
porcupine, lion, monkey, elephant, tortoise, lizard, 
and alligator. 

6. Urddha. 'above,' and Srotas as before; their 
nourishment being derived from the exterior, not 
from the interior of the body : according to the 
commentator: 3aqok eetefeta Gla sees Vet aS 
U:! as a text of the Vedas has it; “Through satiety 
derived from even beholding ambrosia; ’sryaexrarea 
Ja: | 


7. Arvak. ‘downwards,’ and Srotas. ‘canal’ 


BOOK I, CHAP. 5 


33 





8. This reckoning is not very easily reconciled 
with the creations described, for. as presently 
enumerated, the stages of creation are seven. The 
commentator, however, considers the Urddhasrotas 
creation, or that of the superhuman beings, to be the 
same with that of the Indriyas, or senses over which 
they preside; by which the number is reduced to 
S1X. 

9. This creation being the work of the supreme 
spirit, TS ATH Aq Sys: GA fasy sas: | according 
to the commentator : or it might have been 
understood to mean, that Brahma was then created, 
being, as we have seen, identified with Mahat, 
‘active intelligence.’ or the operating will of the 
Supreme. See Ch. II. Nofe 23. 

10. The text is, Wt: Bq afigyeda: | which is, as 
rendered in the text, ‘creation preceded by, or 
beginning with Buddhi. intelligence., The rules of 
euphony would however admit of a mute negative 
being inserted, or A*psafeyeds:! 'preceded by 
ignorance.’ that is by the chief principle, crude 
nature or Pradhana. which is one with ignorance : 
but this seems to depend on notions of a later date. 
and more partial adoption, than those generally 
prevailing in our authority; and the first rcading 
therefore has been preferred, It is also to be 
observed, that the first unintellectual creation was 
that of immovable objects (as in p. 30-31), the 
original of which is, Hafsyedte: wt: weyaera: | 
and all ambiguity of construction is avoided. The 
reading is also established by the text of the Linga 
Purana, which enumerates the diffcrent series of 
creation in the words of the Visnu, except in this 
passage, which is there transposed, with a-slight 
variation of the reading. Instead of Ww AeA: Tl 
fara FATE] GF: |} it is VAST ed: VA: Beat aflgedta: | 
‘The first creation was that of Mahat : Intellect 
being the first in manifestation.’ The reading of tae 
Vayu Purana is still more tautological. but confirms 
that here preferred : BHT Hed: AT farat AeA a: | 
See also n. 12. 

11. The Anugraha creation, of which no notice 
has been found in the Mahabharata seems to have 
bcen borrowed from the Samkhya philosophy. It ts 
more particularly described in the Padma, 
Markandeya, Linga and Matsya Puranas : as, 
Wrisqye: Wi: @ wqal orafera:) farses a 
fasa gen ata au 'The fith is the Anugraha 
creation, which is subdivided into four kinds; by 


obstruction, disability, — perfect-ness. and 
acquiescence. This is the Pratyaya sarga. or 
intellectual creation. of the Samkhyas (S. Karika. v. 
46. p. 146); the creation of which we have a notion, 
or to which we give assent (Anugraha), in 
contradistinction to organic creation, or that 
existence of which we have sensible perception. In 
its specific subdivisions it is the notion of certain 
inseparable properties in the four different ordcrs of 
beings : obstruction or stolidity in inanimate things; 
inability or imperfection in animals : perfectibility 
in man : and acquiescence or tranquil enjoyment in 
gods. So aho the Vayu Purana TATALY 


fremert wqyEM wea 
Pe: | 


12. Or Vaikrta, derived mediately from the first 
principle, through its Vikrtis, productions or 
developements;' and Prakrta, derived more 
immediately from the chief principle itself. Mahat 
and the two forms of Ahankara, or the rudimental 
elements and the senses, constitute the latter class: 
inanimate beings, etc. compose the former : or the 
latter are considercd as the work of Brahma, whilst 
the three first are evolved from Pradhana. So the 
Vayu : wpe wa: wt: Hare afegedar: 1 afeqed 
vad we wi: gen a 'The three creations 
beginning with intelligence are elemental; but the 
six creations which proceed from the series of 
which Intellect is the first are the works of Brahma.' 

13. We must have recourse here also to other 
Puranas, for the elucidation of this term. The 
Kaumara creation is the creation of Rudra or 
Nilalohita, a form of Siva. by Brahma, which is 
subsequently described in our text, and of certain 
other mind-born sons of Brahma, of whose birth the 
Visnu Purana gives no further account : they are 
elsewhere termed Sanat-kumara, Sananda. Sanaka, 
and Sanatana, with sometimes a fifth, Rbhu, added. 
These, declining to create progeny, remained, as 
the name of the first implies, ever boys, kumaras; 
that 1s, ever pure and innocent: whence their 
creation is called the Kaumara. Thus the Vayu : 34 
was og Fa WASRIGR: GaN! wd aad fag a 
SAGA | GASPAR SAG Ses FT ARS Fcden) waa: | 
And the Linga has, Uae: Sel Ua HAR a Bert 
TH SaHARA Ware welfta:) Bring ever as he 
was born, he is here called a youth; and hencc his 
name 1s well known as Sanatkumara.. This 
authority makes Sanatkumara and Rbhu the two 


34 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





first born of all : %%: Gana geaagedtaa 
yaictl...vterafy yeti whilst the text of the Hari 
Vamsa limits the primogeniture to Sanat-kumara : 
wrrpan a fas] yaw ydst In another place, 
however, it enumerates apparently six. or the above 
four with Sana and either Rbhu or another 
Sanatana; for the passage is-corrupt. The French 
translation scribes a share in creation to 
Sanatkumara : 'Les sept Prajapatis, Raudra, Scanda, 
et Sanatkaumala, se mirent a produire les etres 
repandant partout l'inepuisable energic de dieu.’ 
The original is, Ad Bay C4 Us Bes UNA) Sar: 
wapana at: fata faga:t Sarksipya is not 
‘repandant.' but ‘restraining . and 7isthatah being in 
the dual number, relates of course to only two of 
thc serics. The correct rendering is. These seven 
(Prajapatis) created progency. and so did Rudra; 
but Skanda and Sanatkumara. restraining their 
powcr, abstained (from  creation).’ So the 
commentator : Uae dara Fre yerpedarta 
fagd:t These sages, however, live as long as 
Brahma, and they are only crcated by him in the 
first Kalpa, although their generation is very 
commonly, but inconsistently, introduced in the 
Varaha or Padma Kalpas. This creation, says the 
text, is both primary (Prakrta) and secondary 
(Vaikrta). It is the latter, according to the 
commentator, as regards the origin of these saints 
from Brahma : it is the former as affects Rudra. 
who, though proceeding from Brahma, in a certain 
form was in essence equally an immediate 
production of the first principle. These notions, the 
birth of Rudra and the saints, seem to have been 
borrowed from the Saivas, and to have been 
awkwardly engrafted upon the Vaisnava system. 
Sanatkumara and his brethren are always descnbed 
in the Saiva Puranas as Yogis : as the Kiirma, after 
enumerating them, adds, Ta afr fam: 
auraeifaat: | These five, oh Brahmanas, were Yogis, 
who acquired entire exemption from passion :’ and 
the Hari Vamsa, although rather Vaisnava than 
Saiva, observes, that the Yogis celebrate these six, 
along with Kapila, in Yoga works: wert aftei Wa 
yeaa Ar: | saat amaaq wars fe feeraa:i The 
idea seems to have been amplified also in the Saiva 
works; for the Linga Purana describes the repeated 
birth of Siva. or Vamadeva. as a Kumara, or boy, 
from Brahma, in each Kalpa, who again becomes 
four. Thus in the twenty-ninth Kalpa Swetalohita is 


the Kumara, and he becomes Sananda, Nandana. 
Visvananda. Upananda; all of a white complexion: 
in the thirtieth the Kumara becomes Virajas, 
Vivahu. Visoka, Visvabhavana; all of a red colour : 
in the thirty-first he becomes four youths of a 
yellow colour : and in the thirty-second the four 
Kumaras were black. All these are no doubt, 
comparatively recent additions to the original 
notion of the birth of Rudra and the Kuméaras; itself 
obviously a sectarial innovation opon the primitive 
doctrine of the birth of thc Prajapatis. or will-born 
sons of Brahma. 

14. These reiterated, and not always very 
congruous accounts of the creation are explained by 
the Puranas as referring to different Kalpas, or 
renovations of the world, and therefore involving 
no incompatibility. A better reason for their 
appcarance is the probability that they have been 
borrowed from different original authorities. The 
account that follows is evidently modified by the 
Yogi Saivas. by its gencral mysticism, and by the 
expressions with which it begins: ai targr- 

aed frgereneaanh 9 caerersaaasr | 
‘Collecting his mind into itself, 1 Wary) 
according to the comment, is the performance of 
the Yoga (Yiyuje). The term Ambhfansi, lit. 
‘waters.’ for the four orders of beings, gods. 
demons, men, and Pitrs. is also a peculiar, and 
probably mystic term. The, commentator says it 
occurs in the Vedas as a synonym of gods, etc.: 
ca aareyifa ta aye: fradsyu sfa ga:1 The 
Vayu Purana derives it from ‘to shine.’ because the 
different orders of beings shine or flourish severally 
by moonlight, night, day, and twilight: etc.ara 
AATTAISTATHE | etc. 

15. This account is given in several other 
Puranas : in the Kirma with more simplicity; in the 
Padma. Linga, and Vayu with more detail. The 
Bhagavata, as usual, amplifies still more copiously, 
and mixes up much absurdity with the account. 
Thus the person of Sandhya, ‘evening twilight.’ is 
thus described: “She appeared with eyes rolling 
with passion, whilst her lotus-like feet sounded 
with tinkling ornaments: a muslin vest depended 
from her waist, secured by a golden zone: her 
breasts were protuberant, and close together; her 
nose was elegant: her tongue beautiful; her face 
was bright with smiles, and she modestly concealed 
it with the skirts of her robe; whilst the dark curls 


BOOK I, CHAP. 6 


35 





clustered round her brow.” The Asuras address her, 
and win her to become their bride. To the four 
forms of our text, the same work adds, Tandri, 
‘sloth,’ Jrmbhika, ‘yawning;’ Nidra, ‘sleep;’ 
Unmada, insanity; Antarddhana. ‘disappearance;' 
Pratibimba, 'reflexion;’ which become the property 
of Pisaéchas, Kinnaras, Bhttas, Gandharvas, 
Vidyaddharas, Sadhyas, Pitrs, and Manus. The 
notions of night, day, twilight, and moonlight being 
derived from Brahma, seem to have originated with 
the Vedas. Thus the commentator on the Bhagavata 
observes, UST4 Tae aTEt UT atrarsafefa we: | 
‘That which was his body and was left, was 
darkness: this is the Sruti.' All the authorities place 
night before day, and the Asuras or Titans before 
the gods, in the order of appearance; as did Hesiod 
and other ancient theogonists 

i6. From Raksa, 'to preserve.’ 

17. From Yaksa, 'to eat,' 

18. From Srip, srpo, ‘to creep,’ and from Ha, 'to 
abandon. 

19, Gam dhayantah, “drinking speech.” 

20 This and the preceding enumeration of the 
origin of vegetables and animals occurs in several 
Puranas, precisely in the same words. The Linga 
adds a specification of the Aranya, or wild animals, 
which are said to be the buffalo, gayal, bear. 
monkey, sarabha, wolf, and lion. 

21. This specification of the parts of the Vedas 
that proceed from Brahma occurs, in the same 
words, in the Vayu, Linga, Ktrma, Padma. and 
Markandeya Puranas. The Bhagavata offers some 
important varieties: “From his eastern and other 
mouths he created the Rik. Yajush. Sama, and 
Atharvan vedas; the Sastra or ‘the unuttered 
incantation; Ijya ‘oblation:' Stuti and Stoma-prayers 
and hymns; and Prayascitta, ‘explation’ or ‘sacred 
philosophy’ (BrahmA). also the Vedas of medicine, 
arms, music, and mechanics; and the Itihasas and 
Puranas, which are a fifth Veda: also the portions of 
the Vedas called Sorasi, Uktha, Purisi. Agnistut, 
Aptoryama. Atiratra, Vajapeya, Gosava; the four 
parts of virtue, purity, liberality, piety, and truth: 
the orders of life. and their institutes and different 
religious rites and professions; and the sciences of 
logic, ethics, and polity. The mystic words and 
monosylliable proceeded from his heart; the metre 
Usnis from the hairs of his body; Gayatri from his 
skin; Tristubh from his flesh; Anustubh from his 


tendons; Jagati from his bones; Pankti from his 
marrow: Brhati from his breath. The consonants 
were his life: the vowels his body: the sibilants his 
senses: the semi-vowels his vigour". This 
mysticism, although perhaps expanded and 
amplified by the Pauraniks, appears to originate 
with the Vedas: as in the text, HWY Far! 'The 
metre was of the tendons,’ The different portions of 
the Vedas specified in the text are yet, for the most 
part, uninvestigated. 
2K 2K 2K 


BOOK I, CHAP. 6 35 





CHAPTER 6 
UBISeaa: 


(agauerafy: , arqacheartracursy) 
A249 sara 


Saray HMA Taek Ay AT: 

wert free Gls Ta MATTE FAT VU 

FM A AMAA AYU TTA 

aq Tat Tad wel farsa weeraTAN 2 

Maitreya said— You have briefly noticed, 

illustrious sage, the ereation termed 
Arvaksrotas;-or that of mankind : now explain 
to me more fully how Brahma accomplished 
it; how he created the four different castes; 
what duties he assigned to the Brahmanas and 
the rest’. 


TAP SAT 
weatvent: gt fagardenn sre 
stared fees Vralgr WERL WaT 3 
TAM TAHT S TANS AAT! 
THA AA ea AAPA EAAAAT: 1 1 
USAT: WA Tet Bat fara 
TATRA: WAT GAUVAAS ATG 
Seon: afar ava: yes fia 
UATE: WIAA AST ARATE 


Parasara replied— Formerly, oh best of 
Brahmanas, when the truth-meditating Brahma 
was desirous of creating the world, there 
sprang from his mouth beings especially 


36 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





endowed with the quality of goodness; others 


pious men, attached to their duties, attentive to 


from his breast, pervaded by the quality of prescribed obligations, and walking in the 


foulness; others from his thighs, in whom 
foulness and darkness prevailed; and others 
from his feet, in whom the quality of darkness 
predominated. These were, in succession, 
beings of the several castes, Brahmanas, Ks 
atriyas, Vaisyas, and Sidras, produced from 
the mouth, the breast, the thighs, and the feet 
of Brahma’. 


aaa Wavag TE WaT aI 

AGavd HEMT STAATTTT TN 9 1 
aarentaar tar gaqerfor a we: 
STATA TAT AAT: BEMOTNAT CI 
reversal Atedeq Taerenifirer ea: | 
fagaramied: uf: wartrfitizn <n 
wang ae wearer AT TA 
aanhrafadt wart aa aa apa FEST Rot 
TAM TOT Younqavderatw 
AACA AAAI APTA AA 2 
AIPA: Marae farasray: | 

West ACT: Wogl: WaSTAPATST: 22 
Ys a arat wafe yasa- dha eth 

We WA wovata fawared Bar aqaNqn V3 
aa: Sree Bsa A aig: say srs 
OF UCAS STATE VI 
HATA TATA AT RAT 

WAY ITY AT THAT 84 Mt 
aa: Bt Veer faker ariter sr 
Tareas: fagaset seater ar: 26 0 
Ay aTrOTryraTY Seg A UAH 
BRA EN WaT AA: HST VON 


These he created for the performance of 
sacrifices, the four castes being the fit 
instruments of their celebration. By sacrifices, 
oh you who know the truth, the gods are 
nourished; and by the rain which they bestow, 
mankind are supported’: and thus sacrifices, 
the source of happiness, are performed by 


paths of virtue. Men acquire (by them) 
heavenly fruition, or final felicity: they go, 
after death, to whatever sphere they aspire to, 
as the consequence of their human nature. The 
beings who were created by Brahma, of these 
four castes, were at first endowed with 
righteousness and perfect faith; they abode 
wherever they pleased, unchecked by any 
impediment; their hearts were free from guile, 
they were pure, made tree from soil by 
observance of sacred institutes. In their 
sanctified minds Hari dwelt; and they were 
filled with perfect wisdom, by which they 
contemplated the glory of Visnu.” After a 
while (after the Treta age had continued for 
some period), that portion of Hari which has 
been described as one with K4la (time) infused 
into created beings sin, as yet feeble though 
formidable, or passion and the like: the 
impediment of soul's liberation, the seed of 
iniquity, sprung from darkness and desire. The 
innate perfectness of human nature was then 
no more evolved: the eight kinds of perfection, 
Rasollaga and the rest, were impaired;’ and 
these being enfeebled, and sin _ gaining 
strength, mortals were afflicted with pain, 
arising from susceptibility to contrast, as heat 
and cold, and the like. 


at Stier mapalel wea 

slat a aa ot yt wadeenfzenn ve i 
Tet a wrare wg wy: yarey 
VTATTATAAT WHTATT VTA 8 
WHS FAT SATA: MAT TAs | 
aaa Ara ca ates A BATA % gy 
Teay wala wegen srorateret: | 
frIgal Yar AGA: AeA: 112 VN 
WaT WaT Tae Ferra: Wea: | 
MSFT MUN; AAEM: MATIN WM 


They therefore constructed places of 
refuge, protected by trees, by mountains, or by 
water; surroundcd them by a ditch or a wall, 


BOOK I, CHAP. 6 


and formed villages and cities; and in them 
erected appropriate dwellings, as defences 
against the sun and the cold “Having thus 
provided security against the weather, men 
next began to employ themselves in manual 
labour, as a means of livelihood, (and 
cultivated) the seventeen kinds of useful 


srain—rice, barley, wheat, millet, sesamum, — 


panic, and various sorts of Icntils, beans, and 
pease. 


saeeetary weno areca AN 
SiN UAT ATA TORNT TST 3 3 1 
TeIT: Waar rar Mea storaferet: | 


AAT BAT SATAY FHT: VLU 

vara Aare fae: Ways: 

TAT AUIS: MATTE Aches FAN IGM 

TTT; VAT AAT SNTTET ATE 

SAAT AMAA STRATA VEN 

Utes UE Aaa Wa St VTA 

Urata: wera Bary faeraan Von 

WAST AAT YR ATA 

State Yar Hreaaorea oniraqn yen 

O sage! These are the kinds cultivated for 
domestic use: but there are fourteen kinds 
which may be offered in sacrifice; they are, 
rice, barley, Masa, wheat, millet, and 
sesamum; Priyangu is the seventh, and 
kulattha, pulse, the eighth: the others are, 
Syamaka, a sort of panic; Nivara, uncultivated 
rice; Jarttila, wild sesamum; Gavedhuka 
(coix); Markata, wild panic; and (a plant 
called) the seed or barley of the Bamboo 
(Venu-yava). These, cultivated or wild, are the 
fourteen grains that were produced for 
purposes of offering in sacrifice; and sacrifice 
(the cause of rain) is their origin also: they 
again, with sacrifice, are the great cause of the 
perpetuation of the human race, as those 
understand who can discriminate cause and 
effect. Thence sacrifices were offered daily; 
the performance of which, oh best of Munis, is 
of essential service to mankind, and expiates 


37 


the offences of those by whom they are 
observed. 


aarg srerenisal wafsgdera 
VAY AGI Aer T ANY ATAU VM 
ARAM AAT ART T AI 
ceed Freeney AHA: 113 0 
safrenieriatrenttun defer: 
SU Stree ay™: HlSereray: 1-3 VN 


Those, however, in whose hearts the dross 
of sin derived from Time (K4la) was still more 
developed, assented not to sacrifices, but 
reviled both them and all that resulted from 
them, the gods, and the followers of the Vedas. 
Those abusers of the Vedas, of evil disposition 
and conduct, and seceders from the path of 
enjoined duties, were plunged in wickedness.® 


Ufaagt ary aratat war: pt wares: 
Talat TAT TTT BIMTOTTAN 3 2 
ANAM FAPL ayat aT 

areas Waantat wert catzarferam 3 3u 
WAS Manat Ba wert Fara 
was airamnt agrrahrahrrg 3st 
avait aed wrt wentaqahrny 

nerd URdat uftaratqzafernq 3 41 


The means of subsistence having been 
provided for the beings he had created- 
Brahma prescribed laws suited to their station 
and faculties, the duties of the several castes 
and orders, and the regions of those of the 
different castes who were observant of their 
duties. The heaven of the Pitrs is the region of 
devout Brahmanas. The sphere of Indra, of Ks 
atriyas who fly not from the field. The region 
of the winds is assigned to the Vaisyas who 
are diligent in their occupations and 
submissive. Sadras are elevated to the sphere 
of the Gandharvas. 


SMUCEST CURR IGILL CREEL 

tye Aer Wears ada Rafe 3g 
aagorg Uy wt wd Te ataary 
WaT Yew =A Tarayagn 3191 


38 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





armagd wet ago: Wet TET 

Welert: Ber Teena aera fe a 

VST AL UCT Wart Tey Upset UTI BC 

Tea Tea Rada wageateay Wet: 

SOUP ERE CL OBAGI CRC IAI RE 

aftrarranitres wereaan 

sifaarat at arerqanal fara ¥ ot 

farreart deer aqeararrantwory! 

TIANA Wasa Carrera A w et 

ott fampyere weraigt watseara:) 

Those Brahmanas who lead religious lives 
go to the world of the eighty-eight thousand 
saints: and that of the seven Rsis is the seat of 
pious anchorets and hermits. The world of 
ancestors is that of respectable householders: 
and the region of Brahma is the asylum of 
religious mendicants.'” The imperishable 
region of the Yogis is the highest seat of Vis 
nu, where they perpetually meditate upon the 
supreme being, with minds intent on him 
alone: the sphere where they reside, the gods 
themselves cannot behold. The sun, the moon, 
the planets, shall repeatedly be, and cease to 
be, but those who internally repeat the mystic 
adoration of the divinity, shall never know 
decay. For those who neglect their duties, who 
revile the Vedas, and obstruct religious rites, 
the places assigned after death are the terrific 
regions of darkness, of deep gloom, of fear, 
and of great terror; the fearful hell of sharp 
swords, the hell of scourges and of a waveless 
sea.!! 

of 3494 
NOTES 

1. The creation of mankind here described 1s 
rather out of its place, as it precedes the birth of the 
Prajapatis or their progenitors: but this want of 
method is common to the Puranas, and is evidence 
of their being compilations from various sources. 

2. This original of the four castes 1s given in 
Manu. and in most of the Purdnas. We shall see; 
however, that the distinctions are subsequently 
ascribed to voluntary election, to accident, or to 
positive institutions. 


3. According to Manu, oblations ascend to and 
nourish the sun; whence the rain falls upon earth, 
and causes the growth of corn: burnt-offerings are 
therefore the final causes of the support of 
mankind. 


4. This description of a pure race of beings is not 
of general occurrence in the Puranas. It seems here 
to be abridged from a much more detailed account 
in the Brahmanda, Vayu. and Markandeya Puranas. 
In those works Brahma is said to create, in the 
beginning of the Kalpa, a thousand pairs of each of 
the four classes of mankind, who enjoy perfect 
happiness during the Krta age, and only gradually 
become subject to infirmitics as the Treta or second 
age advances. 


5. These eight perfections, or Siddhis, are not the 
supernatural faculties obtained by the performance 
of the Yoga, They are described, the commentator 
says. in the Skanda and other works: and from them 
he extracts their description: 1. Rasollasa, the 
spontaneous or prompt evolution of the juices of 
the body, independently of nutriment from without: 
2. Tripti, mental satisfaction, or freedom from 
sensual desire: 3. Samya, sameness of degree: 4. 
Tulyata, similarity of life, form, and feature: 5. 
Visoka, exemption alike from infirmity or grief: 6. 
Consummation of penance and meditation, by 
attainment of true knowledge: 7. The power of 
going every where at will: 8. The faculty of 
reposing at any time or in any place. These 
attributes are alluded to though obscurely, in the 
Vayu. and are partly specified in the Markandeya 
Purana. 

6. In the other three Puranas, in which this 
legend has been found. the different kinds of 
inhabited places are specified and introduced by a 
series of land measures. Thus the Markandeya 
states, that 10 Paramanus==I Parastiksma; 10 
Parasiksmas=I Trasarenu; 10 Trasarenus=! particle 
of dull, or Mahirajas; 10 Mahirajasas = 1 Balagra, 
hair's point;'10 Balagras=I Likhya; 10 Likhhydas=l 
Yaka; 10 Yikas== I heart of barley (Yavodara); 10 
Yavodaras=I grain of barley of middle size: 10 
barley grains=I finger, or inch; 6 fingers=a Pada, or 
foot (the breadth of it); 2 Padas=1 Vitasti, or span; 
2 spans =I Hasta, or cubit: 4 Hastas=a Dhanu, a 
Danda, or staff, or 2 Narikas; 2000 Dhanus= a 
Gavyiti; 4 Gavyitis-a Yojana. The measurement of 


BOOK I, CHAP. 7 


39 





the Brahmanda 1s less detailed. A span from the 
thumb to the first finger is a Pradesa; to the middle 
finger, a Nila; to the third finger, a Gokarna; and to 
the little finger, a Vitasti, which is equal to twelve 
Angulas, or fingers, understanding — thereby, 
according to the Vayu, a joint of the finger 
( RIT IsaIfT) ; according to other authorities, it is the 
breadth of the thumb at the tip. (A. R. 5. 104.) The 
Vayu, giving similar measurements upon the 
authority of Manu (aaa warn), although such a 
statement does not occur in the Manu Samhita, 
adds. that 21 fingers= 1 Ratni; 24 finger=] Hasta, or 
cubit; 2 Ratnis==] Kishku; 4 Hastas=1Dhanu; 2000 
Dhanus= | Gavyiti; and 8000 Dhanus= ! Yojana. 
Durgas, or strongholds, are of four kinds; three of 
which are natural. from their situation in 
mountains, amidst water, or in other inaccessible 
spots; the fourth is the artificial defences of a 
village (Grama) a hamlet (Khetaka), or a city (Pura 
or Nagara). which are severally half the size of the 
next in the series. The best kind of city is one which 
is about a mile long by half a mile broad, built in 
the form of a parallelogram, facing the north-east, 
and surrounded by a high wall and ditch. A hamlet 
should be a Yojana distant from a city: a village 
half a Yojana from a hamlet. The roads leading to 
the cardinal points from a city should be twenty 
Dhanus (above 100 feet) broad: a village road 
should be the same: a boundary road ten Dhanus: a 
royal or principal road or street should be ten 
Dhanus (above fifty feet) broad: a cross or branch 
road should be four Dhanus. Lanes and paths 
amongst the houses are two Dhanus in breadth: 
footpaths four cubits: the entrance of a house three 
cubits: the private entrances and paths about the 
mansion of still narrower dimensions. Such were 
the measurements adopted by the first builders of 
cities, according to the Puranas specified. 

7. These are enumerated in the text, as well as 10 
the Vayu and Markandeya Purana, and are, Udara. 
a sort of grain with long stalks (perhaps a holcus); 
Kodrava (Paspalum kora): Cinaka, - a sort of panic 
(P. miliaceum); Masa. Kidney bean (Phaseolus 
radiatus); Mudga (Phaseolus mungo); Masia, 
lentil (Ervum hirsutum); Nisp4va, a sort of pulse: 


8. This allusion to the sects hostile to the Vedas, 
Buddhists or Jains, does not occur in the parallel 
passages of the Vayu and Markandeya Puranas. 

_ 9. The Vayu goes farther than this, and states 
that castes were now first divided according to their 
occupations : having, indeed, previously stated that 
there was no such distinction in the Krta age: 
ays J dares Wet! Brahma now 
appointed those who were robust and violent to be 
Ksatriyas, to protect the rest; those who were purc 
and pious be made Brahmanas: those who were of 
less power, but industrious, and addicted to 
cultivate the ground, he made Vaisyas; whilst the 
feeble and poor of spirit were constituted Sidras: 
and he assigned them their several occupations, to 
prevent that interference with one another which 
had occurred as long as they recognised duties 
peculiar to castes: @felwitat (ta:) saeerd 
WER | 

10. These worlds, some of which will be more 
particularly described in a different section. are the 
seven Lokas or spheres above the earth:1. 
Prajapatya or Pitni loka: 2. Indra loka or Swarga: 3. 
Marutloka or Divaloka, heaven: 4. Gandharva loKa, 
the region of celestial spirits; also called 
Maharloka- 5. Janaloka, or the sphere of saints; 
some copies read eighteen thousand; others, as in 
the text, which is also the leading of the Padma 
Purana: 6. Tapaloka, the world of the seven sages: 
and, Brahmaloka or Satyaloka, the world of infinite 
wisdom and truth. The eighth, or high world of 
Visnu. fast: 44 V1 is a sactarial addition, which in 
the Bhagavata is called Vaikuntha. And in the 
Brahma Vaivartta, Goloka; both apparently, and 
most certainly the last, modern inventions. 

11. The divisions of Naraka, or hell, here named, 
are again more particularly enumerated, b. 11. c. 6. 


KRRK 


Kulattha (Dolichos biflorus). Arhaki (Cytisus ~ 


Cajan); Canaka. chick pea (Cicer arietinum); and 
Sana (Crotolaria). 


BOOK I, CHAP. 7 | 39 


RN ET Se ys YP ep quips psy eS 


CHAPTER 7 
GAA SEAT : 


UU Sarat 
Tasha HRT UTA: WAT: 
areata: HA: BIT: Tat git 


40 


aM: Wada WATE Ad: t 

Wa Waa J aT wyathear: 11 VA 

CaM: Tara soars Pera: 

VaR BST UOT aU ATi 3 1 

Sara AT: WAT: Wal AT aa aT: | 

SARI AA FA, ASRS BAT 

ary gored yore gaara ae 

wife eats a afas da AAAI GI 

qa GeO Sera Wey Fert Tar: 1 

Parasara said— From Brahma, continuing 
to meditate, were born mind-engendered 
progeny, with forms and faculties derived 
from his corporeal nature; embodied spirits, 
produced from the person of ‘that all-wise 
deity. All these beings, from the gods to 
inanimate things, appeared as I have related to 
you,’ being the abode of the three qualities: 
but as they did not multiply themselves. 
Brahma created other mind-born sons, like 
himself; namely, Bhrgu, Pulastya, Pulaha, 
Kratu, Angiras, Marici, Daksa, Atri and 
Vasistha: these are the nine Brahmas (or 
Brahmérshis) celebrated in the Puranas.’ 


wreteMn Fa ys Yat gg sea tt 
qa cerned Prete: wary a 

aa Ft arma ata faaeat: 9 tt 
wera Frdarg otearget were: 

TAUNTS HASTAC ART: I CI 
TET IAT WATT Te aaa 
TAMNIST Aat Wa ActeemMfaet FU 
UHH TH oretreny, wterah fra 
ATTA GA AAT AAIT: 11 Lol 
sTeaay: wavetsfasritary 
farmrearafargeran & TeMaaey Fees VV 
aeatniset fear feret weet aarti 
fata Youd wt ayer eter TA 221 
WTA AAT VA Vd: Stel aT A YL 
fate agen ta: wamtefad: fat:1 gsi 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


Sanandana and the other sons of Brahma 
were previously created by him, but they were 
without desire or passion, inspired with holy 
wisdom, estranged from the universe, and 
undesirous of progeny. This when Brahma 
perceived, he was filled with wrath capable of 
consuming the three words, the flame of which 
invested, like a garland, heaven, earth, and 
hell. Then from his forehead, darkened with 
angry frowns, sprang Rudra’, radiant as the 
noon-tide sun, fierce, and of vast bulk, and of 
a figure which was half male, half female. 
Separate yourself, Brahma said to him; and 
having so spoken, disappeared. Obedient to 
which command, Rudra became _ twofold, 
disjoining his male and female natures, His 
male being he again divided into eleven 
persons, of whom some were agreeable, some 
hideous, some fierce, some mild; and he 
multiplied his female nature manifold, of 
complexions black or white.4 

aa aneraayd ys Taye wy: 

SATAN TAL MATTE AE FEST YU 

Waa @ at A walerewaTy 

Tarra aya, uated Se Fags eat 

AST Feae Sat MAST SAAT 

fragararrarel wararen erate 25 tt 

SUT Met Bulerehyonaay 

wat wat aera areal Ger TAT got 

warafa: @ wae: Tarde: Baler: | 

YAY Sa AST ares Ft AA ket 

UAE SOTA YAT Baa Tie 

SMT Stet AARSATA Sat: TATATYS VAT V3 1 

Then Brahma? created himself the Manu 
Svayambhuva, born of and identical with, his 
original self, for the protection of created 
beings; and the female portion of himself he 
constituted Sataripa whom austerity purified 
from the sin (of forbidden nuptials), and 
whom the divine Manu Svayambhuva took to 
wife. From these two were born two sons, 
Priyavrata and Uttanapada’, and two 
daughters, named Prasiti and Akiti, graced 


BOOK I, CHAP. 7 


with loveliness and exalted merit’. Prasati he 
gave to Daksa, after giving Akiti-to the 
patriatch Ruci’, who espoused her. Akiti bore 
to Ruci twins, Yajfia and Daksina’, who 
afterwards became husband and wife, and had 
twelve sons, the deities called Yamas’”, in the 
Manvantara of Svayambhuva. 


TAA A wa aaerrat fererierete 

Vast SAAT WS ATTA FH JOT A ott 
mer engig es: yfedear frat tem 
gfacin ay: wis fates: atfreraresta 2 ett 
uead wire gat arenaoit: wey: 

aT: FST ASTD Waa Yea 1 2 
Tara: Wear wera: Taft: wht: ator cem 
Aa TTAT THAT FATT TAM TMT 3 Ut 
aay wifes car darter art: 

TART: Totes merece Vit 
srafasy afger fares warnayi 


GUTEN Wg: BA Yaa hr V4 tl 

The patriarch Daksa had by Prasiti twenty- 
four daughters'': hear from me their names: 
Sraddha (faith), Laksmi (prosperity), Dhrti 
(steadiness), Tusti (resignation), Pusti 
(thriving), Medha (intelligence). Kriya (action, 
devotion), Buddhi (intellect), Lajja (modesty), 
Vapu (body), Santi (expiation), Siddhi 
(perfection), Kirtti (fame): these thirteen 
daughters of Daksa. Dharma (righteousness) 
took to wife. The other eleven bright-eyed and 
younger daughters of the patriarch were, 
Khyati (celebrity), Sati (truth), Sambhuti 
(fitness). Smrti (memory). Prti (affection). Ks 
ama (patience), Sannati (humility). Anasdya 
(charity). Urjja (energy), with Svaha 
(offering), and Svadha (oblation). These 
maidens were respectively wedded to the 
Munis— Bhrgu, Bhava, Marici. Angiras, 
Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Atri, and Vasistha; to 
Firc (Vahni), and to the Pitrs (progenitors)’*. 


THI aM wet at fad gferacasry 
wees Te eects yeaa 2 gt 


41 

ten ad fear aug aa farata oi 

ae afer cen fart aya 291! 

Aaa Wat Sf at wire 

ya fatgder: atid ntara: cn 

aa Tet Ya et garg 

The progeny of Dharma by the daughters 
of Daksa were as follows: by Sraddha lie had 
Kama (desire); by Laksmi, Darpa (pride); by 
Dhrti, Niyama (precept); by Tusti, Santosa 
(content); by Pusti, Lobha (cupidity); by 
Medha, Sruta (sacred tradition); by Kriya, 
Danda, Naya and Vinaya (correction, 
polity, and prudence); by Buddhi, Bodha 
(understanding); by Lajjd, Vinaya (good 
behaviour); by Vapu, Vyavasaya 
(perseverance). Santi gave birth to Ksema 
(prosperity); Siddhi to Sukha (enjoyment); and 
Kirti to Yasas (reputation’*). These were the 
sons of Dharma; one of whom, K4ma, had 
Harsa (joy) by his wife Nandi (delight). 

fear arat eerie aeat AH TATIAA! 

areata Prafreavat wet Arata au Ve 

wat a deat da fayaaataat: | 

was I Aa wey yaTaericorqi 3 ott 

aa Myra eG asa Ward 

Wealeafasrretreangensateay ste 3 Vu 

SARAT BAT Mt Ber MTT CATT: | 

Tai wait Ya at A Mae BATT Uh 

Caifar Ms warior faery erst: | 

Preamereged Wratsea wentet Sr 3 Bil 

er UT PATENT WT: | 

WTAA ARTA PTA TT 3 

wat AAT oT ater a 

amnifirca: yet Preateafereanhear: 3 4 

The wife of Adharma”™ (vice) was Himsa 
(violence), on whom he begot a son Anrta 
(falsehood), and a daughter Nikrti 
(immorality): they intermarried, and had two 


sons, Bhaya (fear) and Naraka (Hell); and 
twins to them, two daughters, Maya (deceit) 


42 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





and Vedana (torture), who became their wives. 
The son of Bhaya and Maya was the destroyer 
of living creatures, or Mrtyu (death); and 
Duhkha (pain) was the offspring of Naraka 
and Vedand4, The children of Mrtyu were 
Vyadhi (disease), Jara (decay), Soka (sorrow). 
Trsna (greediness). and Krodha (wrath). These 
are all called the inflictors, of misery, and are 
characterised as the progency of Vice 
(Adharma). They are all without wives, 
Without posterity, without the faculty to 
procreate; they are the terrific forms of Visnu, 
and perpetually operate as causes of the 
destruction of this world. On the contrary, 
Daksa and the other Rsis, the elders of 
mankind, tend perpetually to influence its 
renovation : whilst the Manus and their sons, 
the heroes endowed with mighty power, and 
treading in the path of truth, as constantly 
contribute to its preservation. 


AAT sara 

at fren Rafadert Frernheaatta 

Frarransy dat a cad ae aera 3 <I 

Maitreya said—Tell me, Brahman, what is 

the essential nature of these revolutions, 
perpetual preservation, perpetual creation, and 
perpetual destruction. 
UU SareT 


wiferttatreties WTA APTS: | 
ARRURATT HUTT SA FAY: 3 
afifaa: wreftenetareatarcnt fist: 
Fras aayarat wetaise afar: 3 cil 
Tan Afar watt aa: ofa 

Was weHA da Taos wat TAT <1 
Wrreratera weal ata: wears 

fra: wea areart at faarett fearfrerqu x ott 
wafa: wracat a ar gfe: wrench war 
Sae AM MIT ARTI ATS i 
qaragied aa art grrr 

Fra: at: ag We: quranelferaerdt: 11 ¥ 2 Ut 


Par4sara said— Madhusiidana, whose 
essence is incomprehensible, in the forms of 
these (partriarchs and Manus), is the author of 
the uninterrupted vicissitudes of creation, 
preservation, and destruction. The dissolution 
of all things is of four kinds; Naimittika. 
“occasional;' Prakrtika, 'elemental;' Atyantika. 
“absolute;’ Nitya, ‘perpetual’’ . The first, also 
termed the Brahma dissolution, occurs when 
the sovereign of the world reclines in sleep. In 
the second, the mundane egg resolves into the 
primary element, from whence it was derived. 
Absolute non-existence of the world is the 
absorption of the sage, through knowledge, 
into supreme spirit. Perpetual destruction 1s 
the constant disappearance, day and night, of 
all that are born. The productions of Pratmi 
form the creation that is termed the elemental 
(Prakrta). That which ensues after a (minor) 
dissolution is called ephemeral creation: and 
the daily generation of living things is termed 
by those who are versed in the Puranas, 
constant creation. 

Ud Bay Wary ACA: | 

Uae: ged fawpeafatairdaar x 3 

Behari wea: waeteg! 

Sureq: uftetat Rersehtst wari vwit 

Yoaars Ste Ter MRT AEA 

astra @ wreda wt Aad YASS I 

gfe sttfereargerat weratyt MAAS EAT: | 

In this manner the mighty Visnu, whose 
essence is the elements, abides in all bodies, 
and brings about production, existence, and 
dissolution. The faculties of Visnu to create, to 
preserve, and to destroy, operate successively, 
Maitreya, in alt corporeal beings and at all 
seasons; and he who frees himself from the 
influence of these three faculties, which are 
essentially composed of the three qualities 
(goodness, foulness, and darkness), goes to the 
supreme sphere, from whence he never again 
returns. 


3k ok 3 3h 


BOOK I, CHAP. 7 


43 





NOTES 

1. It is not clear which of the previous narratives 
is here referred to, but it Seems most probable that 
the account in Ch. V. is intended. 

2. Considerable variety prevails in this list of 
Prajapatis, | Brahmd-putras. Braéhmanas, or 
Brahmarshis; but the variations are of the nature of 
additions made to an apparently _ original 
enumeration of but seven, whose names generally 
recur. Thus in the Mahabharata,| Moksa Dharma, 
we have in one place, Marici. Atri, Angiras. 
Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu. and Vasistha, ¥em: Wa a4 
Tat ARIAT: THAR Ya: | the seven highminded sons of 
the self-born Brahma,’ In another place of the 
same, however, we have Daksa substituted for 
Vasistha: FOI YR AAA caaaAry! 
TASS Forest Yorse Gd! ‘Brahma then created 
mind-begotten sons, of whom Daksa was the 
seventh, with Marici,’ etc. These seven sons of 
Brahma are also identified with the seven Rsis: as 
in the Vayu; SoA AA A: | Fad 
aera wate trary: | although, with palpable 
inconsistency, eight are immediately enumerated, 
or, Bhrgu, Marici. Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha. 
Kratu, and Vasistha. The Uttara Khanda of the 
Padma Purana substitutes Kardama for Vasistha. 
The Bhagavata includes Daksa, enumerating nine. 
The Maisya agrees with Manu in adding Narada to 
the list of our text. The Kirma Purana adds Dharma 
and Sankalpa. The Linga. Brahmanda, and Vayu 
Purana also add them, and extend the list to 
Adharma and Ruci. The Hari VarhSa in one place 
inserts Gautama, and in another Manu. Altogether 
therefore we have seventeen, instead of seven. But 
the accounts given of the origin of several of these, 
show that they were not originally included 
amongst the Manasa putras, or sons of Brahma’s 
mind; for even Daksa, who finds a place in all the 
lists except one of those given in the Mahabharata, 
is uniformly said to have sprung from Brahma's 
thumb: and the same patriarch, as well as Dharma, 
is included in some accounts. as in the Bhagavata 
and Matsya Purana, amongst a different series of 
Brahma's progeny, or virtues and vices: or, Daksa 
(dexterity), Dharma (virtue). Kama (desire). 
Krodha (passion). Lobha (covetousness). Moha 
(infatuation), Mada (insanity), Pramoda (pleasure), 
Mrtyu (death). and Angaja (lust). These are 
severally derived from different parts of Brahma's 


body: and the Bhagavata adding Kardama (soil or 
sin) to this enumeration, makes him spring from 
Brahma's shadow. The simple statement, that the 
first Prajapatis sprang from the mind or will of 
Brahma, has not contented the depraved taste of the 
mystics, and in some of the Puranas, as the 
Bhagavata. Linga, and Vayu, they also are derived 
from the body of their progenitor : or, Bhrgu from 
his skin, Marici from his mind. Atri from his eyes, 
Angiras from his mouth. Pulastya from his ear; 
Pulaha from his navel. Kratu from his hand, 
Vasistha from his breath, Daksa from his thumb, 
and Narada from his hip. They do not exactly 
agree, however, in the places whence these beings 
proceed; as for instance, according to the Linga, 
Marici springs from Brahma's eyes. not Atri, who 
there proceeds, instead of Pulastya, from his ears. 
The Vayu has also another account of their origin, 
and states them to have sprung from the fires of a 
sacrifice offered by Brahma; an allegorical mode of 
expressing, their probable origin, considering them 
to be in some degree real persons, from the 
Brahmanical ritual, of which they were the first 
institutors and observers. The Vayu Purana also 
states, that besides the seven primitive Rsis, the 
Prajapatis are numerous, and specifies Kardama. 
Kasyapa, Sesha, Vikranta. Susravas, : Bahuputra, 
Kumara, Vivasvat. Sucisravas. Prachetasa (Daks 
a), Aristanemi, Babula. These and many others 
were Prajapatis: @aneais~asht aag Wiaw: | In the 
beginning of the Mahabharata (A P.) we have again 
a different origin, and first Daksa, the son of 
Pracetasas, it is said. had seven sons, after whom 
the twenty-one Prajapatis were born, or appeared. 
According to the commenfator. seven sons of Daks 
a were the allegorical persona Krodha, Tamas, 
Dama, Vikrta, Angiras. Kardama, and Asva; and 
the twenty-one Prajapatis, the seven usually 
Specified Marichi and the rest, and the fourteen 
Manus. This looks like a blending of the earlier and 
later notions. 

3. Besides this general notice of the origin of 
Rudra and his separate forms, we have in the next 
chapter an entirely different set of beings so 
denominated; and the eleven alluded to in the text 
are also more particularly enumerated in a 
subsequent chapter. The origin of Rudra, as one of 
the agents in creation, is described in most of the 
Puranas, The Mahabharata, indeed, refers his origin 


44 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





to Visnu, representing him as the personification of 
his anger, whilst Brahma is that of his kindness: 
we: ee 
yaaa! «daerarart ~=giderarat The 
Karma Purana makes him proceed from Brahma’s 
mouth, whilst engaged in meditating on creation. 
The Varaha Purana makes this appearance of Rudra 
the consequence of a promise made by Siva to 
Brahma, that he would become his son. In the 
parallel passages in other Puranas the progeny of 
the Rudra created by Brahma is not confined to the 
eleven, but comprehends infinite numbers of beings 
in person and equipments like their parent; until 
Brahma, alarmed at their fierceness, numbers, and 
immortality, desires his son Rudra, or, as the 
Matsya calls him, Vamadeva. to form creatures of a 
different and mortal nature. Rudra refusing to do 
this, desists; whence his name Sth4anu. from Stha. 
‘to stay,’ Linga. Vayu Purana etc. 

4. According to the Vayu, the female became 
first twofold, or one half white, and the other black; 
and each of these, again, becomes manifold, being 
the various energies, or Saktis, of Mahadeva, as 
stated by the Kirma, after the words 
fivt:| which are those of our text: am @ fasaat Fan 
faga: wea yfal The Linga and Vayu specify 
many of their names. Those of the white, 
complexion, or mild nature, include Laksmi, 
Saraswati, Gauri, Uma, etc. Those of the dark huc, 
and fierce-disposition, Durga, Kali, Chandi, 
Mah§aratri, and others. 

5. Brahma, after detaching from himself the 
property of anger, in the form of Rudra, converted 
himself into two persons, the first male, or the 
Manu Svayambhuva, and the first woman, or 
Satariipa: so in the Vedas; Wa a1 a Fat AAT So 
himself was indeed (his) son.' The commencement 
of production through sexual agency is here 
described with sufficient distinctness, but the 
subject has been rendered obscure by a more 
complicated succession of agents, and especially by 
the introduction of a person of a mythic or mystical 
character. Viraj. The notion is thus expressed in 
Manu: "Having divided his own substance, the 
mighty power Brahma became half male and half 
female; and from that female he produced Viraj. 
Know me to be that person whom the male Viraj 
produced by himself." J. 32. 33. We have therefore 
a series of Brahmd, Viraj, and Manu, instead of 


Brahma and Manu only: also the generation of 
progeny by Brahma, begotten on Satartpa. instead 
of her being, as in our text. the wife of Manu. The 
idea seems to have originated with the Vedas, as 
Kullika Bhatta quotes a text: am fasresraa) Then (or 
thence) Virét was born. The procreation of 
progeny by Brahmd, however, is at variance with 
the whole system, which almost invariably refers 
his creation to the operation of his will: and the 
expression in Manu, wen @ faasagaai ‘he created 
Viraj in her,’ does not necessarily imply sexual 
intercourse. Viraj also creates, not begets, Manu. 
And in neither instance does the name of Sataraipa 
occur. The commentator on Manu, however, 
understands the expression asrijat to imply the 
procreation of Viraj : 344 wit; and the same 
interpretation is given by the Matsya Purana, in 
which the incestuous passion of Brahma for 
Satartipa, his daughter in one sense, his sister in 
another, is described; and by her he begets Viraj, 
who there is called, not the progenitor of Manu, but 
Manu himself, a: Set Feet TEM: Galt sway: 
varrsya tid waa: a faafeta 4: yd This therefore 
agrees with our text, as far as it makes Manu the 
son of Brahmé, though not us to the nature of the 
connexion. The reading of the Agni and Padma 
Purana is that of the Visnu; and the Bhagavata 
agrees with it in one place, stating distinctly that the 
male half of Brahma was Manu, the other half, 
Satariipa: AQ aa YY MSY: Taree: Te, Gil 
Gesretren asses Ae: | Bhagav. Ill. 12. 35: 
and although the production of Viradj is elsewhere 
described, it is neither as the son of Brahma, nor the 
father of Manu. The original and simple idea, 
therefore, appears to be, the ideality of Manu with 
the male half of Brahma, and his being thence 
regarded as his son. The Karma Purana gives the 
Same account as Manu, and in the same words. The 
Linga Purana and Vayu Purana describe the ongin 
of Viraj and Sataripa from Brahma; and they 
intimate the union of Satariipa with Purusa or Virdj. 
the male portion of Brahmé, in the first instance; 
and in the second, with Manu, who is termed 
Vairaja. or the son of Viraj: 2 AF: Fa: | The 
Brahma Purana the words of which are repeated in 
the Hari VarmhsSa, introduces a new element of 
perplexity in a new name, that of Apava. According 
to the commentator, this is a name of the Prajapati 


Vasistha: 31vau: afasracara: warad:! As, however, 


BOOK I, CHAP. 7 


45 





he performs the office of Brahma, he should be 
regarded as that divinity: but this is not exactly the 
case, although it has been so rendered by the 
Franch translator. Apava becomes twofold, and in 
the capacity of his male half begets offspring by the 
female. Again, it is said Visnu created Viraj. and 
Viraj created the male, which is Vatraja or Manu; 
who was thus the second interval (Antaram), or 
stage, in creation. That is, according to the 
commentator, the first stage was the creation of 
Apava, or Vasistha, or Viraj, by Visnu, through the 
agency of Hiranyagarbha or Brahma; and the next 
was that of the creation of Manu by Viraj. Satarapa 
appears as first the bride of Apava, and then as the 
wife of Manu, This account therefore, although 
obscurely expressed, appears to be essentially the 
same with that of Manu; and we have Brahma, 
Viraj, Manu, instead of Brahma and Manu. It seems 
probablc that this difference, and the part assigned 
to Viraj, has originated in some measure from 
confounding Brahma with the male half of his 
individuality, and considering as two beings that 
which was but one. If the Puruaha or Virdj be 
distinct from Brahma, what becomes of Brahma ? 
The entire whole and its two halves cannot co-exist. 
although some of the Pauraniks and the author of 
Manu seem to have imagined its possibility, by 
making Viray the son of Brahma. The perplexity, 
however, is still more ascribable to the 
personification of that which was only an allegory. 
The division of Brahma into two halves designates, 
as is very evident from the passage in theVedas 
given by Colebrooke, (As. R. VIII. 425.) the 
distinction of corporeal substance into two sexes : 
Viraj being all male animals, Sataripa all female 
animals. So the commentator on the Hari Varhsa 
explains the former to denote the horse, the bull, 
etc,; and the latter. the mare, the cow, and the like. 
In the Bhagavata the term Viraj implies, Body, 
collectively, as the commentator observes; THBIKK 
wayey ya We | o(ofeg wa fan 
yavenerdedé: Fart ‘As the sub illuminates his 
own inner sphere, as well as the exterior regions, so 
soul, shining in body (Viraja), irradiates all without 
and within.’ fare @ yar ware yarrafa! All 
therefore that the birth of Viraj was intended to 
express, was the creation of living body, of 
creatures of both sexes: and as in consequence man 
was produced, he might be said to the son of Vira}, 


or bodily existence. Again Satariipa, the bride of 
Brahma, or of Viraj, or of Manu, is nothing more 
than beings of varied of manifold forms, from Sata, 
‘a hundred’ and ®4, ‘form;’ explained by the 
annotator on the Hari Vamsa by Anantarfipa 
(789) ‘of infinite, and  Vividharaipa 
(fafaeret), ‘ of diversified shape;’ being, as he 
stares the same as Maya, ‘illusion,’ or the power of 
multiform metamorphosis: sMHeverared) The 
Matsya Purana has a little allegory of its own, on 
the subject of Brahma's intercourse with Satartpa; 
for it explains the former to mean, the Vedas, and 
the latter the Savitri, or holy place, which is their 
chief text; and in their cohabitation there no evil: 
aaa: Bat Ten aia vefesieer, Tena afwers: eae 
eater TAY Fast: | 

6. The Brahma Purana has a different order, and 
makes Vira the Son of the first pair, who has 
Uttanapada, etc. by Kamya. The commeotator on 
the Hari Varmsa quotes the Vayu for a confirmation 
of this account: but the passage there is. ann 
FRA WE Bad saratefrrad ‘Sataripa bore to 
the male Vairaja (Manu) two Viras,' 1. e. heroes or 
heroic sons, Uttanpada and Priyavrata, It looks as if 
the compiler of the Brahma Purina had made some 
very unaccountable blunder, and invented upon it a 
new couple, Vira and Kamya. : no such person as 
the former occurs in any other Purana, nor does 
Kamyéa, as his wife. 

7. The Bhagavata adds a third daughter, 
Devahiti: for the purpose apparently of 
introducing a long legend of the Rsi Kardama, 
to whom she is married, and of their son 
Kapila : a legend not met with any where else. 

8. Ruci is reckoned amongst the Prajapatis by the 
Linga and Vayu Puranas. 

9. These descendants of Svayambhuva are all 
evidently allegorical : thus Yajfia is ‘sacrifice,’ and 
Daksini, ‘donation’ to Brahmanas. 

10. The Bhagvata (b. IV. c. 1) says the Tushitas. 
but they are the divinities of the second, not of the 
first Manvantara, as appears also in another part of 
the same, where the Yamas are likewise referred to 
the Svayambbuva Manvantara. 

11. These twenty-four daughters are of much 
less universal occurrence in the Puranas than the 
more extensive series of fifty or sixty, which 1s 
subscquently described, and which appears to be 
the more ancient legend. 


46 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





12. The twenty-four daughters of Daksa are 
similarly named and disposed of in most of the 
Puranas which noticc them. The Bhagavata, having 
introduced a third daughter of Svayambhuva, has a 
rather different enumeration, in order to assign 
some of them, the wives of the Prajapatis, to 
Kardama and Devahiti. Daksa had therefore, it is 
there said (b. IV. c. I), sixtcen daughters, thirteen of 
whom were married to Dharma. named Sraddha, 
Maitri (friendship), Daya (clemency), Santi Tustt. 
Pusti, Kriya, Unnati (elevation), Buddhi, Medha, 
Titiksa (patience). Hri (modesty), Martti (form): 
and three, Sati. Svaha, and Svadha, married, as in 
our text. Some of the daughters of Dcevahiti repeat 
these appellations, but that is of slight 
consideration. They are Kali (a moment), married 
to Marichi: Anasiiya to Atn; Sraddha to Angiras; 
Havirbhu (oblation-born) to Pulastya;  Gati 
(movement) to Pulaha : Kriya to Kratu; Khyati to 
Bhrgu : Arundhati to Vasistha; and Santi to 
Atharvan In all these instanccs the pcrsons are 
manifestly allegorical, bcing personincations of 
intelligences and virtues and religious rites, and 
being therefore appropriately wedded to the 
probable authors of the Hindu code of religion and 
morals, or to the equally allegorical representation 
of that codc, Dharma, moral and religious duty. 

13. The same remark applies hcre. The Puranas 
that give these details generally concur with our 
text, but the Bhadgavata specifies the progeny of 
Dharma in a somewhat differcnt manner; or, 
following the ordcr observed in the list of Dkarma's 
wives, their children are, Rita (truth), Prasada 
(favour), Abhaya (fearlessness), Sukha, Muda 
(pleasure), Smaya (wonder). Yoga (devotion), 
Darpa, Artha (meaning), Smrtt (memory), 
Kshema, Prasraya (affection), and the two saints 
Nara and Narayana, the sons of Dharma by Martti. 
Wc have occasional varicties of nomenclature in 
other authorities; as, instcad of Sruta, Sima: Korma 
Purana. instcad of Dandanaya, SAmaya; and instead 
of Bodha, Apramada; Linga Purana: and Siddha in 
place of Sukha: Kirma Purana. 

14, The text rather abruptly introduces Adharma 
and his family. He is said by the commentator to be 
the son of Brahma, and the Linga Purana 
enumeratcs him among the Prajapatis, as well as 
Dharma. According to the Bhagavata, he is the 
husband of Mrsha (falsehood), and the father of 


Dambha (hypoerisy) and Maya (deceit), who were 
adopted by Nirritti. The scries of their descendants 
is also somewhat varied from our text; being in 
each descent, however, twins which intermarry, or 
Lobha (covetousness) and Nikrti, who produce 
Krodha (wrath) and Himsa: their children are, Kali 
(wickedness) and Durukti (evil speech): their 
progeny are, Mrtyu and Bhi (fear); whose offspring 
are, Niraya (hell) and Yatana (torment). 

15. The three first of these are more particularly 
described in the last book: the last. the Nitya, or 
constant, 1s differently described by Vans Kennedy 
(Ancient and Hindu Mythology, p. 224. note). "In 
the 71h chapter.” he obscrves, “of the Visnu Purana 
four kinds of Pralaya are described. The Naimittika 
takes place when Brahma slumbers: the Prakrtika 
when this universe returns to its original nature: 
Atyantika proceeds from divine knowledge: and 
Nitya is the extinction of life. like the extinction of 
a lamp. in sleep at night.” For this Tast 
characteristic, however, our text furnishes no 
warrant; nor can it be explained to signify, that the 
Nitya Pralaya means no more than “a man's falling 
into a sound sleep at night.” All the copies 
consulted on the present occasion concur in 
reading, fea: Wea Wart a faa frais as 
rendered above. The commentator supplies the 
illustration, <saretad) ‘like the flame of a lamp;’ 
but he also writes, alamt fearfast at faart: a faca: | 
"That which is the destruction of all that are born, 
night and day, is the Nitya, or constant’ Again, in a 
verse presently following we have the Nitya Sarga, 
‘constant or perpetual creation,’ as opposed to 
constant dissolution Yaraqed wa sad WTA | 
fea: wt: Bq We: Yeonelfasert: | ‘That in which, oh 
excellent sages, beings are daily born, is termed 
constant creation, by those learned in the Puranas’. 
The commentator explains this, weAefegbyraret Fes: 
wy sead: 1 "The constant flow or succession of the 
creation of ourselves and other creatures is the 
Nitya or constant creation: this 1s the meaning of 
the text.’ It is obvious, therefore, that the alternation 
intended is that of life and death, not of waking and 
sleep. 


RK 


BOOK I, CHAP. 8 


CHAPTER 8 


STPUISeATT: 
(meaty) 


QUI Jara 

afgaermra: wat georet wera 

axed ween at Frat: sOq gi 

Parasara.—have described to you, oh great 
Muni, the creation of Brahma, tn which the 
quality of darkness prevailed. I will now 
explain to you the creation of Rudra.’ 

BUSA Yt WATT: | 

MSTA WANTS Sarat AtereN sat VU 

eel aS Beat Bisa sae fsa 

fa Ueda a wen sed weyara B30 

am céifa & aise weara warofery 

eae ta arenfa ar Wears x 

In the beginning of the Kalpa. as Brahma 
purposed to create a son, who should be like 
himself, a youth of a purple complexion’ 
appeared, crying with a low cry, and running 
about.’ Brahma, when he beheld him thus 
afflicted, said to him, "Why do you weep ?" 
"Give me a name,' replied the boy. "Rudra be 


your name.” rejoined the great father of all 
creatures :’ "be composed; desist from tears." 


Way: YA: Aisa ANH SUE si 
aaisantst eat we wa af Ss wy: 
RIT UAE Ue: WaT a NG 
wa wd west ven ugafe fen 

agg weed sara a frag: 

aa ara Wert wa A: 
gat wei wet afgarqcanrsra a 

Sieral Gra: ATA SAAT: ANTI 


But, thus addressed, the boy still wept 
seven-times, and Brahma therefore gave to 
him seven other denominations; and to these 
eight persons regions and wives and posterity 
belong. The eight manifestations, then, are 


47 


named Rudra, Bhava, Sarva. ISana. Pasupati. 
Bhima, Ugra. and Mahadeva, which were 
given to them by their great progenitor. He 
also assigned to them their respective stations, 
the sun. water, ether, air, fire, earth, the 
ministrant Brahman, and the moon; for these 
are their several forms.“ 


qaden aan gayi are feran 

erat fegreaart Het Teel BT weRATN CII 

qalart awe ese: Tel 

Used: VAT BEV waren H eyo 

aut afaradat seoraftd seq en 

VATA BER EAST VATA: | 

He: VNST GAY FTTH FAT: 11 Bo 

The wives of the sun and the other 
manifestations, termed Rudra and the rest 
were respectively, Suvercala, Uma, Vikesi, 
Siva, Svaha, Disa, Diks&é and Rohini. Now 
hear an account of their progeny, by whose 
successive generations this world has been 
peopled. Their sons, then, were severally, 
Sanaisocara (Saturn), Sukra (Venus), the fiery- 


bodied Mars, Manojava (Hanuman), Skanda. 
Swarga, Santina, and Budha (Mercury). 


Taran easel wat areataferean 
SARUT AIT UT Bal TF HeraTTN 22M 
fevagion ana fer 

SUNY TAA WTA AT VAM 
cat argfaarant st: wafer 

frag tataey vst ATATUTET TH 83 I 


It was the Rudra of this description that 
married Sati, who abandoned her corporeal 
existence in consequence of the displeasure of 
Daksa.” She afterwards was the daughter of 
Himavan (the snowy mountains) by Mena; and 
in that character, as the only Uma, the mighty 
Bhava again married her.’ The divinities Dhati 
and Vidhata were born to Bhrgu by Khyati, as 
was a daughter, Sri. the wife of Narayana, the 
god of gods.’ 


48 


aaa sara 

einen st; ayers saasTeRry 

WT: Gara aAaeltas St WAN evn 

Maitrcya.—It 1s commonly said that the 
goddess Sri was born from the sea of milk, 
when it was churned for ambrosia; how then 
can you say that she was the daughter of 
Bhreu by Khyati ? 
QUSt Jara 

fra a sorarat fae: street 

aan waa fawpertad fata eu I 

set faonfta aroit after aay aft: 

ant faunfte afeatsal wana fer 26 1 

apr faite ofs: siniftstat aft:n 

ae War aadkafetaes grad voit 

sat siealar amy aise eferon | aM 

arearehaca Sat YUSTe WATT Vou 

Parasara said— Sri, the bride of Visnu, the 

mother of the world, is eternal, imperishable; 
in like manner as he is all-pervading, so also is 
she, oh best of Brahmanas, omnipresent. Visnu 
is meaning; she is speech. Hari is polity 
(Nyaya); she is prudence (Niti). Visnu 1s 
understanding; she is intellect. He 1s 
righteousness; she is devotion. He is the 
creator; she is creation. Sri is the earth; Hari 
the support of it. The deity is concent; the 
eternal Laksmi is resignation. He is desire; Sri 
if wish. He is sacrifice; she is sacrificial 
donation (Daksina). The goddcss is the 
invocation which attends the oblation; 
Janarddana is the oblation. 


Uetignen GA wet: weg ATE: 
fafrciateraa sear shreary Hye: 1 Ve 
ATaSH WIAA: Brean 

TATE SRATTTATA ATYSAT FATA: 11 Vol 
wst wTasatfatfeens fester 

Rae Sera: Wala BISTSTATH 2 Vt 
fasy: fagaor: van caer wraagqizen 

at: sit; waterat feoprecareitsfaferere: 11 2 2 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


wens: stat: aft: strerstararferh 
afrcietsiast ary: Waa sft 23M 


Laksmi is the chamber where the females 
are present (at a_ religious ceremony); 
Madhustidana the apartment of the males of 
the family. Laksmi is the altar, Hari the stake 
(to which the victim is bound). Sri is the fuel; 
Hari the holy grass (Kusa). He is the 
personified Sdama-veda; the goddess, lotus- 
throned, is the tone of its chanting. Laksmi 1s 
the prayer of oblation (Svaha); Vasudeva, the 
lord of the world, is the sacrincial fire. Sauri 
(Visnu) is Sankara (Siva); and Sri is the bride 
of Siva (Gauri). Kegava, oh Maitreya, is the 
sun; and his radiance is the lotuses eated 
goddess. Visnu is the tribe of progenitors 
(Pitrgana); Padma is their bride (Svadha), the 
eternal bestower of nutriment. Sri is the 
heavens; Visnu, who is one with all things, is 
wide extended space. The lord of Sri is the 
moon; she is his unfading light. She is called 
the moving principle of the world; he, the 
wind which bloweth every wherc. 


wetafge Miereergen sitter 
caniereufaan Sere WTA UI 
CARAT: ATE TAO BASE TAM 

fg: ot: stead a: taste aT Bui 


Govinda is the ocean; Laksmi its shore. 
Laksmi is the consort of Indra (Indrani); 
Madhustidana is Devendra. The holder of the 
discus (Visnu}) is Yama (the regent of 
Tartarus); the lotus-throned goddess is his 
dusky spouse (Dhimorna). Sri is wealth; 
Sridhara (Visnu) is himself the god of riches 
(Kuvera). 


THe Maia Ayrat sent: WAT 
siéaan fag cadarafeete: Bau 

ara trerafir: yifenctettfesiraa 

SBT TAAGSa YRdisal Her F An Vo 
SHeeT Heat: waraisat wa: Waa |e: 
AAA SATA siiferaygr ara: it Vo 
farrat sitfeaat taser: | 


BOOK I, CHAP. 8 


49 





AUT AAMT: VAAN 2 3 


© illustrious Brahman, Laksmi is Gauri; 
and Kegava is the deity of ocean (Varuna). Sri 
is the host of heaven (Devasena); the deity of 
war. her lord. is Hari. The wielder of the mace 
is resistance; the power to oppose is Sri Laks 
mi is the Kastha and the Kala; Hari the Nimes 
a and the Muhirtta. Laksmi is the light: and 
Hari, who ts all, and lord of all, the lamp. She, 
the mother of the world, is the creeping vine; 
and Visnu the tree round which she clings. She 
is the night; the god who is armed with the 
mace and discus is the day. He, the bestower 
of blessings. 1s the bridegroom; the lotus- 
throned goddess 1s the bride. 


Aaa Va eTRaa ee: 
CART YOST: WAHT HATTA 3 011 
TOT MAHI MAT ATTA: UT 
a-ha ast creates wa a3 Vt 
faanitagarns dearer 
cael Gates eran Bit: 
iris water araifaet we 3 2 
ofa sifaegaet wernist sreniseara: ii 


The god is one with all male— the goddess 
one with all female, rivers. The lotus-eyed 
deity 1s the standard; the goddess seated on a 
lotus the banner. Laksmi is cupidity; 
Narayana, the master of the world, 1s 
covetousness, Oh you who know what 
rigteousners is, Govinda is love; and Laksmi, 
his gentle spouse, is pleasure. But why thus 
diffusely cnumerate their presence?—it is 
enough to-say, in a word. that of gods, 
animals, and men. Hari is all that is called 
male; Laksmi is all that is termed female: 


there 1s nothing else than they. 
2 2k 2 2 


NOTES 

1. The creation of Rudra has been already 
adverted to. and that seems to be the primitive form 
of the legend. We have here another account, 
grounded apparently upon Saiva or Yoga 
mysticism. 


2. The appearance of Rudra as a Kumara, ‘a 
boy,’ is described as of repeated occurrence in the 
Linga and Vayu Puranas, as already noticed (Ch. V. 
Note 12); and these Kumaras are of different 
complexions in different Kalpas. In the Vaisnava 
Puranas, however, we have only one original form, 
to which the name of Nilalohita, the blue and red or 
purple complexioned is assigned. In the Ktirma this 
youth comes from Brahma's mouth: in the Vayu, 
from his forehead, 

3. This is the Pauranic etymology:Uete area 
eG: | or rud, ‘to weep.’ and dru. 'to run.’ The 
grammarians derive the name from rud. 'to weep’, 
with ra affix. 

4, The Vayu details the application of each name 
severally These eight Rudras are therefore but one, 
under as many appellations, and in as many types. 
The Padma. Markandeya, Karma, Linga.. and Vayu 
agree with our text in the nomenclature of the 
Rudras. and their types, their wives, and progeny. 
The types are those which are enumerated in the 
Nandi, or opening benedictory verse, of Sakuntala; 
and the passage of the Visnu Purdna was found by 
Chezy on the envelope of his copy. He has justly 
corrected Jones's version of the term tt ‘the 
sacrifice is performed with solemnity;’ as the word 
means. ‘Brahmana officiant feat @em:) ‘the 
Brahman who is qualified by intiation (Diksa) to 
conduct the rite.’ These are considered as the 
bodies, or visible forms, of those modifications of 
Rudra which are variously named, and which, 
being praised in them, severally abstain from 
harming them: @& (aa aI: wars eaens ales a1 
fa afd: 1 Vayu Purana The Bhagavata. III. 12. has a 
different scheme, as usual; but it confounds the 
notion of the eleven Rudras, to whom the text 
subsequently adverts. with that of the eight here 
specified. These eleven it terms Manyu, Manu, 
Mahinasa, Mahan, Siva. Rtadhvaja. Ugraretas. 
Bhava, Kala, Vamadeva, and Dhrtavrata: their 
wives are. Dhi. Dhrti. Rasaloma, Niyut. Sarpi, 1a, 
Ambika, Iravati, Svadha. Diks4, Rudrani: and their 
places are the heart, senses, breath, ether, air, fire. 
water, earth, sun. moon, and tapas. or ascetic 
devotion. The same allegory or mystification 
characterises both accounts. 

5. See the story of Daksa's sacrifice at the end of 
the chapter. 


50 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





6. The story of Uma's birth and marriage occurs 
in the Siva Purana and in the Kasi Khanda of the 
Skanda Purana: it 1s noticed briefly, and with some 
variation trom the Puranas, in the Ramayana, first 
book: it is also given in detail 10 the Kumara 
Sambhava of Kalidasa. 

7. The family of Bhrgu is more particularly 
described in the tenth chapter: it is here mentioned 
merely to introduce the story of the birth of the 
goddess of prosperity, Sri. 


oF Ok Of 


SACRIFICE OF DAKSA' 
(From the Vayu Purana) 

“There was formerly a peak of Meru, named 
Savitra, abounding with gems, radiant as the sun. 
and celebrated throughout the three worlds; of 
immensc extent, and difficult of access, and an 
object of universal veneration. Upon that glorious 
eminence, rich with mineral treasures, as upon a 
splendid couch, the deity Siva reclined, 
accompanied by the daughter of the sovereign of 
mountains, and attended by the mighty Adityas, the 
powerful Vasus, and by the heavenly physicians, 
the sons of ASvini; by Kuvera, surrounded by his 
train of Guhyakas, the lord of the Yaksas, who 
dwells on Kailasa. There also was the great Muni 
Usanas: there, were Rsis of the first order, with 
Sanatkumara at their head; divine Rsis. preceded by 
Angiras; Visvavasu, with his bands of heavenly 
choristers; the sages Narada and Parvata; and 
innumerable troops of celestial nymphs. The breeze 
blew upon the mountain, bland, pure, and fragrant, 
and the trees were decorated with flowers, that 
blossomed in every season. The Vidyadharas and 
Siddhas, affluent in devotion, waited upon 
Mahadeva. the lord of living creatures; and many 
other beings, of various forms, did him homage. 
Raiksasas of terrific semblance, and Pisaches of 
great strength, of different shapes and features, 
armed with various weapons, and blazing like fire. 
were delighted to be present, as the followers of the 
god. There stood the royal Nandi, high in the 
favour of his lord, armed with a fiery trident, 
shining with inherent lustre; and there the best of 
rivers. Ganga. the assemblage of all holy waters, 
stood adoring the mighty deity. Thus worshipped 
by all the most excellent of sages and of gods, 
abode the omnipotent and all-glorious Mahadcva. 


"In former times, Daksa commenced a holy 
sacrifice on the side of Himavan, at the sacred spot 
Gangadvara, frequented by the Rsia. The gods. 
desirous of assisting at this solemn rite, came, with 
Indra at their head, to Mahadeva. and intimated 
their purpose; and having received his permission, 
departed in their splendid chariots to Gangadvara. 
as tradition reports*. They found Daksa, the best of 
the devour, surrounded by the singers and nymphs 
of heaven, and by numerous sages, beneath the 
shade of clustering trees and climbing plants; and 
all of them, whether dwellers on earth, in air, or in 
the regions above the skies, approached the 
patriarch with outward gestures of respect. The 
Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, Maruts, all entitled to 
pareake of the oblations, together with Jisnu, were 
present. The four classes of Pitrs, Ushmapas. 
Somapas, Ajyapts, and Dhumapas, or those who 
feed upon the name, the acid juice, the butter, or the 
smoke of offerings, the ASvins and the progenitors, 
came along with Brahmd. Creatures of every class, 
born from the womb, the egg, from vapour, or 
vegctation, came upon their invocation; as did all 
the gods, with their brides, who in their resplendent 
vehicles blazed like so many fires. Beholding them 
thus assembled, the sage Dadhicha was filled with 
indignation, and observed, 'The man who worships 
what ought not to be worshipped, or pays not 
reverence where veneration is due, is gultcy, most 
assuredly, of heinous sin.’ Then addressing Daksa, 
he said to him, 'Why do you not offer homage to 
the god who is the lord of life (Pasubhartri)?' Daksa 
spoke; 'I have already many Rudras present, armed 
with tridents, wearing braided hair, and existing in 
eleven forms: 1 recognise no other Mahadeva.’ 
Dadhicha spoke; ‘The invocation that is not 
addressed to Isa, is, for all, but a solitary (and 
imperfect) summons. Inasmuch as | behold no 
other divinity who is superior to Sankara, this 
sacrifice of Daksa will not be completed.’ Daksa 
spoke; “I offer, in a golden cup, this entire oblation, 
which has been consecrated by many prayers, as an 
offering ever due to the unequalled Visnu, the 
sovereign lord of all.” 

“In the meanwhile, the virtuous daughter of the 
mountain king, observing the departure of the 
divinities, addressed her lord. the god of living 
beings, and said—Uma spoke— ‘Whither, oh lord, 
have the gods, preceded by Indra, this day 


BOOK I, CHAP. 8 


5] 





departed? Tell me truly, oh you who know alt truth, 
for a great doubt perplexes me.’ Mahesvara spoke; 
"{llustrious goddess, the excellenc patriarch Daksa 
celebrates the sacrifice of a horse, and thither the 
gods repair.’ Devi spoke; 'Why then, most mighty 
god, dos you also not proceed to this solemnity? by 
what hindrance is your progress thither impeded?’ 
Mahesvara spoke; ‘This is the contrivance, mighty 
queen, of all the gods. that in all sacrifices no 
portion should be assigned to me. In consequence 
of an arrangement formerly devised, the gods allow 
me, of right, no participation of sacrificial 
offerings.’ Devi spoke; 'The lord god lives in all 
bodily forms, and his might is eminent through his 
superior faculties; he is unsurpassable, he is 
unapproachable, in splendour and glory and power. 
That such as he should be excluded from his share 
of oblations, fills me with deep sorrow, and a 
trembling, oh sinless, seizes upon my frame. Shall 
J now practise bounty, restraint, or penance, so that 
my lord, who is inconceivable, may obtain a share, 
a half or a third portion, of the sacrifice’? 

“Then the mighty and incomprehensible deity, 
being pleased, said to his bride, thus agitated; and 
speaking; 'Slender-waisted queen of the gods. you 
know not the purport of what you say; but [ know 
it, oh you with large eyes, for the holy declare all 
things by meditation. By your perplexity this day 
are all the gods. with Mahendra and all the three 
worlds, utterly confounded. In my sacrifice, those 
who worship me. repeat my praise?, and chant the 
Rathantara song of the Sama veda; my priests 
worship me in the sacrifice of true wisdom, where 
no officiating Brahman is needed; and in this they 
offer me my portion.’ Devi spoke; ‘The lord is the 
root of all, and assuredly, in every assemblage of 
the female world, praises or hides himself at will.’ 
Mahadcva spoke; ‘Queen of the gods, I praise not 
myself: approach, and behold whom ! shall create 
for the purpose of claiming my share of the rite.’ 

“Having thus spoken to his beloved spouse, the 
mighty Mahesvara created from his mouth a being 
like the fire of fate; a divine being, with a thousand 
heads, a thousand eyes, a thousand feet; wielding a 
thousand clubs, a thousand shafts; holding the shell, 
the discus, the mace, and bearing a blazing bow and 
battle-axe; fierce and terrific, shining with dreadful 
splendour, and decorated with the crescent moon; 
clothed in a tiger's skin, dripping with blood; 


having a capacious stomach, and a vast mouth, 
armed with formidable tusks: his ears were erect, 
his lips were pendulous, his tongue was lightning; 
his hand brandished the thunderbolt; flames 
screamed form his hair; a necklace of pearls wound 
round his neck; a garland of flame descended on his 
breast: radiant with lustre, he looked like the final 
fire that consumes the world. Four tremendous 
tusks .projected from a mouth which extended from 
ear to ear : he was of vast bulk, vase strength, 
mighty male and lord, the destroyer of the universe, 
and like a large fig-tree in circumference; shining 
like a hundred moons at once; fierce as the fire of 
love; having four heads, sharp white teeth, and of 
mighty fierceness, vigour, activity, and courage; 
glowing with the blaze of a thousand fiery suns at 
the end of the world; like a thousand undimmed 
moons; in bulk like Him4adri; Kailasa, or Meru, or 
Mandara, with all its gleaming herbs; bright as the 
sun of destruction at the end of ages; of irrcsistible 
prowess, and beautiful aspect; irascible, with 
lowering eyes, and a countenance burning like fire; 
clothed in the hide of the elephant and lion, and girt 
round with snakcs; wearing a turban on his head, a 
moon on his brow; sometimes savage, sometimes 
mild; having a chaplet of many flowers on his head, 
anointed with various unguents, and adorned with 
diffcrent ornaments and many sores of jewels; 
wearing a garland of heavenly Karnikara flowcrs, 
and rolling his eyes with rage. Sometimes he 
danced; sometimes he laughed aloud; sometimcs he 
stood wrapt in meditation; sometimes he trampled 
upon the earth; sometimes he sang; sometimes he 
wept repeatedly; and he was endowed with the 
facuities of wisdom, dispassion, power, penance, 
cruch, endurance, fortitude, dominion, and self- 
knowledge. 

“This being, then, knelt down upon the ground, 
and raising his hands respectfully to his head, said 
to Mahadeva, ‘Sovereign of the gods, command 
what it is that I must do for you,’ To which 
Maheswara replied, ‘Spoil the sacrifice of Daksa.' 
Then the mighty Virabhadra, having heard the 
pleasure of his lord, bowed down his head to the 
feet of Prajapati; and starting like a lion loosed 
from bonds, despoiled the sacrifice of Daksa, 
knowing that he had been Created by the 
displeasure of Devi. She too in her wrath, as the 
fearful goddess Rudrakali, accompanied him, with 


§2 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





all her train, to witness his deeds. Virabhadra the 
fierce, abiding in the region of ghosts, is the 
minister of the anger of Devi. And he then created, 
from the pores of his skin, powerful demigods, the 
mighty attendants upon Rudra. of equal valour and 
strength, who started by hundreds and thousands 
into existence. Then a loud and confused clamour 
ailed all the expanse of ether, and inspired the 
denizens of heaven with dread. The mountains 
tottered, and earth shook, the winds roared, and the 
depths of the sea were disturbed; the fires lost their 
radiance, and the sun grew pale; the planets of the 
firmament shone not, neither did the stars give 
light; the Rshis ceased their hymns, and gods and 
demons were mute; and thick darkness eclipsed the 
chariots of the skies.’ 

“Then from the gloom emerged tearful and 
numerous forms, shouting the cry of battle; who 
instantly broke or overturned the sacrificial 
columns, trampled upon the altars, and danced 
amidst the oblations. Running wildly hither and 
thither, with the speed of wind, they tossed about 
the implements and vessels of sacrifice, which 
looked like stars precipitated from the heavens. The 
piles of food and beverage for the gods, which had 
been heaped up like mountains; the rivers of milk; 
the banks of curds and butter; the sands of honey 
and butter-milk and sugar; the mounds of 
condiments and spices of every flavour; the 
undulating knolls of flesh and other viands; the 
celestial liquors, pastes, and confections, which had 
been prepared; these the spirits of wrath devoured 
or defiled or scattered abroad. Then talling upon the 
host of the gods, these vase and resistess Rudras 
beat or terrified them, mocked and insulted the 
nymphs and goddesses, and quickly put an end to 
the rite, although defended by all the gods; being 
the ministers of Rudra's wrath, and similar to 
himself. ‘Some then made a hideous clammour, 
whilst ochers fearfully shouccd, when Yajfia was 
decapitated. For the divine Yajiia. the lord of 
sacrifice. then began to fly up to heaven, in the 
shape of a decr; and Virabhadra, of immeasurable 
spirit, apprehending his power, cut off his vast 
head, after he had mounted into the sky./ Daksa the 
patriarch, his sacrifice being destroyed, overcome 
with terror, and utterly broken in spirit, fell then 
upon the ground, where his head was spurned by 
the feet of the cruel Virabhadra.* The thirty scores 


of sacred divinities were all presently bound, with a 
band of fire, by their lion-like foe; and they all then 
addressed him, crying, 'Oh Rudra, have mercy upon 
your servants: oh lord, dismiss thine anger.' Thus 
spoke Brahma and the other gods, and the patriarch 
Daksa: and raising their hands, they said, 'Declare, 
mighty being, who you are.’ Virabhadra said, 'I am 
not a god, nor an Aditya; nor am I come hither for 
enjoyment, nor curious to behold the chiefs of the 
divinities: know that ] am come to destroy the 
sacrifice of Daksa, and that I am called Virabhadra. 
the issue of the wrath of Rudra. Bhadrakali also, 
who has sprung from the anger of Devi, is sent here 
by the god of gods to destroy this rite. Take refuge, 
king of kings, with him who is the lord of Uma; for 
better is the anger of Rudra than the blessings of 
other gods.' 

"Having heard the words of Virabhadra, the 
righteous Daksa propitiated the mighty god, the 
holder of the trident, Mahesvara. The hearth of 
sacrifice, deserced by the Brahmanas, had been 
consumed; Yajfia had been metamorphosed to an 
antelope; the fires of Rudra’s wrath had been 
kindled; the attendants, wounded by the tridents of 
the servants of the god, were groaning with pain; 
the pieces of the uprooted sacrificial posts were 
acattered here and there; and the fragments of the 
meat-offerings were carried off by flights of hungry 
vultures, and herds of howling jackals. Suppressing 
his vital airs, and taking up a posture of meditation, 
the many-sighted victor of his foes, Daksa fixed his 
eyes every where upon his thoughts. Then the god 
of gods appeared from the altar, resplendent as a 
thousand suns, and smiled upon him, and said. 
‘Daksa, your sacrifice has been destroyed through 
sacred knowledge: I am well pleased with you:’ and 
then he smiled again, and said, 'What shall I do for 
you: declare, together with the preceptor of the 
gods.’ 

"Then Daksa, frightened, alarmed, and agitated, 
his eyes suffused with tears, raised his hands 
revcrentially to his brow, and said, ‘If lord, you are 
pleased; if I have found favour in your sight; if I 
am to be the object of your benevolence; if you will 
confer upon me a boon, this is the blessing 1 solicit, 
that all these provisions for the solemn sacrifice, 
which have been collected with much trouble and 
during a long time, and which have now been 
eaten, drunk, devoured, burnt, broken, scattered 


BOOK I, CHAP. 8 


53 





abroad, may not have been prepared in vain.’ 'So 
let it be,’ replied Hara, the subduer of ludra. And 
thereupon Daksa knelt down upon the earth, and 
praised gracefully the author of righteousness, the 
three-eyed god Mahadeva, repeating the eight 
thousand, names of the deity whose emblem is a 
bull.’ 


NOTES 

{. The sacrifice of Daksa is a legend of some 
interest, from its historical and archaeological 
relations. It is obviously intendcd to intimate a 
struggle between the worshippers of Siva and of 
Visnu, in which at first the latter, but finally the 
former, acquired the ascendancy. It is also a 
favourite subject of Hindu sclupture, at least with 
the Hindus of the Saiva division, and makes a 
conspicuous figure both at Elephanta and Ellora. A 
representation of the dispersion and multilation of 
the gods and sages by Virabhadra. at the former, is 
published in the Archeologia, VII. 326. where it is 
described as the Judgement of Solomon! a figure of 
Virabhadra is given by Niebuhr, vol. II. tab. 10: 
and the entire group in the Bombay Transactions, 
vol.l. p. 220. It is described, p. 229; but Erskine 
has not verified the subject, although in cannot 
admit of doubt The groupe described. p. 224, 
probably represents the introductory details given 
in our text. Of the Ellora sculptures, a striking one 
occurs in what Sir C. Malet calls the Doomar Leyna 
cave, where is "Veer Budder. with eight hands. In 
one is suspended the slain Rajah Dutz,” A. R. VI, 
396. And there is also a representation of ‘Ehr 
Budr,' in one of the colonadcs of Kailasa;'being, in 
fact, the same figure as that at Elephanta. Bombay 
Tr. Ill, 287. The legend of Daksa therefore was 
popular when those cavern temples were excavated. 
The story is told in much more detail in several 
other Puranas, and with some variations, which will 
be noticed: but the above has been selected as a 
specimen of the style of the Vayu Purana. and as 
being a narration which, from its inartifical, 
obscure, tautological, and uncircumstantial 
construction, is probably of an ancient date. The 
same legend, in the same words, is given in the 
Brahma Purana 

2. Or this may be understood to imply, that the 
original story is in the Vedas; the term being, as 
usual in such a reference, sf af: 1 Gangadvara. the 
place where the Ganges descends to the plains—or 
Haridvar. as it is more usually termed—is usually 


specified as the scene of action. The Linga is more 
precise, calling it Kanakbala, which is the village 
still called Kankhal, near Haridvar (Megha Dutft, p. 
59). It rather inaccurately, however, describes this 
as upon Harhsa peak;, a point of the Himalaya: 
eayEg fenatrat | 

3. The Ktrma Purana gives also this discussion 
between Dadhicha and Daksa, and their dialogue 
contains some curious matter. Daksa, for mstance, 
states that no portion of a sacrifice is ever allotted 
to Siva, and no prayers are directed to be addressed 
to him, or to his bride: Weatya fF aXy 47 4M: 
aafera: (7 teat eta arg viareata eq Dadhicha 
apparently evades the objection, and claims a share 
for Rudra, consisting of the triad of gods, as one 
with the sun, who is undoubtedly hymned by the 
several ministering priests of the Vedas: @ ™ad 
ea wrTeaseah: | west fares we Aft 
Daksa replies, that the twelve Adityas receive 
special oblations : that they are all the suns; and 
that he knows of no other. The Munis, who 
overbear the dispute, concur in his sentiments: 4 Ud 
memeen seen: | wel seat sft weet fee 
a: | WaT Y AAA: Wares fegeta: | aefseagqay caf 
Tey Bera: | These notions seem to have been 
exchanged for others im the days of the Padma 
Purina and Bhagavata. as they place Daksa's 
neglect of Siva to the latter's filthy practices, his 
going naked, smearing himself with ashes, carrying 
a Skull, and behaving as if he were drunk or crazed: 
alluding, no doubt, to the practices of Saiva 
mendicants, who seem to have abounded in the 
days of Sankaricharya, and since, there is no 
discussion in the Bhagavata. but Rudra is described 
as present at a former assembly, when his father-in- 
law censured him before the guests, and in conse- 
quence he departed in a age. His follower Nandi 
curses the company, and Bhrgu retorts in language 
descriptive of the Vaméacharis, or left hand 
worshippers of Siva. “May all those” he says, “who 
adopt the worship of Bhava (Siva), all those who 
follow the practices of his worshippers, become 
heretics, and oppugners of holy doctrines; may they 
neglect the observances of purification; may they 
be of infirm intellects. wearing clotted hair. and 
ornamenting themselves with ashes and bones: and 
may they enter the Saiva initiation, in which 
spirituous liquor is the libation." 


54 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





4. This simple account of Sati’s share in the 
transaction is considerably modified in other 
accounts. In the Kiirma, the quarrel begins with 
Daksa the patriarch’s being, as he thinks, treated by 
his son-in-law with less respect than is his due. 
Upon his daughter Sati subsequently visiting him, 
he abuses her husband, and turns her out of his 
house. 

She in spite destroys herself; @arerearraret Siva. 
hearing of this. comes to Daksa, and curses him to 
be born as a Ksatriya, the son of the Pracetasas, and 
to beget a son on his own daughter: Sei Gaal 
YSray TaAeelsesa It is in this subsequent birth that 
the sacrifice occurs. The Lifiga and Matsya allude 
to the dispute between Daksa and Sati. and to the 
latter's puting an end to herself by Yoga: 

a @:The Padma. 
Bhagavata, and Skanda in the Kasi Khanda, relate 
the dispute between father and daughter in a like 
manner, and in more detail. The first refers the 
death of Sati. however, to a prior period; and that 
and the Bhagavata both ascribe it to Yoga: Hdl Wa: 
yaar waftenitati The Kasi Khanda, with an 
improvement indicative of a later age, makes Satfi 
throw herself into the fire prepared for the 
solemnity. 

5. The description of Virabhadra and his 
followers is given in other Puranas in the same 
strain, but with less detail. 

6. Their exploits, aod those of Virabhadra, are 
more particularly specified elsewhere, especially in 
the Linga. Kirma, and Bhagavta Puranas. Indra is 
knockcd down and trampled on; Yama has his staff 
broken; Sarasvati and the Matrs have their noses 
cut off; Mitra or Bhaga has his eyes pulled out; 
Pusha has his teeth knocked down his throat; 
Candra is pummelled : Vahni's hands are cut off; 
Bhrgu loses his beard; the Brahmanas are pelted 
with stones : the Prajapatis are beaten . and the 
gods and demigods are run through with swords or 
stuck with arrows. 

7. This is also mentioned in the Linga and in the 
Hari VarhSa: and the latter thus accounts for the 
origin of the constellation Migosiras; Yajiia, with 
the head of a dear. being elevated to the planetary 
region. by Brahma. 

8. As he prays to Siva presently, it could not well 
be meant here that Daksa was decapitated, although 
that 4s the story in other places. The Linga and 


Bhagavata both state that Virabhadra cut off Daks 
a's head, and threw it into the fire. After the fray 
therefore when Siva restored the dead to life, and 
the mutilated to their limbs. Daksa's head was not 
forthcoming : it was therefore replaced by the head 
of a goat, or, according to the Kasi Khanda, that of 
a ram. No notice is taken in our text of the conflict 
elsewhere described between Virabhadra and Vis 
nu. In Ihe Linga, the latter is beheaded, and his 
head is blown by the wind into the fire. The Karma. 
though a Saiva Purana, is less irreverent towards 
Visnu, and after describing a contest in which both 
parties occasionally prevail, makes Brabma 
interpose, and separate the combatants. The KaAsi 
Khanda of the Skanda Purana describes Visnu as 
defeated, and at the mercy of Virabhadra. who 1s 
prohibited by a voice from heaven from destroying 
his antagonist : whilst in the Hari Varnsa, Visnu 
compels Siva to fly, after taking him by the throat 
and nearly strangling him. The blackness of Siva's 
neck arose from this throttling, and not, as 
elsewhere described, from his drinking the poison 
produced at the churning of the ocean. 


RKREK 


54 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


CHAPTER 9 
TANS ATT: 


(34 via gala: ye:, Tet: we eari 
THAT VYSAUAT SHEA MAA sy) 


GUY SAT 


See TO WS Aq WalSetAS TAM 
TTA AA SerapTAA Aa fag: It 
Parasara said—-But with respect to the 
question you have asked me. Maitreya, 
relating to the history of Sri, hear from me the 
tale as it was told to me by Marici. 


qarar: wigreaigerant yferatrarg 
a cast wat feargfateenatatn 21 
SaMaArahaet AeA WT ATA 
MATA TE Tot SAMATVTT 3 
saan fart EBT sit ST 
at seared ater Perera AAI UI 


BOOK I, CHAP. 9 


55 





atta at wast Urett faenerrean 
wal we fagrenat aret yftrae a4 i 


ATA Yet SAAT 
sear @ fant tae uftaurr fee 1 


Stayt Waar Taat erry 
Aciaaferaft a we Sa: yreafer 9 i 


Durvasas, a portion of Sankara (Siva)', was 
wandering over the earth; when he beheld, in 
the hands of a nymph of air’, a garland of 
flowers culled from the trees of heaven, the 
fragrant. odour of which spread throughout the 
forest, and enraptured all who dwelt beneath 
its shade. The sage. who was then possessed 
by religious frenzy’; when he beheld that 
garland, demanded it of the graceful and full- 
eyed nymph, who, bowing to him 
reverentially, immediately presented it to him. 
He, as one frantic, placed the choplet upon his 
brow, and thus decorated resumed his path; 
when he bcheld Indra, the husband of Saci. the 
ruler of the three worlds, approach, seated on 
his infuriated elephant Airavata, and attended 
by the gods. 

aMaTeart: A: forta: SagarTeTEny 
sera faaratarraayty: i cit 
Terarrnns STs 

at Tt Heaters IEat Far 8 
TATA ATANS A TNFVA ATU: | 
atorare fare at Bat TUitAET gol! 

The frenzied sage, taking from his head the 
garland of flowers, amidst which the bees 
collected ambrosia, threw it to the king of the 
gods, who caught it. and suspended it on the 
brow of Airavata, where it shone like the river 
Jahnavi, glittering on the dark summit of the 
mountain Kailadsa. The elephant, whose eyes 
were dim with inebriety, and attracted by the 
smell, took hold of the garland with his trunk, 
and case it on the earth. 


aA WTA SALA APTA: | 
ta tas a Hasagars Bi Ven 


aad epirafreraisha araat 


fal ara wat Ue Tea aha V2 
Tare sft aARe a wftrarag¢: wey! 
eRieHecranrery FT writ ferear gar V3 
FAT Safa Wreat TeTA Ty ATA 
Aclaasita We faarerqrarafan ex 
ai waasat: weet =r yee wary fest: 
MASAAATA TAT AAT Pe BW It 
Het wat Te ferar ate wetatey 
TA Tapeh Fela J vfaeafan v6 i 
Rey waar way wera 

a wa arafaneor SauTAAATA go 11 


That chief of sages, Durvasds, was highly 
incensed at this disrespectful treatment of his 
gilt, and thus angrily addressed the sovereign 
of the immortals: “Inflated with the intoxica- 
tion of power, Vasava, vile of spirit, you are 
an idiot not to respcct the garland I presented 
to you, which was the dwelling of Fortune 
(Sri), You have not acknowledged it as a 
largess’; you have not bowed yourself before 
me; you have not placed the wreath upon your 
head, with your countenance expanding with 
delight. Now, tool, for that you have not 
infinitely prized the gailand that I gave you, 
your sovereignty over the three worlds shall be 
subverted. You confoundest me, Sakra, with 
other Brahmanas. and hence I have suffered 
disrespect from your arrogance: but in like 
manner as you have cast the garland I gave 
you down on the ground, so shall your 
dominion over the universe be whelmed in 
ruin. You have offended one whose wrath 1s 
dreaded by all created things, king of the gods. 
even me, by thine excessive pride.” 


UU SAT 
WSR areas erat: | 
WATSATATT HAT FAVA ATA TIAN VC A 
VaR: A Aat woranagy- AT 
WYATT USAel Fara WRT AATA Vs 


56 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





Parasara said— Descending hastily from his 
elephant, Mahandra endeavoured to appease 
the sinless Durvdsas: but to the excuses and 
prostrations of the thousand-eyed, the Muni 
answered. 


gare sare 

We FUE TF Bi sat ae 

stat TWAT: WH GataaTAAaly ATI oll 
Taafefrthed vearafedt Wal 
Naas FATA] UT vit 
aasereareat: Eilat Halwa: | 

we Tatsha Aa UTTSTENAUATAI 2 2M 
aM YRelplect Taq 
fatter aaftasyay am at Tay sre VBI 
we aftel agar faqs yea 
fasanital ya: AVSPTa ATI 2 II 


Durvésé said—~ “I am not of a 
compassionate heart, nor is forgiveness 
congenial to my nature. Other Munis may 
relent; but know me, Sakra, to be Durvasas. 
You have in vain been rendered insolent by 
Gautama and others; for know me, Indra, to be 
Durvdsas, whose nature is a stranger to 
remorse. You have becn flattered by Vasistha 
and other tender-hearted saints, whose loud 
praises have made you so arrogant, that you 
have insulted me. But who is there in the 
universe that can behold my countenance, dark 
with frowns, and surrounded by my blazing 
hair, and not tremble ? What need of words? I 
will not forgive, whatever semblance of 
humility you may assume." 


UUM SARA 
sya weet fant caaatshe a ya: 
seated Te WTA 2 & UI 
aa: waft Pst UerR yer 
Arardtareared defturafadreerq 2 & 
A UM: AMAT A TAT ATTAT: | 
aa arfeety Waa TST FAI Vl 
fr arat Tae ctrar cing weaker: 


Tacaste fe aged aiftrerer SAAT 2 CI 

Ua: Ure dat Haat: we yerpanyt aI 

Psion qa: Gea fear AA DUM: HAN VV 

aepiarentasy yearn yore 

gta: were septal faa: gol 

YauEaAAfreiafad: WIT: TAT 

Parasara said— Having thus spoken, the 
Brahman went his way; and the king of the 
gods, remounting his elephant, returned to his 
capital Amaravati. Thence forward, Maitreya, 
the three worlds and Sakra lost their vigour, 
and all vegetable products, plants, and herbs 
were withered and died; sacrifices were no 
longer offered; devout exercises no longer 
practised; men were no more addicted to 
charity or; any moral or religious obligation; 
all beings became devoid of steadiness ; all 
the faculties of sense were obsttucted by 
cupidity; and men's desires were excited by 
frivolous objects. Where there is energy, there 
is prosperity; and upon prosperity energy 
depends. How can those abandoned by 
prosperity be possessed of energy; and without 
energy, where is excellence ? Without 
excellence there can be no vigour nor heroism 
amongst men : he who has neither courage nor 
strength, will be spurned by all: and he who ts 
universally created with disgrace, must suffer 
abasement of his intellectual faculties. 


Wanda ste Aetaa VTAAAAI 3 2M 

tary wit aetert asATeAT: | 

canning F:siter cen: arafaaisre: 3 2H 

faen face araddarpeaa TAT 

fafarnfercen eethesren: Beat TA 3 3H 

PqaSs HEMT SATA: | 

qarad alarat Sagar We Ad: YUAN 3 vil 

The three regions being thus wholly 
divested of prosperity, and deprived of energy, 
the Danavas and sons of Diti, the enemies of 
the gods, who were incapable of steadiness, 


and agitated by ambition, put torch their 
strength against the gods. They engaged in war 


BOOK I, CHAP. 3 


a7 





with the feeble and unfortunate divinities; and 
Indra and the rest, being overcome in fight, 
fled for refuge to Brahma, preceded by the god 
of flame (Hutasana). When the great father of 
the universe had heard all that had come to 
pass, he said to the deities, 


wearer 

UNA LOT THAT ATE 

scfahafearenamed SATATTH 3&1 

WTA FTA AAAT TAT 

WAT AH: ACOT HTATTAT: 113 € I 

wornfret faoy wa: sat faareafan 

Brahma said—- “Repair for protection to the 
god of high and low, the tamer of the demons, 
the causeless cause of creation, preservaction, 
and destruction; the progenitor of the 
progenitors; the immortal, unconquerable Vis 
nu; the cause of matter and spirit, of his 
unengendered products; the remover of the 


grief of all who humble themselves before 
him: he will give you aid." 


CATR YUL HAY Te SireAv TATE | 
efttrearat att aa afeat ati sion 
a mar faest: wed: aaa: fra: 
qera arhaters: waracait eft 3 cn 


Having thus spoken to the deities. Brahma 
proceeded along with them to the northern 
shore of the sea of milk; and with reverential 
words thus prayed to the supreme Hari; 


Taare 
TAT Te VARTA AACA 
BAT AATA TATA TANT I 3 8 I 
ARTTOTATU AT TART ATOTTO TAT | 
Bae TS As YUTSLAT WTA ¥ oI 
aa Wa Va: Tay WYT- ATT 
Taye A Sa: WMO A: UT 
Ul: WEN YR TORTI 
aiid asa yfmeay yay 2 
AAA A VANS AA AT Mg TOT: | 


OF Ys: AaYSrA: YA: weleqs3 

Brahma said— "We glorify him who is all 
things, the lord supreme over all, unborn, 
imperishable; the protector of the mighty ones 
of creation; the unperceived, indivisible 
Narayana, the smallest of the smallest, the 
largest of the largest of the elements; in whom 
are all things, from whom are all things; who 
was before existence; the god who is all 
beings, who is the end of ultimate objects, who 
is bcyond final spirit, and is one with supreme 
soul; who is contemplated as the cause of final 
liberation by sages anxious to be free; in 
whom are not the qualities of goodness, 
foulness, or darkness, that belong to 
undeveloped nature. May that purest of all 
pure spirits this day be propitious to us. 

aHeN- HIST PM eaaeTgTST TTT 

Tel Viet Yeet Wetag wat etuven 

mead Ue fe A: YRlsPTANAT: | 

watag Wat fara a: VaR ATU 4 

May that Hari be propitious to us, whose 
inherent might is not an object of the 
progressive chain of moments or of days, that 
make up time. May he who is called the 
supreme god, who is not in need of assistance, 
Hari, the soul of all embodied substance, be 
favourable unto us. 

OG: BUS BUA BUTT Beco 

Beate a a: wre weleg A aT ats wen 

aaa UT: ard aenreanie a: ayy 

THAT TTA WAT: FT ATI VII 

May that Hari, who is both cause and 
effect; who 1s the cause of cause, the effect of 
effect; he who is the effect of successive 
effect: who is the effect of the effect of the 
effect himself; the product of the effect of the 
effect of the effect, or elemental! substance; to 
him I bow.’ 

NOT HOTA ALT HILO 

TANT Se aT NOTA: BA TLIC YC I 

Wa WENT BE YEAS aI 

alg HARAST FT WTA: BT UT way sei 


58 


The cause of the cause; the cause of the 
cause of the cause; the cause of them all; to 
him I bow. To him who is the enjoyer and 
thing to be enjoyed; the creator and thing to be 
created; who ts the agent and the cffect; to that 
supreme being I bow. 

fayd det femsmermeray 
BaMtiaant Ay Afewont: Tet TaN y ott 
Tt Wet TU Tent aa fara 

arene Ue ferent: wore: WeTeTTN G eH 

The infinite nature of Visnu is pure, 
intelligent, perpetual, unborn, undecayable, 
inexhaustible, inscrutable, immutable; it 1s 
neither gross nor subtile, nor capable of being 
defined: to that ever holy nature of Visnu I 
bow. 

covist faareefier Fara 
UL TAART Aq WOT STAT & 2 
aa al A WAM A UE TT VET 
Sa aTeTer ARO: UT TANG BH 
ae A: Waleeal: Yoaaraarasey) 
avatar wore fare afget wot weRy xi 


waa Vey cawy gelaniyrantear: | 
TEATS ARO: UT WEAN GH 


Rae aya wa WalsrarEA 
wate fae wet sa A SfeTMTMAT TN G GN 


To him whose faculty to create the universe 
abides in but a part of but the ten-millionth 
part of him; to him who is one with the 
inexhaustible supreme spirit, I bow: and to the 
glorious nature of the supreme Visnu, which 
nor gods, nor sages, nor I, nor Sankara 
apprehend; that nature which the Yogis, after 
incessant effort, effacing both moral merit and 
demerit, behold to be contemplated in the 
mystical monosyllable Om: the supreme glory 
of Visnu, who ts the first of all; of whom, one 
only god, the triple energy is the same with 
Brahma, Visnu, and Siva: oh lord of all, great 
soul of all, asylum of all, undecayable, have 
pity upon your servants; oh Visnu, he manifest 
to us.” | 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


saiiteanrencd serorferesrena: | 

Wray: wales ae at afer 4 ot 

aad WTA TEN At UTA WaT 

aa: A TEA da Va WAAAY Ci 

ParaSara continued—The gods, having heard 

this prayer uttered by Brahma, bowed down, 
and cried, “Be favourable to us; be present to 
our sight: we bow down to that glorious nature 
which the mighty Brahma does not know; that 
which is your nature, oh imperishable, in 
whom the universe abides.” 


Seat SAAR Sarat TAOTAAT 
ayaa: VS: FEMAATTATAT NG BU 
BEN AAPAASa A: AAA Yaw: 

af Aa: TT Soe: BErTafayrTOTTN & oN 
ATE AAT TTT 

THE Wat wa adat Vf ae & en 


Then the gods having ended, Brhaspati and 
the divine Rsis thus prayed: “We bow down to 
the being entitled to adoration; who is the first 
object of sacrifice; who was before the first of 
things; the creator of the creator of the world; 
the undefinable: oh lord of all that has been or 
is to be; imperishable type of sacrifice; have 
pity upon your worshippers; appear to them. 
prostrate before you. 


UT Te ward TE aphex: | 

alfert: Ui yar qaasa Berar: g BN 

start aaa ad dt WeRUT: | 

Treat fad en Sar Sasa: 1 BM 

WOUTa arr Ser ATTA: | 

PRT ATAGMAT: TAA SAAT |G BH 

Here is Brahma; here is Trilocana (the 
three-eyed Siva), with the Rudras; Pusan (the 
sun), with the Adityas; and Fire. with all the 
mighty luminaries: here are the sons of ASvini 
(the two ASvini Kumaras). the Vasus and all 
the winds, the Sadhyds, the Visvedevas, and 


Indra the king of the gods: all of whom bow 
lowly before you : all the tribes of the 


BOOK I, CHAP. 9 


59 





immortals, vanquished by the demon host, 
have fled to you for succour.” 


WUT Sars 
Ue TRAY WaT FTHTE! 
SRT Set Bat Be UIT I 
at SBT of Fal Cal: VgUATETA! 
sys ertast Arar ufyraaaA GG 
WON’ Woreat: Yat Parafeafyaeron: | 
aes: Gustine Praeger: 11g 91 


Parafsara continued—Thus prayed to, the 
supreme deity, the mighty holder of the conch 
and discus, showed himself to them: and 
beholding the lord of gods, bearing a shell, a 
discus, and a mace, the assemblage of 
primeval form, and radiant with embodied 
light, Pitamaha and the other deities, their eyes 
moistened with rapture, first paid him homage 
and then thus addressed him : 


Cat Se: 
TM aMisfageRd wt Ten wat fiaragai 
Saeaaim: wast aeur: afar Tag cil 
aaal Wet: aeat fay sano wary 
aise tara ta Bs Saar: 1 V1 
@ ag WAT Aa: WANA Tar 


a Uae AANA: WATT: 9 ol 
aAMNaIg Valeieasrshadt wd 
care wear ferent wera Seaaferat: 1119 eh 


Gods said— “Repeated salutation to you, 
who are indefinable: you are Brahm; you are 
the wonder of the Pindka bow (Siva); you are 
Indra; you are fire, air, the god of waters, the 
sun, the king of death (Yama), the Vasus, the 
Maruts (the winds), the Sdadhyas, and 
Visvadevas. This assembly of divinities, that 
now has come before you, you are; for, the 
creator of the world, you are every where. You 
are the sacrifice, the prayer of oblation, the 
mystic syllable Om, the sovereign of all 
creatures: you are all that is to be known, or to 
be unknown: oh universal soul, the whole 


world consists of you. We, discomfited by the 
Daityas, have fled to you, oh Visnu, for 
refuge. 

aa wale Walesa A: 

TTA AAM ABT ATA STAM AAI 9 211 

ASAT PT PATS ETAT! 

ta Waid NAA NTA HEAT 7311931) 

AAA AT TAR TARTAR FEI 9 XII 

Spirit of all, have compassion upon us; 
defend us with your mighty power. There will 
be affliction, desire, trouble, and grief, until 
your protection is obtained : but you are the 
remover of all sins. Do you then, oh pure of 
spirit, show favour unto us who have fled to 
you: oh lord of all, protect us with your great 
power, in union with the goddess who 1s your 
strength’.” 


UUP SAT 
We MET wUraTAEHT: | 
waaeitanrenre 8 fare I 


Hari, the creator of the universe, being thus 
prayed to by the prostrate divinities, smiled, 
and thus spoke: 


wa Vaat tar: aemyagguny 

agra aq fact watseied FTO I 

BA Alea Set: etree Tacit: 

art Wat Heat At Hear F argfaq oii 

WAM Sat; WTA Waa 

Visnu said— "With renovated energy, oh 
gods, I will restore your strength. Do you act 
as I enjoin. Let all the gods, associated with 
the Asuras, cast all sorts of medicinal herbs 
into the sea of milk; and then taking the 
mountain Mandara for the churning-Kick, the 
serpent Vasuki for the rope, churn the ocean 
together for ambrosia; depending upon my aid. 


anges scarey AereaTHAT 9c 1 
ATTA aT ATCA Hf eTETMT 
TAN WT ARTE ATL VAMAAS TAT Vl 


60 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





aaa aferat qatar vse 

amt are afentt war fesfate:| 

qT wreeeagd fat: Hach FeTTo 

To secure the assistance of Daityas, you 
must be at peace with them, and engage to 
give them an equal portion of the fruit of your 
associated toil; promising them, that by 
drinking the Amrta that shall be produced 
from the agitated ocean, they shall become 
nughty an immortal. I will take care that the 
enemies of the gods shall not partake of the 
percious draught; that they shall share in the 
labour alone.” 


QUINT sara 
sya tacay Wa Wa aa: WT: 
PAAAGL: HAT ATIASTASMATN 2 Ii 
aed: ware @a-deaerat: | 
farcar fernfercafa sreurmetatai¢ 211 
Being thus inscruccced by the god of gods, 


the divinities entered into alliance with the 
demons, and they jointly undertook the 
acquirement of the beverage of immortality. 
They collected various kinds of medicinal 
herbs, and cast them into the sea of milk, the 
waters of which were radiant as the thin and 
shining clouds of autumn. 

Wart Wet Hear AF Feat a argrayi 

aay Maen AAT ATATFAHN ¢ 31 

fag: ate: Wa aa: Yes At: Hat: 

HO aye: Yaar Faferat Nn cw 

a Ae HOT: ara-afearasaiearg: | 

Pretraisy: we ayqefraganc ui 

Waa TA: MT-ST ATTACH 

Fae THREAT MENA: WANS Kit 

efter ana Hatred tad aft: | 

ARASH WAS HATATAAII C9 

They then took the mountain Mandara for 
the staff; the serpent Vasuki for the cord; and 


commenced to churn the ocean for the Amrta. 
The assembled gods were stationed by Krsna 


at the tail of the serpent; the Daityas and 
Danavas at its head and neck. Scorched by ‘the 
flames emitted from his inflated hood. the 
demons were shorn of their glory; whilst the 
clouds driven towards his tail by the breath of 
his mouth, refreshed the gods with revivifying 
showers. In the midst of the milky sea, Hari 
himself, in the form of a tortoise, served as a 
pivot for the mountain, as it was whirled 
around. 


BAU LAM WA WTI: | 
dae Wife sermalsatt As cil 


STA ETAar Met TERI Hy: | 

aaa Aa UA EE ATAt Ne 8 

aaa APN aaTenaaary Blt: | 

set ware tary sudfedary fay: eo lt 

The holder of the mace and discus was 
present in other forms amongst the gods and 
demons, and assisted to drag the monarch of 
the serpent race: and in another vast body he 
sat upon the summit of the mountain. With 
one portion or his energy, unseen by gods or 
demons, he sustained the serpent king; and 
with another, infused vigour into the gods. 


TaN area are Sara: | 
traarmag va gta: eaferar < et 
WYRE aay Sat AST WET 
eafaredasa ayateahraero: 118 2 
fanatafa fara fee fertaat aa: 
ayes AE Sat Tare UTTTAT ¢ 3 1 


From the ocean, thus churned by the gods 
and Danavas, first uprose the cow Surabhi. the 
fountain of milk and curds, worshipped by the 
divinities, and beheld by them and _ their 
associates with minds disturbed, and eyes 
glistening with delight. Then. as the holy 
Siddhas in the sky wondered what this could 
be, appeared the goddess Varuni (the deity of 
wine), her eyes rolling with intoxication. 


HAMA AAA alate AAA FATT 
TR UTA CHASTE: 11 8 V1 


BOOK I, CHAP. 9 


BUTTON AAT FUT: 

see: UGTA AIT WATTS 4 I 

Next from the whirlpool of the deep, 
sprang the celescial Parijata tree, the delight of 
the nymphs of heaven, perfuming the world 
with its blossoms. The troop of Apsarasas. the 
nymphs of heaven, were then produced, of 
surprising loveliness, endowed with beauty 
and with taste. 


Ad: PidigManye ct West: | 
wey fad arm: efrtrarer ayer ¢ & i 
aa Tada: JANA: GAT 

fay BATS VORA AAA: 1S 9h 
ad: WAR Aa SaaS: | 
auaufeat: we ara qf: wens 


The cool-rayed moon next rose, and was 
seized by Mahadeva: and then poison was 
engendered from the sea, of which the snake 
gods (Nagas) took possession. Dhanvantari, 
robed in white, and bearing in his hand the cup 
of Amrta, next came forth: beholding which, 
the sons of Diti and of Danu, as well as the 
Munis. were filled with satisfaction and 
delight. 


ad: Garant faarfrane fer 

Sea TATRA AA YATSATI 8 8 UI 

at eager Fel: ataHA TST: | 

faMAQy Greet Wat: FAT AT: Yo oll 

FARANMaT TEM AFSC: | 

TET: VTA: FTAA TASTE Ro VI 

fennn saureMers fanet Henry 

SMTA Val WdetasaTAAI 90 2 

Then, seated on a full-blown lotus, and 
holding a water-lily in her hand, the goddess 
Sri, radiant with beauty, rose from the waves. 
The great sages, enraptured, hymned her with 
the song dedicated to her praise’. Visvavasu 
and other heavenly quiristers sang, and 
Ghrtaci and other celestial nymphs danced 


before her, Ganga and other holy streams 
attended for her ablutions; and the elephants of 


61 


the skies, taking up their pure waters in vases 
of gold, poured them over the goddess, the 
queen of the universal world. 


aitial Suge aet UAT USS 

at fayaurag: fara wat A Qo 31 

FETT TATAT AUT 

UVaat Uacart Wat aa: Wet Fe Yo vil 

TAs Sa Sica: TAA 

eT HAT Agar Ut Fag frarra go & I 

Sat wad agcear fawpatespar: | 

eT MRA Tet fanfare TTAr: Fok i 

The sea of milk in person presented her 
with in wreath of never-fading flowers; and 
the artist of tnc gods (Visvakarma) decorated 
her person with heavenly ornaments. Thus 
bathed. attired, and adorned, the goddess, in 
the view of the celestials, cast herself upon the 
breast of Hari; and there reclining, turned her 
eyes upon the deities, who were inspired with 
rapture by her gaze. Not so the Daityas, who, 
with Vipracitti at their head, were filled with 
indignation, as Visnu turned away from them, 
and they were abandoned by the goddess of 
prosperity (Laksmi). 

Aaa WIRE ereraticar rey 

HUSH Welslat ward aa fEargaq owt 

arr afaean ay fae: eirerarheret: | 

— sarq: yest fay: goci 

UY: GRTOT: VARTENRA, ATTA 

si SAT RAI GATTI RO <I 

isa a afeatrcadereanyern 

aera fet wt uraret y fader Su ego 

dal Cat Yat BRAT: MGA TENT! 

forest saree srptradt fafaeoqn 22 

The powerful and indignant Daityas then 
forcibly seized the Amrta-cup. that was in the 
hand of Dhanvantari; but Visnu. assumin:. a 
female form, fascinated and deluded them: and 
recovering the Amrta from them, delivered it 


to the gods. Sakra and the other deities quaffed 
the ambrosia. The incensed demons, grasping 


62 


their weapons, fell upon them; but the gods, 
into whom the ambrosial draught had infused 
ncw vigour, defeated and put their host to 
flight, and they fled through the regions of 
space, and plunged into the subterraneous 
realms of Patal. The gods thereat greacly 
rejoiced, did homage to the holder of the 
discus and mace, and resumed their reign in 
heaven. 


Wd: WHAM: Wel: wet wa aah 
SHAT BT Bat WATT AAA VV II 
WHATS MTA AC AaNTay : | 
gat ye aaa Far AATATTA 22311 


The sun shone with renovatcd splendour, 
and again discharged his appointed task; and 
the celestial luminaries again circled, oh best 
of Munis, in their respective orbits. Fire once 
more blazed aloft, beautiful in splendour; and 
the minds of all beings were animated by 
devotion. 


aeleras fsa ws aya yaa 

ven Gregets: Wa: ATATATRTA Vee 
fagraata: yea: wearer fates WA: 
cay frat cal qwraroAaT TA LLG I 


The three worlds again were rendered 
happy by prosperity; and Indra, the chief of 
the gods, was restored to power. Seated upon 
his throne, and once more in_ heaven, 
exercising sovereignty over the gods, Sakra 
thus eulogized the goddess who bears a lotus 
in her hand: 


4 Bara 
THY BAY Seer 
fragfacoeel ferontcter: ere RaATTN 225 1 
wa fataee Yer tale Tae a Matar 
ean Ua: we fete sgn ATA 2 V9 
agfaen velfaen Jaan a we 
aneafaen a df wat faire ee 
ardent Ta art cusatfreata un 
araniengeeadaeta AT 228 
at meat wage tf adage aq: 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


SATAY CaeaeT Baers WENT LY oll 
waa ef Ulich waet Yaa 
faremranvad mazar WAN 2 eM 
an: Yara Yaq arene 
TAATHETATY FT ABATTTGUITN 2 VM 
winnraiweaahaTTa: Fay! 

ta wagelwewrat Yoaunt 7 seHTTN LIM 


Indra said— “I bow down to Sri. the mother 
of all beings, seated on her lotus throne, with 
eyes like full-blown lotuses, reclining on the 
breast of Visnu. You are Siddhi (superhuman 
power): you are Swadha and Svaha: you are 
ambrosia (Sudha). the purifier of the universe: 
you are evening, night, and dawn: you are 
power, faith, intellect: you are the goddess of 
letters (Sarasvati). You, beautiful goddess, are 
knowledge of devotion, great knowledge, 
mystic knowledge, and spiritual knowledge; 
which confers eternal liberation. You are the 
science of reasoning, the three Vedas, the arts 
and sciences:'’ you are moral and political 
science. The world ts peopled by you with 
pleasing or displeasing forms. Who else than 
you, oh goddess, is seated on that person of the 
god of gods, the wielder of the mace, which ts 
made up of sacrifice, and contemplated by 
holy ascetics? Abandoned, by you, the three 
worlds were on the brink of ruin; but they have 
been reanimated by you. From your propitious 
gaze. oh mighty goddess, men obtain wives, 
children, dwellings, friends, harvests, wealth. 
Health and strength, power, victory, happiness, 
are easy of attainment to those upon whom 
you smilest. 


wa Mat Maya cacat sit: Fran 

aaa FATA AT ATTA AATATAN LIVI 
Ol a: let aa WS At Ve Ar airway 

OW Mat HAAR VAAT: WesaTaA eV 

WH UA AT Gest AT UPL aT fay) 
RAAT WY Aare fewer: STA 2G It 
Brat GItaAl sar sienfaferfar: | 

RSI TAU: A: Gael F AIA L2G! 


BOOK I, CHAP. 9 


63 





waaraeiteaan: AE: vileehaenyat | 
pores gerd Yor frfur siti eee 

a Vora: A YO It: BT Heit: W Fgars 
Tw: a a fear sea Ufa atfera: eee 


GaN AVATAR Ve: WHAT TTT: | 
Waa Wg ae a fawracenti 23 ol! 
At aulfad year Tory fraife aera: 

mete afer wenfer Aretizenatt: HTT 93 


You are the mother of all beings, as the god 
of gods. Hari, is their, father; and this world, 
whether animate or inanimate, is pervaded by 
you and Visnu. Oh you who purify all things, 
forsake not our treasures, Our granaries, our 
dwellings, our dcpendants, our persons, our 
wives: abandon not our children, our friends, 
our lineage, our jewels, oh you who abide on 
the bosom of the god of gods. They whom you 
desert are forsaken-by truth, by purity, and 
goodness, by every amiable and excellent 
quality; whilst the base and worthless upon 
whom you look favourably become 
immediately endowed with all excellent 
qualifications, with families, and with power. 
He on whom your countenance is turned is 
honourable, amiable, prosperous. wise, and of 
exalted birth; a hero of irresistible prowess: 
but all his merits and his advantages are 
converted into worthlessness from whom, 
beloved of Visnu, mother of the world, you 
averted your face. The tongues of Brahma are 
unequal to celcbrate your excellence. Be 
propitious to me, oh goddess, lotus-eyed, and 
never forsake me more.” 


WWI Sard 


Us ot: Taga WeargK we sat err! 
saat Tacs Tawa FEAT 23 VU 
Pardsara continucd— Being thus praised, the 
gratified Sri, abiding in all creatures, and 
heard by all beings, replicd to the god of a 
hundred rites (Satakratu); 


ATEAA 
unaartes eager SUT AF St 


at gui afxast areré aarrami 23 311 


Sri said— “I am pleased, monarch of the 
gods, by thine adoration. Demand from me 
what you desire: I have comc to fulfil your 
wishes.” 


sq Sata 


aval Ufa H Sfa aural aie areaeT 
Fees A aa ATG WSTy aT: UT NBII 
RAT Ge wai wrearaferaara| 
O aa A Une fReraIey aT AAU BAI 


Indra replied— “If. Goddess, you will grant 
my prayers; if it ] am worthy of your bounty '; 
be this my first request, that the three worlds 
may never again be deprived of your prescnce. 
My second supplication, daughter of ocean, is, 
that you will not forsake him who shall 
celebrate your praises in the words I have 
addressed to you.” “J will not abandon,” 


sears 

Tae Fass a deeata ara 

Sat AU HAT Tet RAAT AT 23 & Il 

QI Wl FA Wat: LAUT WaT: | 

ai Mera + aeare afore area 23 911 

The goddess answered, “the three worlds 

again : this your first boon 1s granted; for Jam 
gratified by your praises: and further, I will 
never turn my face away from that mortal who 
morning and evening shall repeat the hymn 
with which you have addressed me. 
UU sare. 

Ua at cal tat Cara & TT 

Bae sey Taare aA 83 Sl 

WN: Ta ATTA st: Wages: WA: 

SH-AAAAAA WIAA TT 23 VI 

Ua Aa Wea saeal Wares: | 

STAM HUTT AM HATA 2¥ o 1 

PS Wag AM sMieasyy Fat ee 

Gel F UPVaY Were|anqgs aot fearerq ev vi 

WHAASHAT Ata STO FOTAA 


64 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





ParaSara proceeded— Thus, Maitreya, in 
former times the goddess Sri conferred these 
boons upon the king of the gods. being pleased 
by his adorations; but her first birth was as the 
daughter of Bhrgu by Khydati: it was at a 
subsequent period that she was produced from 
the sea, at the churning of the ocean by the 
demons and the gods. to obtain ambrosia.” For 
in like manner as the lord of the world, the god 
of gods. Janardana, descends amongst 
mankind (in various shapes), so does his 
coadjutrix Sri. Thus when Hari was born as a 
dwarf, the son of Aditi. Laksmi appeared from 
a lotus (as Padma or Kamala); when he was 
born as Rama. of the race of Bhrgu (or 
Parasurama). she was Dharani; when he was 
Raghava (Ramacandra), she was Sita; and 
when he was Krsna, she became Rukmini. 


STAG aay fearanrta Ter ey 2 

tard tases ATER a ATM 

FANTSETTATT SF HUTT ATTA VY 3 I 

BAAR Hea WT USAT: | 

forat 3 fareaftrerer ye ara, Hera ex vil 

Vaud ag dda yey sieral WA 

Stee: He A AAT GERM Vv tl 

In the other descents of Visnu, she is his 
associate. If he takes a celestial form. she 
appears as divine; if a mortal, she becomes a 
mortal too. transforming her’ own person 
agreeably to whatever character it pleases Vis 
nu to put on. Whosoever hears this account of 
the birth of Laksmi, whosoever reads it. shall 
never lose the goddess Fortune from his 
dwelling for three generations; and misfortune, 
the fountain of strife, shall never enter into 


those houses in which the hymns to Sri are 
repeated. 


Ud a aad ger wai a uhoesfa 
afttredl ster arar ye gar TAT eve 
ofa dactfarcranted: 
Mraratrsypatad fe ce: | 
srfeatte veud hrf 
aah A ay Halareeaayt: 11 Lvl 


Sta ST eaOT TTT WHATS ATATSEATA: | 

Thus, Brahman, have I narrated to you. in 
answer to your question, how Laksmi. 
formerly the daughter of Bhrgu, sprang from 
the sea of milk; find misfortune shall never 
visit those amongst mankind who daily recite 
the praises of Laksmi uttered by Indra. which 
are the origin and cause of all prosperity. 

kek 


NOTES 

|. Durvasas was the son of Atri by Anasiy4, and 
was an incarnation of a portion of Siva. 

2. A Vidyadhari. These beings, male and female, 
are spirits of an inferior order, tenanting the middle 
rcgions of the atmosphere. According to the Vayu, 
the garland was given to the nymph by Devi. 

3. He observed the Vrata, or vow of intanily; 
sATATIL! equivalent to the ecstasies of some 
religious fanatics. ‘In this state.” says the com- 
mentator. ‘even Saints are devils :' Art fe wat: 
faerat sa aAT 

4. They became Nih-satwa; and Satwa is 
explained throughout by Dhairyya, steadness, 
'fortitude.' 

5. The first effect of primary cause is nature, or 
Prakrti : the effect of the effect, or of Prakrti, is 
Mahat : effect in the third degree is Aharmkara: in 
the fourth, or the effect of the effect (Ahamk4ra) of 
the the effect (Mahat) of the effect (Prakrti), is 
elementary substance, or Bhita. Visnu is each and 
all. So in the succeeding ascending scale, Brahma is 
the cause of mortal life : the cause of Brahm ts the 
egg, or aggregate elementary matter : its cause is, 
therefore, elementary matter; the cause of which is 
subtile or rudimental matter, which originates from 
Ahamka4ra. and so on. Visnu is also each and all of 
these. 

6. With your Sakti. or the goddess Sri or Laksmi. 

7. Or with the Sikta, or hymn of the Vedas. 
commencing. “Hiranyu varnam." etc. 

8. The churning of the ocean does not occur in 
several of the Puranas, and ts but cursorily alluded 
to in the Siva, Linga, and Kirma Puranas. The 
Vayu and Padma have much the same narrative as 
that of our text; and so have the Agni and 
Bhagavata, except that they refer only briefly to the 
anger of Durvasas, without narrating the 


BOOK I, CHAP. 9 


65 





circumstances; indicating their being posterior, 
therefore, to the original tale. The part. however, 
assigned to Durvadsas appears to be an 
embellishment added to the original, for no 
mention of him occurs in the Matsya Purana nor 
even in the Hari Varnsa, neither does it occur in 
what may be considered the oldest extant versions 
of the story, those of the Ramayana and 
Mahabhirata : both these ascribe the occurrencc to 
the desire of the gods and Daityas to become 
immortal. The Matsya assigns a similar motive to 
the gods, instigated by observing that the Daityas 
slain by them in battle were restored to life by 
Sukra with the Sanjivini, or herb of immortality, 
which he bad discovered. The account in the Hari 
Vamsa is brief and obscure, and is explained by the 
commentator as an allegory, in which the churning 
of the ocean typifics ascetic penance, and the 
ambrosia is final liberation : but this is mere 
mystification. The legend of the Ramayana is 
translated, vol. 1. p. 410. of the Serampore edition : 
and that of the Mahabharata by Wilkins, in the 
notes to his translation of the Bhagavata Gita. See 
also the original text. Cat ed. p. 40. It has been 
presented 'to general readers in a more attractive 
form by my friend H. M. Paiker. in his Draught of 
Immortality, printed with other poems, Lond. 1827. 
The Matsya Purana has many of the stanzas of the 
Mahabharata interspersed with others. There is 
some variety in the order and number of articles 
produced from the ocean. As |] have observed 
elsewhere (Hindu Theatre, 1. 59. Load. ed.), the 
popular enumeration is fourteen, but the Ramayana 
specifies but nine; the Mahabharata. nine; the 
Bhagavata. ten; the Padma. nine; the Vayu. twelve; 
the Matsya. perhaps, gives the whole number. 
Those in which most agrec, are, I. the Halahala or 
Kalakitta poison, swallowed by Siva : 2. Varunt or 
Sura, the goddess of wine, who being taken by the 
gods, and rejected by the Daityas, the former were 
termed Suras, and the latter Asuras: 3. the horse 
Ucchaisravas. taken by Indra : 4. Kaustubha, the 
jewel worn by Visnu : 5. the moon : 6. 
Dhanvantari, with the Amrta in his Kamandalu. or 
vase, and these two articles are in the Vayu consi- 
dcred as distinct products : 7. the goddess Padma 
or-Sri : 8. the Apsarasas, or nymphs of heaven : 9. 
Surabhi, or the cow of plenty : 10. the Parijata tree, 
or tree of heaven : 11. Airavata, the elephant taken 


by Indra. The Matsya adds, 12. the umbrella taken 
by Varuna : 13. the earrings taken by Indra, and 
given to Aditi : and apparently another horse, the 
white horse of the sun : or the numbcr may be 
completed by counting the Amrta separately from 
Dhanvantari. The number is made up in the popular 
lists by adding the bow and the conch of Visnu; but 
there does not seem to be any good authority for 
this, and the addition is a sectarial one : so is that of 
the Tulasi tree, plant sacred to Krsna, which is one 
of the twelve specified by the Vayu Purina The 
Uttara Khanda of the Padma Purana has a peculiar 
enumeration, or. Poison; Jyestha or Alaksmi, the 
goddess of misfortune, the elder born to fortune : 
the goddess of wine; Nidra, or sloth; the Apsarasas; 
the elephant of Indra; Laksmi; the moon; and the 
Tulasi plant The reference to Mohini, the female 
form assumed by Visnu, is very brief in our text . 
and no notice is taken of the story told in the 
Mahabharata and some of the Puranas, of the 
Daitya Rahu's insinuating himself amongst the 
gods, and obtaining a portion of the Amrta : being 
beheaded for this by Visnu, the head became 
immortal, in consequence of the Amrta having 
reached the throat, and was transferred as a 
constellation to the skies : and as the sun and moon 
detected his presence amongst the gods, Raéahu 
pursues them with implacable hatred, and_ his 
efforts to seize them are the causes of eclipses; 
Rahu typifying the ascending and desccnding 
nodes. This seems to be the simplest and oldest 
form of the legend. The equal immortality of the 
body, under the name Ketu, and his being the causc 
of meteorical phenomena, seems to have been an 
after-thought. In thc Padma and Bhagavata, Rahu 
and Ketu are the sons of Simhika. the wife of the 


Danava Vipracittt. 
9. The four Vidyas. or branches of knowledge, 
are said to bc, Yajnavidyé, knowledge or 


performance of religious rites; Mahavidya, great 
knowledge, the worship of the femalc principle, or 
Tantrika worship; Guhyavidy4, knowledge of 
mantras, mystical prayers, and incantation . and 
Atma vidya, knowledge of soul. true wisdom 

10. Or Vartta, explained to mean the Silpa sastra, 
mechanics, sculpture, and arehitecture : Ayurveda, 
medicine, etc. 

ll. The cause of this, however, is left 
unexplained: -The Padma P. inserts a legend to 


66 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





account for the temporary separation of Laksmi 
from Visnu, which appears to be peculiar to that 
work Bhrgu was lord of Laksmipur. a city on the 
Narmada. given him by Brahma. His daughter Laks 
mi instigated her husband to request its being 
conceded to her. which offending Bhrgu. he cursed 
Visnu to be born upon eartt ten times, to be 
separated from his wife, and to have no children. 
The legend is an insipid modern embellishment. 
Wek wee 


66 


CHAPTER 10 
SUTHTSeAaTT: 
(TyaTictat YA: Hert) 
aay sara 
afar 2 waar ad apisfa were 
TTA WHAT MT A RAAT TAS VM 


Maitreya said— You have narrated to me. 
great Muni, all that I asked of you: now 


resume the account of the creation 
subsequently to Bhrgu. 
WIR Jara 


OT: WMA Aya ceaatawyahys | 
eT argferenatt wares Sat Yet FAT VU 
srafaratasa tt: St WTA: | 
arf wet aatatat Garaget 3 
ws YRugy AhuSa WRIA: II 

cat Sefer set Wovens Ys TON SI 


WUT Hay YAY Weataey Tals va 
dat ae wena faearé aad Wa GN 


ParaSara continued— Laksmi. the bride of 
Visnu, was the daughter of Bhregu by Khyati. 
They had also two sons. Dhatri and Vidhiatti, 
who married the two daughters of the 
illustrious Meru. Ayati and Niryati : and had 
by them each a son, named Prana and 
Mrkanda. The son of the latter was 
Markandeya. from whom Vedasiras was born.! 
The son of Prana was named Dyutimat. and 
his son was Rajavat; after whom, the race of 
Bhrgu became infinitely multiplied. 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


Wet Wik: were: dota 

fara: wana eT Yat Were: 1g II 

SASK Far ateess wale 

Sambhiti, the wife of Marici. gave birth to 
Paurnamdsa, whose sons were Virajas and 
Sarvaga. I shall hereafter notice his other 
descendants, when I give a more particular 


account of the race of Maric). 


VAaansTa: Welt WIA: Hea ETATI 
fadarcht qesta wer arate 

BTA AAAI WARHCAILN ¢ UI 

ae galaga caer ahr 

viet yore aulferencgaisstagit 8 
Gaara Basie: Wa: WMASASA| 
RERMATAT ASOT YATTTN oll 

STAT | YTS Meat Yo waa: 

DAT Daya GAS ITTAAT! Bil 


TTAB TAATATETAT 23 

Gaur: WH sed Wa Wea STMT: | 

MS AAA AAT TAU SAT | LY 

TAT Taal Aarera Foyertsrar fea 

MICO MICE SIDE HES GHMEL URAL 

VAY WANA VAT TST TT 

UWatarusete aga: ufcatterat: 1 VE I 

aeart aged ter gars aq 

The wife of Afigiras, Smriti, bore daughters 

named Sinivali, Kuhu, Raka. and Anumati 


3 
(phases of the moon ). Anastiya, the wife of 
Atri, was the mother of three sinless sons, 
Soma (the moon), Durvasas, and the ascetic 


Dattatreya . Pulastya had, by Priti, a son called 
in a former birth, or in the Svayambhuva 
Manvantara, Dattoli, who 1s now known as the 
sage Agastya . Ksama, the wife of the 
pattiarch Pulaha, was the mother of three sons; 
Karmasa, Arvarivat. and Sahisnu°. The wife of 


BOOK I, CHAP. 10 


67 





Kratu, Sannati, brought forth the sixty 
thousand Balakhilyas, pigmy sages, no bigger 
than a joint of the thumb, chaste, pious, 


7 
resplendent as the rays of the sun. Vasistha 
had seven sons by his wife Urjja, Rajas, Gatra, 
Urdhvabahu. Savana, Anagha, Sutapas, and 


Sukra. the seven pure sages . The Agni named 
Abhim§ani. who 1s the eldest born of Brahma, 
had, by Svaha, three sons or surpassing 
brilliancy, Pavaka, Pavamdana, and Suci, who 
drinks up water: they had forty-five sons, who, 
with the original son of Brahma and his three 
descendants, constitute the forty-nine fires’. 


fry TAT GET SATGAA F Var Tan Won 

afer afeicsaaa: aay a 

WT: TAN Ya Ha Vat deni sam ec 

a St gaat Birt are fe 

SAMI Wa: APfedyorsn Vou 

SUT ASI Hararaaana: | 

ASA CHTAT AAT A TAT ol 
Stet Feng ear weraiyy aeTAseaTa: 


The progenitors (Pitrs), who as I have 
mentioned, were created by Brahma, were the 
Agnisvattas and Barhisads; the former being 
devoid of, and the latter possessed of, fires’”. 
By them. Svadha had two daughters, Mena 
and Dhdrani, who were both acquainted with 
theological truth, and both addicted to 
religious meditation; both accomplished in 
perfect wisdom, and adorned with all 
estimable qualities'’. Thus has been explained 
the progeny of the daughters of Daksa ~. He 
who with faith recapitulates the account, shall 
never want offspring. 

2 3K 


NOTES 

1. The commentator interprets the text aa defer 
Wa to refer to Prana: wera ache AH ‘Vedasiras 
was born the son of Prana.’ So the Bhagavata has 
Aves wongert Aft: | The Linga, the Vayu. and 
Markandeya. however, confirm our reading of the 
text. making Vedasiras the son of Markandeya. 
Prana, or, as read in the two former, Pandu. was 
married to Pundarika, and had by her Dyutimat, 


whose sons were Srijavana and Asruta or 
Asrutavrana. Mrkanda (also read Mrkandu) married 
Maoaswini, and had Markaandeya. whose son, by 
Murddhanya, was Vedasiras : he married Pivari, 
and had many children, who constituted the family, 
or Brahmanical tribe, of Bhargavas, sons of Bhrgu, 
The most celebrated of these was USanas, the 
preceptor of the Daityas. who, according to the 
Bhagavata, was the son of Vedasiras; but the Vayu 
makes him the son of Bhrgu by Paulomi, and born 
at a different period. 

2. Alluding especially to KaSyapa, the son of 
Marichi. of whose posterity a full detail is 
subsequently given. The Bhagavata adds a 
daughter, Devakulya : and the Vayu and Linga, 
four daughters, Tusti, Pusti, Twisa, and Apaciti The 
latter inserts the grandsons of Paurnamdasa. Virajas, 
married to Gauri, has Sudh4man, a Lokapala, or 
rular of the east quarter; and Parvasa (quasi 
Sarvaga) has, by Parvasi. Yajfiavama and Kasyata, 
who were both founders of Gotras, or families. The 
names of all these occur in different forms in 
different MSS. 

3. The Bhagavata adds, that in the Swarocisa 
Manvantara the sages Uttathya and Vrhaspati were 
also sons of Angiras; and the Vayu, etc, specify 
Agni and Kirttimat as the sons of the patriarch in 
the first Manvantara. Agni, married to Sadwati, has 
Parjanya, married to Marichi; and their son is 
Hirauyaroman, a Lokapala. Kirtttmat has, by 
Dhenuka, two sons, Carisnu and Dhrtimat. 

4, The Bhagavata gives an account of Atri'a 
penance, by which the three gods. Brahm4, Visnu, 
and Siva, were propitiated, and became, in portions 
of themselves, severally his sons, Soma, Datta. and 
Durvasas. The Vayu has a totally different series, or 
five sons. Satyanetra. Havya, Apomurtti, Sani, and 
Soma; and one daughter, Sruti, who became the 
wife of Kardama. 

5. The text would seem to imply that he was 
called Agastya in a former Manvantara, but the 
commentator explains it as above. The Bhagavata 
calls the wife of Pulastya. Havirbht, whose sons 
were the Muni Agastya, called in a former birth 
Dahragni or Jatharagni. and Viaravas. The latter 
bad by Ilavila, the deity of wealth, Kuvera; and by 
Kesini, the Raksusas Ravana, Kumbhakarna. and 
Vibhisana. The Vayu specifies three sons of 
Pulastya, Dattoli, Vedabahu, and Vinita; and one 
daughter, Sadwati, married (see note 3) to Agni. 


68 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





6. The Bhatgavata reads Karmasrestha. Variyas. 
and Sahisnu. The Vayu and Linga have Kardama 
and Ambarisa in place of the two first, and add 
Vanakapivat and a daughter. Pivari. married to 
Vedasiras (see note I). Kardama married Sruti (note 
4), and had by her Sankhapada, one of the 
Lokapalas, and a daughter. Kamya, married to 
Priyavrata (note 6. Ch. VII.). Vana-kapivat, also 
read Dhana-k. and Ghana-k., had a son, Sahisnu. 
matried to Yasodhara. and they were the parents of 
Kamadeva. 

7. The different authorities agree in this place. 
The Vayu adds two daughters, Punya and Sumati, 
married to Yajfiavama (sce note 2). 

8. The Bhagavata has an entirely different set of 
namcs, or Citraketu. Surocis, Virajas, Mitra. 
Ulwana, Vasubhridyana. and Dyumat. It also 
specifics Saktri and others, as the issue of a 
different marriage. Thc Vayu and Linga have the 
same sons as in our text, reading Putra and Hasta in 
placc of Gatra : they add a daughter. Pundarika, 
matried to Pandu (see note I). The eldest son, 
according to the Vayu. espoused a daughter of 
Markandeya, and had by her the Lokapala of the 
west. Kelumat. The seven sons of Vasistha are 
termed in the text the seven Rsis. appearing in that 
character in the third Manvantara. 

9. The eldest son of Brahmd,.according to the 
commentator, upon the authority of the Vedas: 

3a: 1 The Vayu Purana 
enters into a very long detail of the names and 
places of the whole forty-nine fires. According to 
that. also. Pavaka is electric or Vaidyuta fire; 
Pavamana is that produced by friction, or 
Nirmathya; and Suci is solar. Saura, fire. Pavamana 
was the parent of Kavya-vahana, the fire of the 
Pitrs; Suci of Havyavahana. the fire of the gods; 
and Pavamana of Sahasraksu. the fire of the Asuras. 
The Bhagavata explains these different fires to be 
so many appellations of fire employed in the 
invocations with which different oblations to fire 
are offered in the ritual of the Vedas : daft wait 
aaratacaery: | srr seal aa Preeeisvaaeg a 
explained by the commentator, af eaifin aa Ai 
aehiseana sea freer fat wa a af a 
are: | 

10. According to the commentator, this 
distinction is derived from the Vedas. The first 
class, or Agnisvattas. consists of those house- 
holders who, when alive, did not maintain their 


domestic fires, nor offer burnt-sacrifices: the 
second, of those who kept up the household flame, 
and presented oblations with fire. Manu calls these 
Agnidagdhas and the reverse, which Jones renders, 
‘consumable by fire,’ etc. Kullika Bhatta gives no 
explanation of them. The Bhagavata adds other 
classes of Pitrs; or, the Ajyapas, ‘drinkers of ghee;’ 
and 'Somapas. ‘drinkers of the acid juice.’ The 
commentator, explaining the meaning of the terms 
Sagnayas and Andagnyas, has, 

ara: alent «aaa: | which might be understood 
to signify, that the Pitrs who are ‘without fire, are 
those to whom oblations are not offered; and those 
‘with fire, arc they to whom oblations are presented. 

11. The Vayu carries this genealogy forward. 
Dharani was married to Meru, and had by him 
Mandara and three daughters. Niyati, Ayati, and 
Vela: the two first ».ere married to Dhitri and 
Vidhatri (p. 69). Vela was the wife of Samudra, by 
whom she had Samudri, married to Pracinavarhis, 
and the mother of the ten Pracetasas, the fathers of 
Daksa, as subsequently narrated. Mena was married 
to Himavat, and was the mother of Mainaka, and of 
Ganga. and of Parvati or Uma. 

12. No notice is here taken of Sati. married to 
Bhava, as is intimated in Ch. VII, when describing 
the Rudras. Of these genealogies the fullest and 
apparently the oldest account is given in the Vayu 
Purana : as far as that of our text extends, the two 
nearly agree, allowing for differences of appellation 
originating in inaccurate transcription, the names 
frequently varying in different copies of the same 
work, leaving it doubful which reading should be 
preferred. The Bhagavata. as observed above (Ch. 
VII, n. 12), has created some further perplexity by 
substituting. as the wives of the patriarchs, the 
daughters of Kardama for those of Daksa. Of the 
general statement it may be observed, that although 
in some respects allegorical, as in the names of the 
wives of the Rsis (Ch. VII.); and in others 
astronomical, as in the denominations of the 
daughters of Angiras (Ch. X.). yet it seems 
probable that it is not altogether fabulous, but that 
the persons in some instances had a real existence, 
the genealogies originating in imperfectly 
preserved traditions of the families of the first 
teachers of the Hindu religion, and of the descent of 
individuals who took an active share in its 
propagation. 

kk 


BOOK I, CHAP. 11 


69 





CHAPTER 11 
Wenlayisearet: 
(JATAEATAT) 
WU sare 


Paar WA: TaTIATTST TI 

Bt ya quercteat ast aferdt wan en 
CHSMTANTA THAT: Ta: 
SMipraMyS Ter Taq terqacent: 1 20 
aaa a ugerempafedt fen 

a afastrareteat TAMAS Fa: Tas 31 
Tanterreangs faqutacatsrry 

SB gaara AAS WATT 

Weal TAA: Teal AVA 
TOA FATA RST HT & 1 


Paraiara continued—I mentioned to you, 
that the Manu Svayam-bhuva had two heroic 
and pious sons, Priyavrata and Uttaénapada. Of 
these two, the latter had a son whom he dearly 
loved. Uttama, by his favourite wife Suruci. 
By his queen, named Suniti. to whom he was 
less attached, he also had a son, called 
Dhruva!. Observing his brother Uttama on the 
lap of his father, as he was seated upon his 
throne, Dhruva was desirous of ascending to 
the same place; but as Suruci was present, the 
Raja did not gratify the desire of his son, 
respectfully wishing to be taken on his father's 
knee. 
aaa yard 


MISHA BET TAATTM TA 

fag: ga dered Yefaateaagatq € 1 
frad fa gat act Were wat: 
STRATA SABLA WAETH 9 
Saaremaa facents asst 

ae qaraneny fed Aa Wal Facil 
Was Taat Taya 

ard ata gat fare feet Sar 81 
sneesa wegreta fee ga 
Parana sey fa AT APTA Fol 


Maitreya said— Beholding the child of her 
rival thus anxious to be placed on his father's 
lap, and her own son already seated there, 
Suruci thus addressed the boy: “Why, child, do 
you vainly indulge in such presumptuous 
hopes? You are born from a different mother, 
and are no son of mine, that you should aspire 
inconsiderately to a station fit for the excellent 
Uttama alone. It is true you are the son of the 
Raja, but I have not given you birth. This regal 
throne, the seat of the king of kings, 1s suited 
to my son only; why should you aspire to its 
occupation ? Why idly cherish such lofty 
ambition, as if you were my son ? Do you 
forget that you are but the offspring of 
Suniti?”’ 


WORE SATE | 
segee frat aerated cat AIGA T! 
ST slut wafer fat wre Vet 
SRT Hat arroTEp TATA 
GaSe BrsqSuTAT 82H 
ae wi: Bleed Hy cat wae 
alsaafa frat cat aersoeafan 83 0 


Paraiara continued— The boy, having heard 
the speech of his step-mother, quitted his 
father, and repaired in a passion to the 
apartment of his own mother’; who, beholding 
him vexed, took him upon her lap, and, gently 
smiling, asked him what was the cause of his 
anger, who had displeased him, and if any one, 
forgetting the respect due to his father, had 
bchaved ill to him. 


Sy: Veet AY STATA Tea 
Gora: wre yoremaeraa nfs ev 
faaaeata afaa afta yor Saat: 
PTAA SAT TATA SATTAT TN V4 Il 


Dhruva, in reply, repeated to her all that the 
arrogant Suruci had said to him in the presence 
of the king. Deeply distressed by the narrative 
of the boy, the humble Suniti, her eyes 
dimmed with tears, sighed, and said, 


70 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





Gaaeara 
Gas: waned Tacourasta yaa 
a fe Yuaaat aca AISA EAA 2G It 
arent Heder: Hd As TAT YT 
aq aAlSUey Marfa ay aad SAM ol 
TRH WIA ATA ATA: | 
BEY TOT TAY WaT IT YAH CI 


sed: Jud: Feet qeferse: 

Area MAY VIA AfgT UTTATATI Ve 

QURAN: TART: | 

Wa FARM Git: TSTGVa gal WaT 201 

aanfe eo: A wary HEME GAS 

Tl Wea A ata TT Feat FLATT 2 vi 

afe at gana Yat ATA Aa 

A YONI aot HS TAHT 22 

viet wea aan ta: wiforfeet wt: 

Frey GATT: Wau: UTATATaaT BTSs VI 

Suniti said— “Suruci has rightly spoken; 
thine, child, is an unhappy fate: those who are 
born to fortune are not liable to the insults of 
their rivals. Yet be not afflicted, my child, for 
who shall effact what you have formerly done, 
or shall assign to you what you have left 
undone? The regal throne, the umbrella of 
royalty, horses and elephants, are his whose 
virtues have deserved them: remember this. 
my son, and be consoled. That the king 
favours Suruci is the reward of her merits in a 
former existence. The name of wife alone 
belongs to such as I. who have not equal merit. 
Her son is the progeny of accumulated piety, 
and is born as Uttama: mine has been born as 
Dhruva, of inferior moral worth. Therefore, 
my son. it is not propcr for you to grieve; a 
wise man will be contented with that degree 
which appertains to him: but if you continue to 
feel hurt at the words of Suruci. endeavour to 
augment due religious merit which bestows all 
good; be amiable, be pious, be friendly. be 
assiduous in benevolence to all living 
creatures; for prosperity descends upon 


modest worth as water Rows towards low 
ground.” 


qa sara 

wa aq wate we wea sata 
tae gaunt fir goa wa festa evi 
Ase aan afrenta aar aahrarrny 

TIM WreTAseTor STATA AASTATTN 2 & UI 
Geractrar Ugedea sraster Aewe 
mare Uva Usva TH Game wat VE II 
SAT: BAA Wat Bl wt 7 gawaan 


a waTeaareng fear at WarEq Aq 2 
APASAANNA WA TachyU 
SOU Aes WIA AA WT Mal WAN 2 


Dhruva answered: “Mother, the words that 
you have addressed to me for my consolation 
find no place in a heart tnat contumely has 
broken. I will exert myself to obtain such 
elevated rank, that it shall be revered by the 
whole world. Though I be not born of Suruci, 
the beloved of the king, you shall behold my 
glory, who am your son. Let Uttama my 
brother, her child, possess the throne given to 
him by my father; I wish for no other honours 
than such as my own actions shall acquire, 
such as even my father has not enjoyed.” 


OU Sata 


FRM Yeragheegaat At Ja: 

que Feary aera areltoad sat 28 

a weet Gilera aa yabrary ga: 

Ponty fasty WATAArLN 3 0 

WT WaT Waly whores 

WHA: WeayaeryaHA! 3 Vt 

Paraiara continued~ Having thus spoken, 

Dhruva went forth from his mother's dwelling: 
he quitted the city, and entered an adjoining 
thicket, where he beheld seven Munis sitting 
upon hides of the black antelope, which they 


had taken from off their persons, and spread 
over the holy kusa grass. Saluting them 


BOOK I, CHAP. I1 


7k 





reverentially, and bowing humbly before 
them, the prince said, 
Td sara 

SAMA Bi Pratt BAA: | 

We Yateat Prefers Gere waa 3 UH 

Dhruva said— "Behold in me, venerable 
men, the son of Uttanapada, born of Suniti. 
Dissatisfied with the world. I appear before 
you”. 
RaT TY: 

UP UMRANA Tees FA 

freer fat va arent fae 3 31 

a fart war: fafeq faa qaft: fram 

a dapfaarnfe wa uparfts aera 3 vii 

Wat a a a afacanfirencea 

frde: fa Aft at Herat ate fae 34 n 

The Rsis replied: “The son of a king, and 
but four or five years of age, there can be no 
reason, child, why you should be dissatisfied 
with life; you cannot be in want of any thing 
whilst the king your father reigns; we cannot 
imagine that you suffer the pain of separation 
from the object of your affections; nor do we 
observe in your person any sign of disease. 
What is the cause of your discontent? Tell us, 
if itis known to yourself.” 


TUM SaryT 

Tat: A BMGT Yee Ugeieay| 
afayrear Ta: WATE UTATTTN 3 & 
ate at Ut Aait arerente wear 
AIM WG ehea CAAATT ATTA 3 19 it 
W wy afar frdarg aq, TGA 
ay aafad ax: mearat ale Tarn 3c 
aa ar qaren: aerate 
agerat faaarerrensrareead it 3 8 


Paradsara said:— Dhruva then repeated to the 
Rsis what Suruci had spoken to him; and when 
they had heard his story, they said to one 
another, “How surprising is the vehemence of 
the Ksatriya nature, that resentment is 


cheruhed even by a child, and he cannot efface 
from his. mind the harsh speeches of a step- 
mother. Son of a Ksatriya, tell us, if it be. 
agreeable to you, what you have proposed, 
through dissatisfaction with the world, to 
accomplish. If you wish our aid in what you 
have to do, declare it freely, for we perceive 
that you are desirous to speak.” 


qa Sard 

Tentasiienta + ot ferawar:| 

TUNA Yeh AA Aq FAT ¥oll 

Ud fraat weap Seat wert sem 

WIAA MTNA: WTA AETATAT: 1 I 

Dhruva said— “Excellent sages, I wish not 
for riches, neither do I want dominion : I 
aspire to such a station as no one before me 
has attained. Tell me what 1 must do to effcct 
this object, how I may reach an elevation 
superior to all other dignities.” The Rsis sever- 


ally thus replied— 
Tithereare 


staierantfarett: WU FATT 
at fe Wares AS THTETAEAATN ¥ 2 


Marici said: ‘““The best of stations is not 
within the reach of men who fail to propitiate 


Govinda. Do you, prince, worship the 
undecaying (Acyuta).” 
sifaRara 


TU: WOT Yea) AT FBT Waa: | 

Hl wreearsd WA Wer Waa ¥ 3 

Atri said:- “He with whom the first of 
spirits, Janarddana, is pleased, obtains 
imperishable dignity. I declare unto you the 
truth.” 


wfga sara 
TAT: AANA TATA: | 
aan WMrae wae weraaran vv 


Angiras said:— "If you desire an exalted 
station, worship that Govinda in whom, 
immutable and undecaying, all that is. exists.” 





72 THE VISNU-PURANAM 
TaRs Fara aftaka srrgiiet aa: safer Faron & 2H 
Ut gal Ut aT Asal Ta wea UAL Wahenafaedd TAT FATA 


aH Bie rhe BheeaarsetsTU BG I 


Pulastya said: “He who adores the divine 
Hari. the supreme soul, supreme glory, who is 
the supreme Brahm, obtains what is difficult 
of attainment, eternal liberation.” “When that 
Janarddana,” 


Aqeara 
A UNTER Be Ay a: WA: TAT 
aferges gaunt fap cater SaTeT ¥ EI 


Kratu observed~ “who in sacrifices is the 
soul of sacrifice, and who in_ abstract 
contemplation is supreme spirit, is pleased, 
there is nothing man may not acquire.” 

Yele Jara 
tafe: ot Wa wees Tera 
Wy AA Taqwa AUT Yall ¥'9 

Pulaha said:— “Indra, having worshipped 

the lord of the world, obtained the dignity of 


king of the celestials. Do you adore, pious 
youth, that Visnu, the lord of sacrifice.” 


afag sara 


werafad faut ore ae afer 
AAI a fay ATA ¥ oH 


Vasistha exclaimed “Anything, child, that 
the mind covets., may be obtained by 
propitiating Visnu, even though it be the 
station that is the most excellent in the three 
worlds.” 


ga sara 
armed: aafaet tat tae: woreter Th 
WaT ae UE Gael ASV Y VI 
TM UM TAT AA Hla STATA: | 
THETA SITY AIT UG oll 
TAG SAT FOOT TET TAT 
BAA TY TTT TEA & 
Teanaahacisrdt was wed AT: 


wae Afra Ta A: UT SAI G BIL 
ferramiyparmenrtrerneriat | 

HS AN AAA YS APSA & Yt 
WAAAY WE He TATITHYSHT AY: | 
FOATSRTA YU TET FBT TSAI GG UI 
al Benicar wales AAEM 
can ante wifes ateda Wer ANG & UI 
Sta stfaegarey weanigh Ware sSeaTa: | 


Dhruva replied to them: “You have told 
me, humbly bending before you, what deity is 
to be propitiated: now inform me what prayer 
is to be medicated by me, that will offer him 
gratification. May the great Rsis. looking upon 
me with favour, instruct me how I am to 
propitiate the god.” The Rsis answered: 
“Prince, you deserve to hear how the adoration 
of Visnu has been performed by those who 
have been devoted to his service. The mind 
must first be made to forsake 4ll external 
immpressions, and a man must then fix it 
steadily on that being in whom the world is. 
By him whose thoughts are thus concentrated 
on one only object, and wholly filled by it, 
whose spirit is firmly under concrol; the 
prayer that we shall repeat to you is to be 
inaudibly recited: ‘Om! glory to Vasudeva, 
whose essence is divine wisdom; whose form 
is inscrutable, or is manifest as Brahma, Vis 


nu, and Siva, This prayer, which was formerly 
uttered by your grandsire, the Manu 
Svayambhuva, and propitiated by which, Vis 
nu conferred upon him the prosperity be 
desired, and which was unequalled in the three 
worlds, is to be recited by you. Do you 
constantly repeat this prayer, for the 
gratification of Govinda.” 
hae 
NOTES 
1, The Matsya, Brahma. and Vayu Puranas speak 
of but one wife of Uttanapdda. and. call her Sunnita 
: they say also that she had four sons. Apaspati (or 


BOOK I, CHAP. 12 


Vasu). Ayushmanta. Kirttimat, and Dhruva. The 
Bhatgaveta, Padma, and Naradiya have the same 
account as that of the text. 

2. The instructions of the Rsis amount to the 
performance of the Yoga. External impressions are 
first to be obviated by particular positions, modes 
of breathing, etc, : the mind must them be fixed on 
the object of meditation; this is Dharana: next 
comes the meditation, or Dhy4na; and then the 
Japa. or inaudible repetition of a Mantra, or short 
prayer : as in the text. The subject of the Yoga is 
more fully detailed in a subsequent book. 

KK 


73 


BOOK I, CHAP. 12 


CHAPTER-12 
BIeonseany: 
(Jaeyq Aen: ) 
WUT aT 

Frerey aasteur Waa yaa: Wa: 
Friary Sar THAT MAOTART A ATAU VN 
arava waaay fet 
Redst Wau WT AAAS VI 
Wag gaan eerntatsd aa: | 
AAT MAT AAT TTT TStASAI 3 
SAT AM Mai WA VYYT ASlacrA! 
yy age area wit aa wart au vu 
aad tata ofset efttera:| 
Maat Aa ATA TTT AK I 
Tifa hreagea ae 
smrerasacast Ferd fap & it 
STATA TTA ATA BET: 
ware fax waarerats vad io tt 


The prince, having received these 
instructions, respectfully saluted the sages, and 
departed from the forest, fully confiding in the 
accomplishment of his purposes. He repaired 
to the holy place, on the banks of the Yamuna, 
called Madhu or Madhuvana. the grove of 
Madhu, after the demon of that name, who 
formerly abided there, Satrughna (the younger 


73 


brother of Rama) having stain the Raksas 
Lavana, the son of Madhu, founded a city on 
the spot, which was named Mathura. At this 
holy shrine, the purifier from all sin, which 
enjoyed the presence of the sanctifying god of 
gods, Dhruva performed penance, as enjoined 
by Marici and the sages: he contemplated Vis 
nu, the sovereign of all the gods, seated in 
himself. Whilst his mind was wholly absorbed 
in meditation, the mighty Hari. identical with 
all beings and with all natures, (took 
possession of his heart). 


Mead ws fawn ta air: 


A VIM AT MARIS HATTON 2 
amaretead afar Tareas Aesth 
farts vara fertdferored eae ¢ 11 
Wager WalsT Bal we ayer Fer: | 
det at aga fam wenet We Tad: 2011 
FEN Al: WARE Past Te aA: 
TRAST: att ut STS Val 


Visnu being thus present in his mind, the 
earth, the supporter of elemental life, could not 
sustain the weight of the ascetic. As he stood 
upon his left foot, one hemisphere bent 
beneath him; and when he stood upon his 
right, the other half of the earth sank down. 
When be touched the earth with his toes, it 
shook with all its mountains, and the rivers 
and the seas were troubled, and the gods 
partook of the universal agitation. 


UAT ATA Fal aT HAT UTAH: | 

SAU UE AHA TANS WaT 27 
aust fafad wd: WEA WENA 
SA SATAEMN: TATA AT: UN 23 
Safes ware Arar aeyTa: Tera 
Yates aeut arerare Ava TNT Vv 
TATA PC TeTARTRUT| 
Fraerit Wert eral eh BATT 1 V4 UI 
SaTteat UPA FT aTEl a 
AUT AT STAT TAT VE UI 


74 


The celestials called Yamias, being 
excessively alarmed, then took counsel with 
Indra how they should interrupt the devout 
exercises of Dhruva; and the divine beings 
termed Kusmandas. in company with their 
king, commenced anxious efforts to distract 
his meditations. One, assuming the semblance 
of his mother Suniti, stood weeping before 
him, and calling in tender accents, “My son, 
my son, desist from destroying they strength 
by this fearful penance. I have gained you, my 
son, after much anxioux hope: you can not 
have the cruelty to quit me, helpless, alone, 
and unprotected, on account of the unkindness 
of my rival. You are my only refuge; I have no 
hope but you. 


wa Ue Ugaiia: aa dag Steor AT: 
frawiat a4: Hera Heras e911 
HA: MISAHMA A ASISATTNT AI 

At: AAMT Aad A ATi Wolk 
HTHSASA Te AAT FAS! 
dfeteatrer cafe fer Agrareaay T1181 
Waite: wat aat aatseeaneaenrg 
saa TM We Panterewta:n Qoll 
ufwenntt cael UeaA WaAeAT: | 
ATATSAT Wroretat A UFATSTAH 2 Vi 


What have you, a child but five years old, 
to do with rigorous penance? Desist from 
such fearful practices, that yield no beneficial 
fruit. First comes the season of youthful 
pastime; and when that is over, it is the time 
for study: then succeeds the period of worldly 
enjoyment: and lastly, that of austere devotion. 
This is your season of pastime, my child. Have 
you engaged in these practices to put an end to 
your existence? Your chief duty is love for 
me: duties are according to time of life. Lose 
not thyself in bewildering error: desist from 
such unrighteous actions. If not, if you will not 
desist from these austerities, I will terminate 
my life before you.” 


TUN SaTT 
at faerradita arnfac-facirrr 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


eer frat wearaht + Sear 21 
ae Aer Yair wares ea 

TAS HYAATTAUT MATAR ETATAT 3 3 I 
STRAT WIS A WATTANyRAT: | 
STATA TATA AAT HOTS: 11 2 Yt 
Ta ACMA WAT F YT: 
DASA MTA PIPER 1 84 I 
feaeI wat Ae: AsarerHactya: | 
START PAT STETAT APT HAT WAT VEU 


But Dhruva, being wholly intent on seeing 
Visnu, beheld not his mother weeping in his 
presence, and calling upon him; and _ the 
illusion, crying out, “Fly, fly, my child, the 
hideous spirits of ill are crowding into this 
dreadful forest with uplifted weapons,” 
quickly disappeared. Then advanced frightful 
Raksasas, wielding terrible arms, and with 
countenances emitting fiery flame; and 
nocturnal fiends thronged around the prince, 
uttering fearful noises, and whirling and 
tossing their threatening weapons. Hundreds 
of jackals, from whose mouths gushed flamel 
as they devoured their prey, were bowling 
alcud, to appal the boy, wholly engrossed by 
meditation. 

waa Fa feaat fea 

WAT VAM FASTA: 1 VI 

aat Aaa Aer faersaarat:| 

WATT WAGE AGS WAT: BSI 

waite aft a Aer: Prararargenfa a 

THAT HAART ATA AMNATTLN 2 3 1 

Vara: Bad fared 

apa Ufseataregat Ar HABA 3 ol 

The goblins called out, "Kill him, kill him; 
cut him to pieces; eat him, eat him;” and 
monsters, with the faces of lions and camels 
and crocodiles, roared and yelled with horrible 
cries, to territy the prince. But all these 
uncouth spectres, appalling cries, and 
threatening weapons, made no impression 
upon his 'senses, whose mind was completely 


BOOK I, CHAP. 12 


75 





intent on Govinda. The son of the monarch of 
the earth, engrossed by one only idea, beheld 
uninterruptedly Visnu seated in his soul, and 
saw no other object. 


dd: arg ararg facirg yA: Et: 

AT UT APART ESAT: 113 8H 

a aver sentrraferet eft 

VATS MCT TATA TAT ATTA 113 2M 

All their delusive stratagems being thus 
foiled, the gods were more perplexed than 
ever. Alarmed at their discomfiture, and 
afflicted by the devotions of the boy, they 
assembled and repaired for succour to Hari the 


origin of the world, who is, without beginning 
or end; and thus addressed him: 
eat HW: 

dq dq Wray Ute Yea 

FA ATH AAA AT VICI Wes 11 3 3 

fer fat Herel: PTS Tes Be 

dard are ta waregfgneherTn 3 yi 

staraiearan safe Sac 

MAHA YU Ara aT Pra 3 & UI 

a faa: f& a vine fa qelansiicafi 

famorgraamt afer: we 3 fami 

TAT WAM TEAITAZL 

SAAT TIT: AfAaTA 3 V1 

Celestials said:~ “God of gods, sovereign 
of the world, god supreme. and infinite spirit, 
distressed by the austerities of Dhruva, we 
have come to you for protection. As the moon 
increases in his orb day by day, so this youth 
advances incessantly towards superhuman 
power by his devotions. Terrified by the 
ascetic practices of the son of Uttanapada, we 
have come to you for succour. Do you allay 
the fervour of his meditations. We know not to 
what station he aspires: to the throne of Indra, 
the regency of the solar or lunar sphere, or to 
the sovereignty of riches or of the deep. Have 
compassion on us, lord; remove this affliction 
from our breasts; diverse the son of 
Uttanapdda from persevering in his penance.” 


Wraryara 

Tea Tw Veit Aargqueteran 

weaeg & ad t ahead Fa 3 cil 

Ud Cat AMT Tart farsa: | 

Radanaé aet aaa AAAI 3 8H 

Visnu replied to the gods.: “The lad 
desireth neither the rank of Indra, nor the solar 
orb, nor the sovereignty of wealth or of the 
ocean: all that be solicits, I will grant. Return 
therefore, deities, to your mansions as ye list, 
and be no more alarmed: | will put an end to 


the penance of the boy, whose mind is 
immersed in deep contemplation.” 


TUN Sava 
sem caeay worst Fraga: 


weg: Tare freon eR TUTAT NY ol 
wate wate ara afer: | 


Treat qagardd wayTagEle: il ¥ gu 

The gods, beings thus pacificd by the 
supreme, saluted him respectfully and retired, 
and, preceded by Indra, returned to their 
habitations: but Hari. who is all things, 
assuming a shape with four arms proceeded to 
Dhruva, being pleased with his identity of 
nature, and thus addressed him: 


ATTA ATA 
SAAS MST TANT: | 
ATISEATMA AL ATA YSAI ¥ 2 
aredfacdel a uta fat enter 
TBS WAT Ag Woiesr at WAN ¥ 3 


Visnu said—~ “Son of Uttaénapadda, be 
prosperous. Contented with your. devotions, I, 
the giver of boons, am present. Demand what 
boon you desire. In that you have wholly 
disregarded external objects, and fixed your 
thoughts on me, I am well pleased with you. 
Ask, therefore, a suitable reward.” 


WUT SAT 
AT AE Uiet AT VACA AAR: | 


76 


SUMAN SET ATASE BT FT vv 
GARTH A CAAT 

facies wares are force wey 4 It 
Was: ASAT Wears TCT TA: 

Wa Bacay A Uh WAT Fall vel 
fae carte earerer Saar WAAR: | 
seemed Ta yah Tah vio 


The boy, hearing these words of the god of 
gods, opened his eyes, and beholding that Hari 
whom he had before seen in his meditations 
actually in his presence, bearing in his hands 
the shell, the discus, the mace, the bow, and 
scimetar, and crowned with a diadem, he 
bowed his head down to earth; the hair stood 
erect on his brow, and his heart was depressed 
with awe. He reflected how best he should 
offer thanks to the god of gods; what he could 
say in his adoration; what words were capable 
of expressing his. praise: and _ being 
overwhelmed with perplexity, he had recourse 
for consolation to the deity. 


qa zara 
way afte A ae ATA Wet Ta: 
Rid aeetreah aed was AX 
Taadedanhad TT At Aft: | 
a wat aang Sa Tile MN aH we 
waefarant et Wat A A: 
Rig Wat aCaTSl AA WaT WATE ANY of 


Dhruva exclaimed—Tf the lord is contented 
with my devotions, let this be my reward, that 
I may know how to praise him as I wish. How 
can IJ, a child, pronounce his praises, whose 
abode is unknown to Brahma and to others 
learned in the Vedas? My heart is overflowing 
with devotion to you: oh lord, grant me the 
faculty worthily to lay mine adorations act 
your feet.” 


UU Sara 
Vga Wiese Tere Ferstery! 
SaAMUadsa FE sereaAy: 1 y eV 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


WT WAAACART RIOT TIAA: | 

GRA MUTA BRAT TATE & 21 

Whilst lowly bowing, with his hands 
uplifted to his forehead, Govinda, the lord of 
the world, touched the son of Uttanap4da with 
the tip of his conch-shell, and immediately the 
royal youth, with a countenance sparkling with 
delight, praised respectfully the impcrishable 
protector of living beings. 
qq sata 

afraistct ay: @ wat gfgta a 

WMT PAT WH ATSTAT TANG 3 

Ys: Werishaceat warn we: Tar 

TY BE TTT YOR TUT G ¥ I 

QUST AAA TANS PTA: | 

FATE WITTE FRCS TT: UTI Gan 

t TAA: TTT 

Wel PCT Ys AGT UATE Y & il 

FEANG FSUCA ART TATA AT! 

dat are Valery aifanfaarraqn & 91 

Dhruva exclaimed— “I venerate him, whose 
forms are earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, 
intellect, the first element (Ahankara), 
primeval nature, and the pure, subtile, all- 
pervading soul, that surpasses nature. 
Salutation to that spirit that is void of 
qualities; that is supreme over all the elements 
and all the objects of sense, over intellect, over 
nature and spirit. I have taken refuge with that 
pure form of thine, oh supreme, which is one 
with Brahma, which is spirit, which transcends 
all the world. Salutation to that form which, 
pervading and supporting all, is designated 


Brahman, unchangeable, and contemplated by 
religious sages. 


Asana Yar Usalet: WEAUTd 

wae ya: TaMaaAse SMF ATTN 4 CU 
aad aa a wet Yea eq Tar 

wae Fate TAS WTS TATE ET: 1 4 FI 
sattear uses free sleds a yar: 


BOOK I, CHAP. 12 


7 





want feeatad ort cant serafaerdti¢ ol 

UNUM WalaS TTL 

wal GA: Wagt: Weer Uyfgan & Vi 

You are the male with a thousand heads, a 
thousand eyes, a thousand feet, who traversest 
the universe, and passest ten inches beyond its 
contact.” Whatever has been, or is to be, that, 
Purusottama, you are. From you sprang Virat. 


Swarat, Samrat, and Adhipurusa . The lower, 
and uppcr, and middle parts of the earth are 
not independent of you: from you 1s all this 
universc, all that has been, and that shall be: 
and all this world is in you, assuming dus 


4 ° ° 
universal form . From you is sacrifice derived, 
and all oblations, and curds, and ghee, and 
animals of either class (domestic or wild). 


aM MAST AM aaescis wT 
ea AAR Ta MSTA: 1G VI 
TARA: WYATT SAA WAT: | 
PATA TRIO GTN: SAAT & 3 
SVATMAa MT; WRTRATS UAT WAR 
SUN: Walshe: AAA WATT G YI 
wont + wfrenat ware awa 
aifereat rt ater force: Waa G GI 


fem: strarq faft: wat ma: wdoyfeari 

From you the Rg-Veda. the Sama. the 
metres of the Vedas, and the Yajur-Veda are 
born. Horses. and cows having teeth in one 
jaw only’, proceed form you; and from you 
come goats, sheep, deer. Brabmans sprang 
from your mouth; warriors from your .arms; 
Vaisyas from your thighs; and Sidras from 
your fect. From thine eyes come the sun; from 
thine ears, the wind; and from your mind, the 
moon: the vital airs from your central vein; 
and fire from your mouth: the sky from your 
navel; and hcavcn from your head: the regions 
from thine ears; the earth from your feet. All 
this world was derived from you. 


SENT: TASC BMT Ast STATA: IG G I 
aaa farafaet deep aa ware 


SAE ATAALM ANA: YAY |G VU 


fame am ofa waa: Get qa ATA 

amt fe meet Ara aAHUATS aT TPA Gc 
we fare Aro qeuritat sya 

Sled art araq rete aaah & ei 
Seared fren cafe at qorafe 
INET YATAT FAT ol 
MEATATATT FA IATA AH: 
ARHMAMAGSN ATS, AME TATE TAT VI 
farsa aU: Pera war] 

aaa Way Wa: TATTRUTHI 9 2 
ae ares at AT: Walerisey a 
Paterntsta Baer Taya ATs 19 3 


As the wide-spreading Nyagrodha (Indian 
fig) tree is compressed in a small seed’, So, at 
the time of dissolution, the whole universe is 
comprehended in you as its germ. As the 
Nyagrodha germinates from the sced and 
becomes first a shoot, and then rises into 
loftiness, so the created world proceeds from 
you, and expands into magnitude. As the bark 
and leaves of the Plantain tree are to be seen in 
its Stem, sO you are the seem of the universe, 
and all things are visible in you. The faculties 
of the intellect, that are the cause of pleasure 
and of pain, abide in you as One with all 
existence; but the sources of pleasure and of 
pain, singly or blended, do not exist in you 
who are exempt from all qualities’. Salutation 
to you, the subtile rudiment, which, being 
singlc, becomes manifold. Salutation to you. 
soul of existent things, identical with the great 
elements. You, imperishable, are beheld in 
spiritual knowledge as perceptible objects, as 
nature, as spirit, as the world, as Brahma, as 
Manu, by internal contemplation. But you are 
in all, the element of all; you are all, assuming 
every form; all is from you. and you are from 
thyself. I salute you, universal soul: glory be to 
you. You are one with all things: oh lord of all, 
you are present in all things. 


78 


aerate aa: fa t ad atte efe fear 
aly WAYAM Aa AAT RAN 9 it 
Va wary ahr was 

a A WA AMT Wael: A Aa Hal 
aay ae Uaet Be apisfa TTA O41 


What can I say to you? you know all that 
is in the heart, oh soul of all, sovereign lord of 
all creatures, origin of all things. You, who are 
all beings, knowcst the desires of all creatures. 
The desire that I cherished has been gratified, 
lord, by you: my devotions have been crowned 
with success, in that I have seen you.” 


sPTTAT TATE 

ATH et Wt Ae Bese TAT Gal 

aes fe famet Taga: FT ATA EI 

at AT TAN A SMTA ATA: | 

ae Uae Tat as seat AAV 

Visnu said to Dhruva: “The object of your 
devotions has in truth been attained, in that 
you have seen me; for the sight of me, young 
prince, 1s never unproductive. Ask therefore of 
me what boon you desire; for men in whose 
sight I appear obtain all their wishes.” 
qq sad 

Wa Vaya Adware vary eel 

ferred aa cate AAT AAAI 9 <I 

wane et sae Hay FAM 

wea sfatiat CITA TAN 8 tt 

fa at aohay: wae ae eT 

PAMhet YS Aetat AVAAT ¢ ott 

tae Tare Area WATT 

sft Walealarat Woah Tae: Ic I 

STAT WTA: EAT AAT 

MAA WAT WI TAMATSTERTSHTATAN ¢ 2M 


To this, Dhruva answered : “Lord god of 
all creatures, who abidest in the hearts of 2!1, 
how should the wish that | chrish be unknown 
to you ? I well confess unto you the hope that 
my presumptuous heart has entertained; a hope 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


that it would be difficult to gratify, but that 
nothing is difficult when you, creator of the 
world, are pleased. Through your favour, Indra 
reigns over the three worlds. The sister-queen 
of my mother has said to me, loudly and 
arrogantly, ‘The royal throne is not for one 
who is not born of me;’ and I now solicit of the 
support of the universe an exalted station, 
Superior to all others, and one that shall endure 
for ever.”’ 


sa ara 
aq ae wierd waa weafa ft wary 
wate fea: Ta Tes 2 3H 
warts: ye wear: aan 
AraTaater Yarra yUTeTsH 1 2 Xt 
ale tesa fas wegaeTanad 
Warshactimedl ceataesatenratas 1 2 4 
AML TET ATA eae EAgerTA| 
Tas Wayatssats Ase IT Hawi ¢ G1 
Aa AATTCaTAT AAT Tt USTTAAT 
SAAT Ye THsfa gat FTA cl 
saa TEAL WIM Het ATTY ATI 
adeat atet Ware uftatfaas ec 
TAT ANY Bearer ea reret rar 
Tafa art faq canes Taq c ei 


Visnu said to him: “The station that you 
aske you shall obtain; for I was satisfied with 
you of old in a prior existence. You wast 
formcrly a Brahman, whose thoughts were 
ever devoted to me, ever dutiful to your 
parents, and observant of your duties. In 
course of time a prince became your friend, 
who was in the period of youth, indulged in all 
sensual pleasures, and was of handsome 
appearance and elegant form. Beholding, in 
consequence of associating with him, his 
affluence, you formed the desire that you 
might be subsequendy born as the son of a 
king; and, according to your wish, you 
obtained a princely birth in the illustrious 
mansion of Uttanapada. But that which would 
have been thought a great boon by others, birth 
in the race of Svayambhuva, you have not so 


BOOK I, CHAP. 12 


considered, and therefore have propitiated me. 
The man who worships me obtains speedy 
liberation from life. What is heaven to one 
whose mind is fixed on me ? 


Aeteaefees WY Aaa TTT: | 
wfacata A Weel Neale WAP Tali Qo 


Fale Ae a sitar VAY ATS, FETT 

faarchararetat darter aear ga e Vt 

aadtoragtarnt fq aaa: AT: 

asaya Tat Ta Set WAT Tang Vk 

aferagqat wad afaratt WT: 

fara ad sat Wat a Hora feata: 1 <3 

Safar t ae waraarfarretem 

fart arent Year aa caret Praceafan e wt 

aa wal Weal: Wa: Base Genfed:| 

caltfaeatet Water wad yoe afaeata ek 

A station shall be assigned to you. ‘Dhruva, 
above the three worlds*; one in which you 
shall sustain the stars and the planets; a station 
above those of the sun, the moon. Mars, the 
son of Soma (Mercury), Venus. the son of 
Strya (Saturn), and all the — other 
constellations; above the regions of the seven 
Rsis, and the divinities who traverse the 
atmosphcre’. Some celestial beings endure for 
four ages; some for the reign of a Manu: to 
you Shall he granted the duration of a Kalpa. 
Your mother Sumati, in the orb of a bright 
star, shall abide near you for a similar term; 
and all those who, with minds attentive, shall 
glorify you at dawn or at eventide, shall 
acquire exceeding religious merit. 
UUM sara 

wa yd we Faces 

at WET Fa: TAT AW HATA EH 

aay wages AeA fatter a 

SATA UOTE: YANAAANGTAT STAT @ 9 

ISA ATA SRaAgisea AIA: eA 

aed Wa: Heal Fs TAG: FAT Nc 

Garey wt dal Baar FTaT 

sree UfeArt SH: yreat aula yfane ei 


79 
tereaeaat wet ot wart fercrafen 

I WaT at Hear a alafarat aA Po oll 
asaq arafaad gacantent fefa 

S wauafaen Taos Alaa go all 
wag a areata fafa ar afe ar afar 


Aang Sees safe Ro VN 
sia sitfaegerey wemigt greyiseara: 


Thus the sage Dhruva, having received a 
boon from Janarddana, the lord of gods, and 
lord of the world, resides in an exalted station. 
Beholding his glory, Usanas, the preceptor of 
the gods and demons, repeated these verses: 
“Wonderful is the efficacy of this penance, 
marvellous is its reward, that the seven Rsis 
should” be preceded by Dhruva. This too is the 
pious Suniti, his parent, who is_ called 
Sonrta!’." Who can celebrate her greatness, 
who. having given birth to Dhruva, has 
become the asylum of the three worlds, 
enjoying to all future time an elevated station, 
a station eminent above all? He who shall 
worthily describe the ascent into the sky of 
Dhruva, for ever shall be freed from all sin, 
and enjoy the heaven of Indra. Whatever be 
his dignity, whether upon earth or in heaven he 
shall never fall from it, but shall long enjoy 
life. possessed of every blessing". 


NOTES 

1. A marginal note by a Bengali Pandit asserts it 
to be a fact, then when a jackal carries a piece of 
meat in his mouth, it shows in the dark as if it was 
on fire. 

2. The commentator understands this passage to 
imply merely that the supreme pervades both 
substance and space, being infinitely vast, and 
without limit. "Having a thousand heads’ ete. 
denotes only infinite extension : and the ‘ten inches 
beyond the contact of the universe’ expresses 
merely non-restriction by its boundaries. 
QE sasaad: Bay HANTS TETAS 
cela Fraieetrary feera sfc 

3. Explained severally the Brahmanda, or 
material universe; Brahma. the creator : Manu. the 
ruler of the period; and supreme or presiding spirit 


80 


4. So the inscription upon the temple of Sais : 
Ey® apt mav to ysyov&, Kal KOI OV, Ka 
eoopEevov. So the Orphic verse, thed by Eusebius, 
beginning Ev de deuag Baoidsiov w ow tade 
NAVTA KVAEITAL, K, t. A. One regal body in which 
all things are comprehended (viz, Virat). fire. and 
water, and earth, and air, and night, and day. and 
Intelligence (viz. Mahat) the first generator, and 
divine love; for all these does Jupiter include in his 
expansive form.’ It proceeds also. precisely in the 
Pauranic strain, to describe the members of this 
universal form : the heaven in his head, the stars his 
hair, the sun and moon his eyes, etc. 

5. A piece of natural history quite correct as 
applied to the front teeth which in the genus ox 
occur in the lower jaw only. 

6. This is also conformable to the doctrine, that 
the rudiments of plants exist in their cotyledons. 

7. In life. or living beings, perception depends 
not. according to Hindu metaphysics, upon the 
external senses, but the impressions made upon 
them are communicated to the mental organ or 
sense, and by the mind _ to _ the 
understanding-—-Samvid (#faa ) in the text—by 
which they are distinguished as _ pleasurable, 
painful, or mixed. But pleasurc depends upon the 
quality of goodness, pain on that of darkness, and 
their mixture on that of foulness, inherent in the 
understanding. properties. belonging to Jiveswara. 
or god. as one with life, or to embodied spirit. but 
not as Parameswara. or supreme spirit. 

8. The station or sphere is that of the north pole. 
or of the polar star. In the former case, the star is 
considered to be Suniti, the mother of Dhruva. The 
legend, although as it is related in our text it differs 
in its circumstances from the story told by Ovid of 
Callisto and her son Arcas, whom Jove 

Imposuit Caelo vicinaque sidera fccit, 

sugggcsts some suspicion of an original identity. 
In ncither of the authorities’ have we, perhaps, the 
primitive fable. [t is evident from the quotation that 
presently follows in the text, of a stanza by Usanas, 
that the Purana has not the oldest version of the 
legend; and Ovid's representation of it is after a 
fashion of his own: all that has been retained of the 
original is the conformity of the chracters and of 
the main Incident, the translation of a mother and 
her son to the heavens as constellations, in which 
the polc-star is the most conspicuous luminary. 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


9. The Vaimanika devas. the deities who travel 
in Vimanas. ‘heavenly car,’ or rather 'moving 
spheres.’ 

10. The text says merely Qe? qqati the 
commentator says. ‘perhaps formerly so called; 
Yeaaa atl We have already remarked that some 
Puranas so denominate her. 

1-1 The legend of Dhruva is narrated in the 
Bhagavata, Padma (Swarga Khanda), Agni. and 
Naradiya, much to the same purport, and partly in 
the same words, as our text. The Brahma and its 
double the Hari Varmsa, the Matsya. and Vayu 
merely allude to Dhruva's having been transferred 
by Brahm to the skies, in reward of his austerities. 
The story of his religious penance, and adoration of 
Visnu, seems to be an embellishment interpolated 
by the Vaisnava Puranas. Dhruva being adopted as 
a Saint by their sect. The allusion to Sarta in our 
text concurs with the form of the story as it appears 
elsewhere, to indicate the priority of the more 
simple legend. 

kkk 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


CHAPTER 13 
WASPS: 
(Qura- WaT!) 
WIS Sa 

qawats way wae 
FOOT YSTA WS YARACATI 2 
fy fgart fat gat gan 
frost Feat Vays WaT AAN 2 
shined Ueaftua arevat areal ATA 
WANT WTA 11 3 
TARA BR ARTA AST: | 
HAA WaT Me ATA WaTTA: 1 ¥ 1 
HS: TS: Vaal Aa afer: 
arapaishraas GIAa t Aa GU 
SIA Seay Agea Wea: 
SUBRL TAL FST WSTTATH GH 
SET FAtaaes FY AUTH AATATI 9 It 


BOOK I, CHAP. 13 


WaT TTA, ACT 

Aorey OUT Ufa Mays WTA ¢ 
quar art wdtare a: ya: afta: 
Ot FAT Het Ya wort farenreata ¢ it 


Parasara continued— The sons of Dhruva, 
by his wife Sambhu, were Bhavya and Slisti. 
Succhaya, the wife of the latter, was the 
mother of five virtuous sons, Ripu, Ripnnjaya, 
Vipra, Vrkala, and Vrkatejas. The son of Ripu, 
by Vrhati. was the illustrious Caksusa, who 
begot the Manu Caksusa on Puskarini, of the 
family of Varuna, the daughter of the 
venerable patriarch Anaranya. The Manu had, 
by his wife Navala, the daughter of the 
patriarch Vairaja. ten noble sons, Uru. Puru. 
Satadyumna, Tapasvi, Satyavak, Kavi. Agnist 
oma, Atiracra, Sudyumna, and Abhimanyu. 
'You wife of Uru, Agneyi, bore six excellent 
sons, Anga, Sumanas, Swati, Kratu. Angiras, 
and Siva. Anga had, by his wife Sunitha, only 
one son, named Vena, whose right arm was 
rubbed by -the Rsis, for the purpose of pro- 
ducing from it progeny. From the arm of 
Vena, thus rubbed, sprang a_ celebrated 
monarch, named Prthu, by whom, in olden 
timc, the earth was milked for the advantage 
of mankind’. 


Waa sare 
fang ufo: witraore utenti: | 
aa UH Weraral: B YUP: 1 Qo ll 
Maitreya.—Best of Munis, tell me why was 
the right hand of Vena rubbed by the holy 


sages, in consequence of which the heroic 
Prthu was produced. 


WR Jara 
QAM AT A HA BR: WTA sa 
SIFT Val A AT Tea TOM SATA Va 
A MATS AT BRAN: FATT: 
frani¢a Wa Se Ue STATI 221 
atfafaral Fal West Bao: WIAA: | 
MAA Baer ufseat viata: eH 


81 


qT Upet 4 elded A aed Herel 

Vea AAA HAM Te BATT: WY: Vv 

TARTAN: Ya OST TATaT AL 

HY: Aaa WaS Bas ayaa 4 

Parasara said— Sunitha was originally the 
daughter of Mrtyu, by whom she was given to 
Anga to wife. She bore him Vena, who 
inherited the evil propensities of his matcrnal 
grandfather. Whcn he was inaugurated by the 
Rsis monarch of the earth, he caused it to be 
every where proclaimed, that no worship 
should be performed, no oblations offered, no 
gifts bestowed upon the Brahmanas. “I, the 
king,” said he, " am the lord of sacrificc; for 
who but I am entitled to the oblations.” The Rs 
is, respectfully approaching the sovereign, 
addressed him in melodious accents, and said, 


RAT Sd: 

TW AW WY JUS SI Ae aaa WN 

Teeter wars fad wT 2g I 

safer Bast wdavat eit 

qafeeara ag a Tear Taran 11 

aad Gage st: wana Fo 

sTeniad: AMA Waa wareafan cit 

THAT IAT TS ASAT BT 

wat Wahearrante sare JT TAT V8 

Rsis replied— “Gracious prince, we salute 
you; hear what we have to represent. For the 
preservation of your kingdom and your life, 
and for the benefit of all your subjects, permit 
us to worship Hari, the lord of all sacrifice, the 
god of gods, with solemn and protracted rites’: 
a portion of the fruit of which will revert to 
you. Visnu, the god of oblations, being 
propitiated with sacrifice by us, will grant you, 
oh king, all your desires. Those princes have 
alf their wishes gratified, in whose realms 


Hari, the lord of sacrifice, is adored with 
sacrificial rites.” 


ant sara 
Tet: HSAs =AS het BATT WAIT: | 


82 


THE! VISNU-PURANAM 





aise afc warat Sse BVA AAI Voll 
wen Watet: yrsyfeR argeay za: 

SNP Too are yet aha reeAT: 1 2 en 
Ud Ut a a ea: WAT ASAU TTT : | 

TIAA VAT: PASAT FA VII 
Wasa Wales Aaa Epaat qa 

ated 4 elated 3 agers at feat R31 
AFMTTT Ta AAT GATT UA Ae: 

Ta aers eat Waar aa FRAT: AVI 


Vena said~ "Who” is superior. to me? who 
besides me is entitled to worship? who is this 
Hari, whom you style the lord of sacrifice? 
Brahma, Jandrddana, Sambhu, Indra, Vayu, 
Yama, Ravi (the sun), Hutabhuk (fire), 
Varuna, Dhaté, Pasha (thc sun), Bhtmi 
(earth), the lord of night (the moon); all these, 
and whatever other gods there be who listen to 
our vows; all these are present in the persent 
of a king: the essence of a sovereign is all that 
is divine. Conscious of this. I have issued my 
commands, and look due you obey them. You 
are not te sacrifice, not to offer oblations, not 
to give alms. As the first duty of women is 


obedience to their lords, so observance of my > 


orders is incumbent, holy men, on you.” 
RAT HT: 

SAAR ASAT UT eat ary Pavey 

Saat ufonaise aetefaet FATT V4 I 

Rsis replied— “Give command, great king” 
that piety may suffer no decrease. All this 
world," is but a transmutation of oblations; 


and if devotion be suppressed, the world is at 
an end. 


QUIT Saray 
sfa fagrermraiste a aur: weafetr:: 
Sel Self AryAT Wes: We: FA: FA EI 
ParaSara said : “But Vena was entreated in 
vain; and although this request was repeated 


by the sages, he refused to give the order they 
suggested, 


aay FAT: Wa Bras: | 

Saat FAA WT STG WTAATTI 29K! 

TD waged tarnfereat wT 
farreraernarendy Ta Arar yet: WAT Ve 
Sa Haye: Hes PrToT TTA 
fraeghted ge arafererrfeat 2 8 tt 


Then those pious Munis were filled with 
wrath, and cried out to each Other, “Let this 
wicked wretch be slain. The impious man who 
has reviled the god of sacrifice who is without 
beginning or end, is not fit to reign over the 
earth,” And they fell upon the king, and beat 
him with blades of holy grass, consecrated by 
prayer, and slew him, who had first been 
destroyed by his impiety towards god, 

aay BAM: Loy zey: wad fen 
fatafefa aradt wee Tt AAT Zo 
TETAS WAR VASTATTTS 

US J MH WATE Tt: 3 
Aaryaalaa Aeon APT AAT: | 

Geer evaa Woy: arfearTarfToN 3 VA 
ad: Maas Tt Ue BARAT YT: 
AAG YATE ATT 1 3 3! 
Tea Wyre aa: Fea: few 
SIROTA HM: ACTS HAS aAR : It 3 Vit 
fer aif ar walt fay we wacaa: | 
Friefa apet Fareert Aswad 34 1 
areal stat faxagrethantar: | 

Frarar yPryrget arrears reeroTT: 11 3 & A 

WT Bor a Ue Frenred aes Ua: 
FraTerat Aet Wat AOAC TAT LAT: 11 3 9 
aatsea aferat eat MEA ot fe: 
TAA Bt AA YAAVA: KATALIN 3 2 I 
Tat: TAG Tera Tay! 

Afterwards the Munis beheld a great dust 
arise, and they said to the people who were 
nigh, "What is this? and the people answered 


and said, “Now that the kingdom is without a 
king, the dishonest men have begun to seize 


BOOK I, CHAP. 13 


83 





the property of their neighbours. The great 
dust that you behold, excellent Munis, is 
raised by troops of clustering robbers, 
hastening to fall upon their prey.” The sages, 
hearing this, consulted, and together rubbed 
the thigh of the king, who had left no 
offspring, to produce a son. From the thigh, 
thus nibbled, came forth a being of the 
complexion of a charred stake, with flattened 
features (like a Negro), and of dwarfish 
statute. “What am | to do?” cried he eagerly to 
the Munis, "Sit down" (Nishida), said they; 
and thence his name was Nishada. His 
descendants, the inhabitants of the Vindhya 
mountain, great Muni. are still called Nis 
hadas. and are characterized by the exterior 
tokens of depravity’. By this means the 
wickedness of Vena was expelled; those 
Nisadas being born of his sins, and carrying 
them away. The Brahmanas then proceeded to 
rub the right arm of the king, from which 
friction was engendered the illustrious son of 
Vena, named Prthu, resplendent in person, as 
it the blazing deity of Fire had been 
manifested. 


SANTIS ATT TAT TUT Aa YZ 3 VN 
wey feat AA: HATS TUT FI 

arery Ma | Wath MEET AAT: Ko 
aga w aa aust fates aah 
Yar ACH ATT: AA YASIAAMI YU 
a Uy Aa Trees WaT: | 

area Maes arrararaa eae & 2 Mh 
fares wary sass: Te 
waren a erht Stra a AAT NY aN 
SanTey Ter doaeatagyy werferay 

eet F can wa apt cer ferme x 
famirigt ya wear uftard ot aah 
fafa at a wast aRaRATT GI 
TATA We wiraferesa 


There then fell from the sky the primitive 
bow (of Mahadeva) named Ajagava. and 
celestial arrows, and panoply from heaven. At 


the birth of Prthu all living creatures rejoiced; 
and Vena, delivered by his being born from 
the hell named Put, ascended to the realms 
above. The seas and rivers, bringing Jewels 
from their depths, and water to perform the 
ablutions of his installation, appeared. The 
great parent of all, Brahma, with the gods and 
the descendants of Angiras (the fires), and 
with all things animate or inanimate, 
assembled and performed the ceremony of 
consecrating the son of Vena. Beholding in his 
right hand the (mark of the) discus of Visnu, 
Brahma recognised a portion of that divinity in 
Prthu, and was much pleased; for the mark of 
Visnu's discus is visible in the hand of one 
who is born to be a universal emperor’, one 
whose power is invincible even by the gods. 


TSA TAT FYSUS: WATTATN ¥ GI 
asta were fafaagdanfae: 

POAT CATR TATRA TSA: 11 9 
STU AAAS AT TTT 

SUTRA TAY UTED ARATE: 1 S I 
Tad ear aeigey ANAM 

spate Ulsal fagarcrants facta ¥ ei 
TaaTASa Wa: Ges yes agi 

Tea A ATA AR TaATAS FAI of 
Fa: Beat aya: Bese wera: | 
ANA STAN Tg WANS ATT: 1G 21 
areal der yPratengut yaar 

wear zara: ya: warqarqns V1 
ByETeG at Ut wae ae 
AACRNTUG aM Waa HAAS & 3 

ST HTT AY GH TAS eA STA: | 

WON Fare Weed FT ATT what AT: 
Mia fanaa arerenrecrarq & Xu 


The mighty Prthu, the son of Vena, being 
thus invested with universal dominion by 
those who were skilled in the rite, soon 
removed the grievances of the people whom 
his father had oppressed, and from winning 


84 


their affections he derived the tide of Raja or 
king’. The waters became solid, when he 
traversed the ocean: the mountains opened him 
a path; his banner passed unbroken (through 
the-forests): the earth needed not cultivation; 
and at a thought food was prepared: all kine 
were like the cow of plenty: honey was stored 
in every Bower, At the sacrifice of the birth of 
Prthu, which was performed by Brahma, the 
intelligent Sita therald or bard) was produced, 
in the juice of the monoplant, on the very 
birth-day’: at that great sacrifice also was 
produced the accomplished Magadha: and the 
holy sages said to these two persons, "Praise 
ye the king Prthu, the illustrious son of Vena; 
for this is your especial function, and here is a 
fit subject for your praise.” But they 
respectfully replied to the Brahmanas. “We 
know not the acts of the new-born king of the 
earth; his merits are not understood by us; his 
fame is not spread abroad: inform us upon 
what subject we may dilate in his praise.” 


RIT HT: 
afeaers aq ad anadt wera: | 
Ton afsen fare as WTA FTG GH 


“Praise the king.” said the Rsis, “for the 
acts this heroic monarch will perform; praise 
him for the virtues he will display.” 


UUNT Save 
aa: B Fares THAT We zh 
RET; VATAATA TINA TUT ATG 
TATE ACT TAIT YUTraars feran 
aftard aftenty wears AefET: 1 4 9 
ufent atten fafsex aferrt:| 
deg anifeaminiage aft FUNG ci 
ae at Ug: ws yaresoaer stra: 
afael: wate: aaa Wad Gear & en 


ParéSara said— The king, hearing these 
words, was much pleased, and reflected that 
persons acquire commendation by virtuous 
actions, and that consequently his virtuous 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


conduct would be the theme of the eulogium 
which the bards were about to pronounce: 
whatever merits, then, they should panegyrize 
in their encomium, he determined that he 
would endeavour to acquire; and if they should 
point out what faults; ought to be avoided, he 
would try to shun them. He therefore listened 
attentively, as the sweet-voiced encomiasts 
eelebrated the future virtues of Prthu, the 
enlightened son of Vena. 


AIAN] SMA sas WITT ALIT: | 

Gray Ba: araryiey fara SERA G oN 
quay FARA Saar eases: | 
WIAA Gal TATA: ATAATT: 11 & QI 
Wa: vat a faa a caaet feat Ta: 


The king is a speaker of truth, bounteous, 
an observer of His promises; he is wise, 
benevolent, patient, valiant, and a terror to the 
wicked; he knows his duties; he acknowledges 
services; he is compassionate and kind- 
spoken; he respects the venerable; he performs 
sacrifices; he reverences the Brahmans; he 
cherishes the good; and in administering 
justice is indifferent to friend or foe. 


Aeakat YON A aa AP BN Vi 
war efe agR a don Hara 

aa: BT Uralarer: Urea AQAA & 311 
gar fafeekistefayhefert: | 

a war: yedtarerquey: agenfear:11& vit 
sreey WOE Aiea wey ETA 


TR A: FERAATATHTTOTAT & & II 

The virtues thus celebrated by the Sta and 
the Magadha were cherished in the 
remembrance of the Raja, and practised by 
him when occasion arose. Protecting this 
earth, the monarch performed many great 
sacrificial ceremonies, accompanied by liberal 
donations. His subjeets soon approached him, 
suffering from the famine by which they were 
afflicted, as all the edible plants had perished 
during the season of anarchy. In reply to his 
question of the cause of their coming, they 


BOOK I, CHAP. 13 


85 





told him, that in the interval in which the earth 
was without a king all vegerable products had 
been withheld, and that consequently the 
people had perished. 


TH Sd: 

sine WIS afar wate: | 

Meee: at aT WaT: Tat: WHITE GI 

we at afmel erat weroret Frafter: | 

fe a: gerdart waar srareet-11 § oil 

They said— “O king, you are the bestower 

of subsistence to us; you are appointed, by the 
creator, the protector of the people: grant us 


vegetables, the support of the lives of your 
subjects, who are perishing with hunger.” 


TUT Sate 
aise Fosters I: | 
wig fear afta: Asaag TFTA G CI 
Aa FATT Tata TAT | THT 
A AA TANT MATA TATE & 8 I 
aa Ga Tal at MT Tar yeNATUT 


aa AA T AT Aad eaveyeraraerqin 9 o lI 

TARA MS TY YY VFTTHAT 

WAUATOT ARIOTAPTATOTa TAVITA 19 I 

On hearing this, Prthu took up his divine 
bow Ajagava, and his celestial arrows, and in 
great wrath marched forth to assail the Earth. 
Earth, assuming the figure of a cow, fled 
hastily from him, and traversed, through fear 
of the king, the regions of Brahma and the 
heavenly spheres; but wherever went the 
supporter of living things, there she beheld 
Vainya with uplifted weapons: at last, 
trembling with terror, and anxious to escape 
his arrows, the Earth addressed Prthu, the hero 
of resistless prowess. 


yfeoqara 
witae tS weraTd fea Aes AT Uae 
Sr A SPA Weeks FATA 9 2M 


The Earth said~ “Know you not, king of 
men,” the sin of killing a female, that you thus 
perseveringly seek to slay me." 


Weary 
watery ua Pert wifi seartefon 


Seat wafer at aeT quanal aa: ii 3il 


Prthu replied: "When the happiness of 
many is sccured by the destruction of one 
malignant being, the death of that being is an 
act of virtue." 


yfreqara 
warren ae wt a ehreatra 
TI: S: Wt 8 Fweas afaerrn xvi 


The Earth said “But, if in order to promote 
the welfare of your subjects, you put an end to 
me, whence, best of monarchs, will your 
people derive their support" 


qytara 
@ geal age aheorarateyay| 
AATATACTAT STATA WT: 11194 I 


“Disobedient to my rule,” rejoined Prthu, 
“at I destroy you, I will support my people by 
the efficacy of my own devotions.” 


WUT Sata 


at: MONEY ager df Ya: we Ufa 

Waa ST UT AAT MAUI VE Ii 
gfaeqara 

SUA: WATE; VS FEAT: | 

qene serge F aq Heer asa vi! 

ATA Tar SOT ATT ARteElt: | 

aerate werent ar: aitcaftontaat: 19211 

Ta Wefeaats aa ehyat az 

dg aed wees et arta a4 area ei 

WS He WaT Ar ate BAA: 

ated any at Was wae 6 ol 


Then the Earth overcome with 
apprehension, and trembling in every limb, 


86 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


respectfully saluted the king, and thus spoke: milked the Earth, and received the milk into 
“All undertakings are successful, if suitable his own hand, for the benefit of mankind. 


means of effecting them are employed. I will 
impart to you means of success, which you can 
make use of if you please. Ail vegetable 
produces are old, and destroyed by me; but at 
your command I will restore them, as 
developed from my milk. Do you therefore, 
for the benefit of mankind, most virtuous of 
princes, give me that calf, by which I may be 
able to secrete milk. Make also all places 
level, so that I may cause my milk, the seed of 
all vegetation, to flow every where around.’ 


UU Sars 


Aa SAAT PCTS AT: | 
SPASM Tay Auaeda: Yet fatwa: i VW 
a fe yafaat a fant gfadiaen 

WIT: GUAT AT ATTA AT TSTAATN ¢ Vs 
a wreaht a Wet a afet aftraca: | 
Avaya WIA WARAT ATA 3A 


aa aA UA TET TAT: 

wa aa wat fe Fart watered c vil 
WEN: wegen WATT TAT 
SPU Use Uist warsreatedty suc 
aw Heusen acs F WA aya WY: 

wi wont yfadiaet gate ofa yascan 


Prthu accordingly uprooted the mountains, 
by hundreds and thousands, for myriads of 
leagues, and they were thenceforth piled upon 
one another. Before his time there were no 
defined boundarics of villages or towns, upon 
the irregular surface of the earth; there was no 
cultivation, no pasture, no agriculture, no 
highway for merchants: all these things (or all 
civilization) originated in the reign of Prthu. 
Where the ground was made level, the king 
induced his subjects to take up their abode. 
Before his time, also, the fruits and roots 
which constituted the food of the people were 
procured with great difficulty, all vegetables 
having been destroyed; and he therefore, 
having made Swayambhuva Manu the calf’ 


wear wafer waar fear 

AATAT Waa ase Frere: cit 

Woe  yysere wat fran 

TA i saolieabigs CoN 

Tree erttelay ; ae c@n 

A AL WAQUEs Aa AE SMT YT Tas 

araareafagreney Vat ASNAATS TAI @ oll 

Thence proceeded all kinds of corn and 

vegetables upon which people subsist now and 
perpetually. By granting life to the Earth. 
Prthu was as her father, and she thence derived 
the patronymic appellation Prthivi (the 
daughter of Prthu). Then the gods. the sages, 
the demons, the Raksasas, the Gandharbhas, 
Yaksus, Pitris, serpents, mountains, and trees, 
took a milking vessel suited to their kind. and 
milked the earth of appropriate milk, and the 
milker and the calf were both peculiar to their 
own species’, 


aa art faa a enfron utfeurt wen 


MAT Ha: Guat FenparateexaTi 8 
Ua Wa: B VY: Yar Aor ada 
Ta Weft: Yat WAAL 8 21 
a Se WH Boge wa: Baa AT 
TAS Sa faiSq eet waraa s 31 
Satay Ft yuaat dagTTAI 
FAA WET aati Bad FMA 8 ¥I 
sa sttfaergarat wermigt waleyiseara: | 
This Earth, the mother, the nurse, the 
receptacle, and nourisher of all existent things, 
was produced from the sole of the foot of 
Visnu. And thus was born the mighty Prthu. 
the heroic son of Vena, who was the lord of 
the earth, and who, from conciliating the 
affections of the people, was the first ruler to 
whom the title of Raja was ascribed. Whoever 


shall recite this story of the birth of Prthu. the 
son of Vena, shall never suffer any retribution 


BOOK I, CHAP. 13 


87 





for the evil he may have committed: and such 
is the virtue of the tale of Prthu's birth , that 
those who hear it repeated shall be relieved 
from affliction’”. 


NOTES 


1. The descent of Prthu from Dhruva is similarly 
traced in the Matsya Purana, but with some variety 
of nomenclature : thus the wife of Dhruva is named 
Dhanya; and the eldest son of the Manu, Taru. The 
Vayu introduces another generation, making the 
eldest son of Slisti, or as there termed Pusti. father 
of Udaradhi; and the latter the father of Ripu, the 
father of Caksusa, the father of the Manu. The 
Bhagavata has an almost entirely different set of 
names, having converted the family of Dhruva into 
personifications of divisions of time and of day and 
night The account there given is, Dhruva mad. by 
his wife Bhrami (revolving), the daughter of 
Sisumara (the sphere), Kalpa and Vatsara. The 
latter married Suvithi. and had six sons. Pushparna, 
Tigmaketu, Isha, Urjja, Vasu and Jaya. The first 
married Prabha and Doaha. and had by the formcr, 
Pratah (dawn), Madhyadina (moon), and Saya 
(evening); and by the latter, Pradosha, Nisitha, and 
Vyusta. or the beginning, middle, and end of night. 
The fast has, by Puskarini. Caksusa. mar, ried to 
Akuti. and the father of Chaksusha Manu. He has 
twelve sons Puru, Kritsna, Rita, Dyumna, Satyavat, 
Dhrita, Vrata. Agnistoma Atiratra, Pradyumna. 
Sivi, and Ulmuka. The last is the farther of six sons, 
named as in our text, except the last. who is called 
Gaya. The eldest, Anga, is the father of Vena. the 
father of Prthu. These additions are evidently the 
creatures of the author's imagination. The Brahma 
Purdna and Hari Vamsa have the same genealogy 
as the Visnu, reading, as do the Matsya and Vayu, 
Pushkarini or Vdarani. the daughter of Virana, 
instead of Varuna. They, as well as copies of the 
text, present several other varieties of 
nomenclature. The Padma Purana (Bhimi Khanda) 
says Anga was of the family of Atn, in allusion 
perhaps to the circumstance mentioned in the 
Brahma Purana of Unioapida's adoption by that 
Rsi. 

2, With the Dirgbasaira, ‘long sacrifice;' a 
ceremony lasting a thousand years. 


3. That is, the land will be fertile in proportion as 
the gods are propitiated, and the king will benefit 
accordingly, as a sixth part of the merit and of the 
produce will be his. So the commentator explains 
the word ‘portion:' 3131; S8Y AT: | 

4. The Matsya says there were born outcast or 
barbarous races, Mlecchas (TeSs1a4:) as black as 
collyrium. The Bhagavata describes an individual 
of dwarfish stature, with short arms and legs, of a 
complexion as black as a crow, with projecting 
chin, broad flat nose, red eyes, and tawny hair; 
whose descendants were mountaineers and 
foresters : fift#ramirert: | The Padma (Bhu. Kb.) has 
a similar description, adding to the dwarfish stature 
and black complexion, a wide mouth, large ears, 
and a protuberant belly. It also particularizes his 
posterity as Nishadas, Kirdtas, Bhillas. Bahanakas, 
Bhramaras, Pulindas, and other barbarians, or 
Miecchas, living in woods and on mountains. These 
passages intend, and do not much exaggerate, the 
uncouth apperance of the Goands, Koles, Bhils, and 
other uocivilized tribes, scattered along the forests 
and mountains of central India, from Behar to 
Kandesh, and who are not improbably the 
predecessors of the present occupants of the 
cultivated portions of the country. They are always 
very black, ill-shapen, and dwarfish, and have 
countenances of a very African character. 

5. A Cakravartti, or, according to the text. one in 
whom the Cakra, the discus of Visnu, abides 
(varttate); such a figure being delineated by the 
lines of the hand. The grammatical etymology is, 
‘he who abides in, or rules over, an extensive 
territory called a Cakra.' 

6. From raga (%"),'passion' or ‘affection;' but the 
more obvious etymology is raj (1 ), to shine’ or 
“be splendid. 

7. The birth of Prthu is to be considered as the 
sacrifice, of which Brahma, the creator, was the 
performer; but in other places, as in the Padma, it 1s 
considered that an actual sacrificial rite was 
celebrated, at which the first encomiasts were 
produced. The Bhigavata does not account for their 
appearance. 

8. ‘Having willed or determined the Manu 
Swayambhuva to be the calf; vaca amd gq 
TIGA! So the Padma Purina : ai Tem: vated 
aq tara Jed ORR YA: YA: ! The Bhagavata has 
‘acd Heat AY! Having made the Manu the calf.’ By 


88 


the ‘calf,’ or Manu in that character, is typified, the 
commentator observes, the promoter of the 
multiplication of progeny : WTAAAIaATS: | 

9. The Matsya, Brahma, Bhagavata, and Padma 
enter into a greater detail of this milking, specifying 
typically the calf, the milker, the milk, and the 
vessel. Thus, according to the Matsya, the Rsis 
milked the earth through Vrhaspati; their calf was 
Soma; the Vedas were the vessel; and the milk was 
devotion. When the gods milked the earth, the 
milker was Mitra (the sun); Indra was the calf: 
superhuman power was the produce. The gods had 
a gold, the Pitrs a silver vessel : and for the latter, 
the milker was Antaka (death); Yama was the calf; 
the milk was Swadha, or oblation. The Naga, or 
snake-gods, had a gourd for their pail; their calf 
was Taksaka; Dhritarastra (the serpent) was their 
milker; and their milk was poison. For the Asuras, 
Maya was the milk; Virocana, the son of Prahlada, 
was the calf; the milker was Dwimurddha; and the 
vessel was of iron. The Yaksus made Vaisravana 
their calf; their vessel was of unbaked earth, the 
milk was the power of disappearing. The Raksasas 
and others employed Raupyanabha as the milker : 
their calf was Sumali: and their milk was blood. 
Citraratha was the calf, Vasuruci the milker, of the 
Gandharvas and nymphs, who milked fragrant 
odours into a cup of lotus leaves. On behalf of the 
mountains, Meru was the milker; Himavat the calf; 
the pail was of crystal : and the milk was of herbs 
and gems. The trees extracted sap in a vessel of the 
Palisa, the Sal being the milker, and the Plaksa the 
calf. The descriptions that occur in the Bhagavata, 
Padma, and Brahma Puranas are occasionally 
slightly varied, but they are for the most part in the 
same words as that of the Matsya. These mys- 
tifications are all probably — subsequent 
modifications of the original simple allegory, which 
typified the earth as a cow, who yielded to every 
class of beings the milk they desired, or the object 
of their wishes. 

10. Another reading is ¢earart atid ‘It 
counteracts evil dreams.’ The legend of Prthu is 
briefly given in the Mahabharata. Raja Dharma, 
and occurs.in most of the Puranas, but in greatest 
detail in our text, in the Bhagavata, and especially 


in the Padma, Bhumi Khanda. s. 29, 30. All the | 


versions, however, are essentially the same. 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


88 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


CHAPTER 14 


TENSE: 

(Wadat a:) 
at: Yat weratal siges-afecutferh 
fretted efaghatarre Sarre en 
east verre feos Gar 
wreaatad Ysa meat Pet genie V1 
mearatetrary verre werate: | 
Share at Wafega WT: 3 
WAT: Breas Years FA 
Wrearaerary Tad Yfa Weraet: 1X 
agarrarat F Atay Aaah: | 
WSARTT: UL Maa WATT 1G 
MaMlent VAS AT wretraiea: | 
Aa VATA AT ASSET UTA GI 
AYMAN SATA ASAT: | 
SALAS AYALA: 11 9 It 


Prthu had two valiant sons, Antarddhi and 
Pali. The son of An-tarddhana.' by his wife 
Sikhandini, was  MHavirdhana,to whom 
Dhishana, a princess of the race of Agni, bore 
six sons, Prichinaverhis, Sukra. Gaya, Krsna, 
Vraja. and Ajina’. The first of these was a 
mighty prince and patriarch, by whom 
mankind was multiplied after the death of 
Havirdhéna. He was called Prachinaverhis 
from his placing upon the earth the sacred 
grass, pointing to the east’. At the termination 
of a rigid penance he married Savarna, the 
daughter of the ocean, who had _ been 
previously betrothed to him, and who had by 
the king ten sons, who were all styled 
Pracetasas, and were skilled in military 
science: they all observed the same duties, 
practised religious austerities, and remained 
immersed in the bed of the sea for ten 
thousand years. 


aaa sara 
qed F WERE 


BOOK I, CHAP. 14 


WATT: AYA Aa ol 


Maitreya said—You can inform me, great 
sage, why the magnanimous Pracetasas 
engaged in penance in the waters of the sea. 


UUM Sara 

foar sera: wreat wanet afr 

WaT ACAAGT: ATTN 8 Il 
Wreitrafewara 

Tao Sacay WAEpIseIs Ya: 

WA: WaASAA HAT Ure AAT ATI Voll 

ware Wad Yat: wergfagaatset:| 

HRA AANA AT: UAT A WATT: 22M 

Parasara said—-The sons of Pr&cinaverhis 
were originally informed by their father, who 
had been appointed as a patriarch, and whose 
mind was intent on multiplying mankind, that 
he had been respectfully enjoined by Brahma, 
the god of gods, to labour to this end, and that 
he had promised obedience : “now therefore,” 
continued he. “do you, my sons, to oblige me, 
diligently promote the increase of the people, 


for the orders of the father of all creatures are 
entitled to respect.” 


aaa ay: Mea Aa FTAA: 

waRyaea Ft TA: UMER: Mat Fn ean 
WIAA Hy: 

at Wa Wag wnat: Hato aay 


VAM UNE A: HA SITS MNaAN V3 


The sons of the king, having heard their 
father's words, replied, "So be it; but they 
then inquired of him, as he could best explain 
it, by what means they might accomplish the 
augmentation of mankind. 


faararer 
aaa area Wet: frre Hera as evn 
rend wnfageaet way eft 
stead Mears ate Faeroe eu tt 


89 


qeqngsy ama Wernaaat Wen 

SITE WTA] BHT: Weary: 1 8g I 

afemrafad af aerrel sarafa:| 

aang she: waar at afacafan von 

He said to them: "Whoever worships 
Visnu, the bestower of good, attains 
undoubtedly the object of his desires: there is 
no other mode. What Further can I tell you ? 
Adore therefore Govinda, who is Hari. the lord 
of all beings, in order to effect the increase of 
the human race, if you wish to succeed. The 
eternal Purusottama is to be propitiated by him 
who wishes for virtue, wealth, enjoyment or 
liberation. Adore him, the imperishable, by 
whom. when propitiated, the world was first 
created, and mankind will assuredly be 
multiplied.” 


OUT Sara 


seaqmred fiat yar werray ay 

aT: Tealferaterey aaAg: WArfATH Ve I 
Sara Aare TTT 

an Fats weaetrHarreyn 28 

aaa a Rae caterer ety 

Teas a: BI SNgREry werssfan on 


ParaSara said— Thus instructed by their 
father, the ten Pracetasas plunged into the 
depths of the ocean, and with minds wholly 
devoted to Narayana, the sovereign of the 
universe, who is beyond all worlds, were 
engrossed by religious .austerity for ten 
thousand years: remaining there, they with 
fixed thoughts praised Hari, who. when 
propitiated, confers on those who praise him 
all that they. desire. 


AAT Bara 
wa wear faut: aggrerta dfear:| 
SPAT yrs qyvt aya 2 aM 


Maitreya said—The excellent praises that 
the Pracetasas addressed to Visnu, whilst they 
stood in the deep, you, oh best of Munis, are 
qualified to repeat to me. 


90 


WUT Sate 
yy Aaa ward ger yes wera: 
CSTR: MARAT 


ParaSara said— Hear, Maitreya, the hymn 
which the Pracetasas, as they stood in the 
waters of the sea, sang of old to Govinda, their 
nature being identified with him : 


Waa By: 
Wa: Tt Wdaaai wiagr aa srw 
Aaa TANT HTT: UT MTT 2 Bt 
Sa fae ATTA 
ATA WATT ATT AN VE 
Tae: WN BaTENTeA aay Fry 
AT TUT TS ATCA TAN VU It 
qeaasafed ea: fagiter gearera:| 
TAT: ATT TST ATT TT VEU 
ae sit dara wan aeary A: | 
atenarsrat aera Galery TA VON 
aifearar at fant aredegrad: | 
Vrearaera Sart TAY PATA AT VS Il 
AT Bat at ay Aare hear 
A MARTA TATA BATA VS 
a YS Wear saySH HOTNYH TM 
Fagus Arete Fars WaT 3 oI 
Taeaaat Fe aret Heads Prory 
STATA TAT AKA ASAT AA 3 it 
TARTANA YA I: Wee 
STARA ETA ATTA TAS 2M 
WARARS A: Hal WATT! 

Pracetasas said~ "We bow to him whose 
glory is the perpetual theme of every speech; 
him first, him last; the supreme lord of the 
boundless world; who is primeval light: who is 
without his like; indivisible and infinite; the 
origin of all existent things, moveable or 
stationary. To that supreme being who is one 
with time, whose first forms, though he be 


without form, are day and evening and night, 
be adoration. Glory to him, the life of all 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


living things, who is the same with the moon, 
the receptacle of ambrosia, drunk daily by the 
gods and progenitors: to him who is one with 
the sun, the cause of heat and cold and rain, 
who dissipates the gloom, and illuminates the 
sky with his radiance: to him who is one with 
earth, all-pervading, and the asylum of smell 
and other objects of sense, supporting, the 
whole world by its solidity. We adore that 
form of the deity Hari which is water, the 
womb of the world, the seed of all living 
beings. Glory to the mouth of the gods, the 
eater of the Havya; to the eater of the Kavya, 
the mouth of the progenitors; to Visnu, who is 
identical with fire; to him who is one with air, 
the origin of ether, existing as the five vital 
airs in the body, causing constant vital action; 
to him who is identical with the atmosphere, 
pure, illimitable, shapeless, separating ll 
creatures. - 


Tat Mreafemars AN: Hes Aa 3 31 
Tate fara Fearne: | 
UR MATA AAT: TAY Viera 3 vit 


yeaa sre FT: weresten 

ST: TOA TRY STAY TAB G tt 

alert aanet fast wend salary 

AMAR VAIS AA: Weafeerferar 3 € 1 

We: Weed yr Yura AtsyNT: | 

AAT Sat Tat: ST FRAT 3 wt 

sifaant Ys Prot afar 

Aa: VY wet wer ae few: we way 3c 

Glory to Krsna, who is Brahma in the form 
of sesible objects, who is ever the direction of 
the faculties of sense. We offer salutadon to ' 
that supreme Hari who is one with the senses, 
both subtle and substantial, the recipient of all 
impressions, the root of all knowledge: to the 
universal soul, who, as internal intellect, 
delivers the impressions, received by the 
senses to soul: to him who has the properties 
of Prakrti; in whom, without end, rest all 
things; from whom all things proceed; and 
who is that into which all things resolve. We 


BOOK I, CHAP. 14 


91 





worship that Purusottama, the god who is pure 
spirit, and who, without qualities, is ignorantly 
Brahma, the ultimate condition of Visnu, 
unporductive, unborn, pure void of qualities, 
and free from accidents. 


OD Fes oR E CBOE Curctl 
STAT ATAU TATOTT 3 8 
STATA AI 

Stee: pect ic 
STATA SHH 


sme Sei 

SANSA TAA 

Yatat + a afery ag fae: Wet WEqN YI 

TUsraNad Taya 

Aa: TA ad ud fawnfrgreiat 4 aq Sst 

Who js neither high nor low, neither bulky 
nor minute, has neither shape, nor colour, nor 
shadow, nor substance; nor affection, nor 
body; who 1s neither etherial nor suscepible of 
cantact, smell, or taste; who has neither eyes, 
nor ears, nor motion, nor speech, nor breath, 
nor mind, nor name; nor considered as 
endowed with qualities. We adore the supreme 
race, nor enjoyment, nor splendour; who is 
without cause, without fear, without error, 
without fault, undecaying, immortal, free from 
passion, without sound, imperceptible, 
inactive, independent of place or time, 
detached from all investing properites; but 
(illusively) exercising irresistible might, and 
indentified with all beings, dependent upon 
none. Glory to the nature of Visnu which 
tongue can not tell, nor has eye behelf.” 


WIT Savy 
Wet ele feqeay TART ATATERT: | 
aMadaeeaiur ASSIA & It 
Wa: Waal Waa BET: 
aah apiryfastietrererecres ea: 1S I 
UAaATAASAA aT WAT: | 
wiforag: ferafired uftarerernfrt: ng i 
aaeae wary feraaraicaay az: 


Waegyalsé a are: agate: von 

AAMATTAS MOTI Were: | 

amt fiat AAee WAT GhegHIOTTI ¥ 6 II 

a ana tad ara aenfrefad ary 

SS STATE F at HASAN Ye 

fa sitfaeapgeay wersyr ageyiseaea: | 

ParaSara said— Thus glorfying Visnu and 
intent in mediation of him, the Pracetasas 
passed ten thousand years of austerity in the 
vast ocean; on which Hari, being pleased with 
them, appeared to them amidst the waters, of 
the complexion of the full-blown lotus leaf. 
Beholding him mounted on the king of birds, 
Gartida, the Pracetasas blowed down their 
heads in devout homage; when Visnu said to 
them, “Receive the boon you have desired; for 
I the giver of good, am content with you, and 
am present.” The Pracetasas replied to him 
with reverence, and told him that the cause of 
their devotions was the command of their 
father to effect the multiplication of mankind. 
The god, having accordingly granted to them 
the object of their prayers, disappered, and 
they came up from the water. 

KKK 

NOTES 

1. The text of the Vayu and Brahma (or Hari 
Varga) read. like that of the Visnu, 92: Wat aerareat 
waras=afeaifert! Mons. Langlois understands the 
two last words as compound epithet: “Se jouirent 
du pouvoir de se _ rccdrc_ invisibles.” The 
construction would admit of such a sense, but it 
seems more probable that they are intended for 
names. The lineage of Prthu is immediately 
continued through one of them, Antarddhdna, 
which is the same as Antarddhi; as the 
commentator states with regard to that appellation, 

:1and as the commentator on the Hari 

Varhnsa remarks of the succeeding name 
HASMMeM SAM! ‘one of the brothers being called 
Antarddhana or Antarddhi.’ leaves no other sense 
for Palin but that of a proper name. The Bhagavata 
gives Prthu five sons, Vijitéasva, Haryyaksa. 
Dhiimrd-kesa. Vrka, and Dravina. and adds that the 
elder was also named Antarddh4na, in consequence 


92 


of having obtained from Indra the power of making 
himself invisible ; 3-tginia Wepectea SAGA: | 

2. The Bhagavata, as usual, modifies this 
genealogy : Antarddhana has by Sikhandini three 
sons, who were the three fires. Pavaka, Pavam4na, 
and Suci. condemned by a curse of Vasistha to be 
born again: by another wife, Nabhasvati, he has 
Havirddhana, whose sons are the same as those of 
the text, only giving another name, Varhisad as 
well as Pracinaverhis to the first. According to the 
Mahabharata.(.Moksa Dharma), which has becn 
followed by the Padma Purana, Prachinavarhis was 
born in the family of Atri : afvag age wear: 
Tare: | MrarateS Tar | 

3. The text is, Wearrm: Hyer yeaa 
KuSa or varhis is properly ‘sacrificial grass' (Poa); 
and Prachinagra, literally, ‘having its tips towards 
the east; the direction in which it should be placed 
upon the ground, as a seat for the gods on occasion 
of offerings made to them_ The name therefore 
intimates, either that the practice originated with 
him, or, as the commentator explains it, that he was 
exceedingly devout, offering sacrifices or invoking 
the gods every where: Weda Gays! The Hari 
Vamsa adds a verse to that or our text reading. 
weit: «peer ofett aA) wae rary 
yferataerantten: | which Mons. Langlois has rendered, 
‘Quand il marchoil sur la terre les poinlesde cousa 
ctoient courbees vers ]' Orient;’ which he supposes 
to mean. 'Quc ce prince avail toume sea pensdes et 
porttf sa domination vers |'Qnent : a supposition 
that might have been obviated by a little further 
consideration of the verse of Manu to which he 
refers. “If he have taken his seat on culms of grass 
with their points towards the cast.” etc. The 
commentary explains the passage as above, 
referring Yftataerar: to AM not to A! as Geeat 
wee Ure: pm: wear: ya: RY Ward: 
perprsrents se da: a wredtvafe:| ‘He was 
called Prachinavarhis. because his sacred grass, 
poimting east, was going upon the very earth. or 
was spread over the whole earth.' The text of the 
Bhagavata also explains clearly what is meant: 

i feeraa:) uniead: getters aqurac 
'By whose sacred grass, pointing to the east, as be 
performed sacrifice after sacrifice, the whole earth, 
his sacrificial ground, was overspread. 
kkK Ke 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


92 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 
CHAPTER 15 


UHaoI Sea: 
(Huggrratay, Ayrrtor caret waTgfes7) 


WUT Sate 

AUIRY yal weet: gy wearer: | 

STRATA ATA SATS WHTATT: 1B 

AMEE ag Fd GATAg FA: 

aradaeentur + MRA WT: 

TS Set MEA: As HSl: WTA: 

Wan agaray assy Ta: 11 3 

FTAA AY FAM FAT AAT 

aAATeSs ATTA FAME: IS 

grermaay apr fafafesty wifes 

SUMTAGAA TaT ATA: WTA & 

ald aes Wa: YURAS Tat AA 

Tan a: afvents we fafaadreqi gi 

THA BT as aa GH azaforii 

afast arta ye War Mfaafegati ol 

Tine ara araer garronfafa fafa 

arat alseq went ga aerate ci 

AM WAST WA Uae AT: | 

sre faery cart ANT waar: 18 Mh 

TH Bis MART FATT a 

Seria wa: wer: Paagfereafen ot 

Whilst the Pracetasas were thus absorbed 

in thcir devotions, the tree spread and 
overshadowed the unprotected earth, and the 
people perished: the winds could not blow; the 
sky was shut out by the forests; and mankind 
was unable to labour for ten thousand years. 
When the sages, coming forth from the deep, 
beheld this, they were angry, and, being 
incensed, wind and flame issued from their 
mouths. The Strong wind tore up the trees by 
their roots, and leic them sear and dry. and the 


fierce fire consumed them, and the forests 
were cleared away. When Soma (the moon), 


BOOK I, CHAP. 15 


93 





the sovereign of the vegetable world, beheld 
all cxcept a few of the trees ‘destroyed, he 
went to the patriarchs, the Pracetasas, and said, 
“Restrain your indignation, princes, and listen 
to me. I will form an alliance between you and 
the trees. Prescient of futurity, I have 
nourished with my rays this precious maiden, 
the daughter of the woods. She is called 
Marisa, and is assuredly the offspring of the 
trees. She shall be your bride. and the 
multiplier of the race of Dhruva. From a 
portion of your lustre and a portion of mine, 
oh mighty sages, the patriarch Daksa shall be 
born or her, who, endowed with a part of me, 
and composed of your vigour, shall be as 
resplendent as fire, and shall multiply the 
human race. 


mugs Ait: yaaa aafaat az: 
Seer Maa A AT ToT aT Vat 
AAAS YSU Wee ATT 
WaT aeraarea ais ar wfaterarn e211 
SA: BW AA ATs AUT PTAA 
afasaragioat fara4ramarra: 1 93 It 
MW a We Wel Waltereag feaq 
WASTAGE Ta sqAt AANA evi 
wag: UT APSA: | 
feats afafeae we wirenfreraa 24 
Wage ART Us STs TA: 

aye fararecat At Ate ATTA 26 I 
sat ef way aonfe fifearera 
SHAT TAA: WhsrareTATTAT BoM 
Gata agra Utes A YS 

amitene fea wer woraterageeaTT 8S 
Shea @ Oreuye aaa 
Weraat aot ay fart caret wie A Ve 
qa Ystuit we safer FA: 

wae fared aatormatasa 2 ott 
THATS TEM Sa TAT 

Wren: MHRA TAT Waa ATTA 2 II 


fA wraware stat afaroaur a efarom 
rept worst Seat a wat BPN Ve 
Ta A TAT Hedeacehyry 

qa Fan Ta Waa: 1 31 


There was formerly (said Soma) a sage 
named Kandu, eminent in holy wisdom, who 
practised pious austerities on the lovely 
borders of the Gomati river. The king of the 
gods sent the nymph Pramlochi to disturb his 
penance, and the sweet-smiling damsel 
diverted the sage from his devotions. They 
lived together, in the valley or Mandara, for a 
hundred and fifty yean; during which, the 
mind of the Muni was wholly given up to 
enjoyment. At the expiration of this period the 
nymph requested his permission to return to 
heaven; but the Muni, still fondly attached to 
her, prevailed upon her to remain for some 
time longer; and the graceful damsel continued 
to reside for another hundred years, and 
delight the great sage by her fascinations. 
Then again she preferred her suit to be allowed 
to return to the abodes of the gods; and again 
the Muni desired her to remain. At the 
expiration of more than a century the nymph 
once more said to him, with a smiling 
countenance, ‘Brahman. I depart;' but the 
Muni, detaining the finoe-eyed damsel, 
replied, ‘Nay. stay yet a little; you will go 
hence for a long period.’ Afraid of incurring an 
imprecation, the graceful nymph continued 
with the sage for nearly cwo hundred years 
more, repeatedly asking his permission to go 
to the region of thc king of the gods, but as 
often desired by him to remain. Dreading to be 
cursed by him, and excelling in amiable 
manners,- well knowing also the pain that is 
inflicted by separation from an object of 
affection, she did not quit the Mani, whose 
mind, wholly subdued by love, became every 
day more strongly attached to her. 


Wena YF aaa Rerarteargr: | 
FATS Haft Mead we A WMT evi 
Sym: dal wre Utgare: WAI 


94 


Teal afters Hares WaT 24 1 

wat: Were Yea FAT we AeA 

fan dats Utadaeean 2611 

aeat fax aaturt aftomeeta 

Tava Hed frat HAT BAATTN Voit 

On one occasion the sage was going forth 

from their cottage in a great hurry. The nymph 
asked him where he was going. 'The day,' he 
replied, ‘is drawing fast to a close: I must 
perform the Sandhya worship, or a duty will 
be neglected.’ The nymph smiled mirthfully as 
she rejoined, 'Why do you talk, grave sir, of 
this day drawing to a close; your day is a day 
of many years, a day that must be a marvel to 
all: explain what this means:.' 


Ufreara | 

TARTAPTA AK ACTS FTL 

ae gota wate wearer A AATAAI 2c 

ae add Gea Ufonaaeta 

Suara: fanaist wala: Heat TMI 

The Muni said, ‘Fair damsel, you came to 
the river-side at dawn; I beheld you then, and 
you then entered my hermitage. It is now the 
revolution of evening, and day is gone. What 


is the meaning of this laughter Tell me the- 
truth. 


wearararer 


WII Tey AAA F BAT 
fH TA AIA TART a3 ol 
Pramlocé answered, You say rightly, 
venerable Brahman, ‘that I came hither at 
morning dawn, but several hundred years have 
passed since the time of my arrival This is the 
truth.’ 


amt sara 
aa: Waa fama UeTaVTOTA| 
SAA WS H: HleTAA A Wa: AI 3 ek 
Werrearare 
aaratvadiats zeae a 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


Aa Fe Waray Wats TAT 3 VI 

The Muni, on hearing this. was seized with 
astonishment. and asked her how long he had 
enjoyed her society; to which the nymph 
replied, that they had lived together nine 
hundred and seven years, six months, and 
three days. 


meaTA 
wet whe aeetaq ufteratsa at yt 
feted WY aa Bratterfaarq 3 311 


wetrarart 
afeeargd Ter HIaA Tarlerahl 
fagrerora waar YET AMAafeAa 3 vi 
The Muni asked her if she spoke the truth, 
or if she was in jest; for it appeared to him. 
that they had spent but one day together: to 
which Pramlocha replied, that she should not 
dare at any time to tell him who lived in the 
path of picty an untruth, hue particularly when 
she had been enjoined by him to inform him 
what had passed. 
Frereal ae ae: ae @ APT: | 
fagt fag arrdtaed Frere are 3 & it 
“When the Muni, princes, had heard these 


words, and knew that it was the truth, he began 
to reproach himself bitterly, | 


giteara 
auifa Wa AE ed alfaat a7 
Bat fader: canta aifeatrere Fafa 3 § 1 
Haat Ga RAAT AI 
after gat aa fare FT ATES 3 tt 
aaa actaentianurakaents a 
TET VSATTTATAT A 3 SI 
fare Ot ata: TATA 
TATA TATATATN 3 21 


He exclaimed saying that ‘Fie, fie upon 
me; my penance has been interrupted; the 
treasure of the learned and the pious has been 
stolen from me; my judgment has been 


BOOK I, CHAP. 15 


blinded: this woman has been created by some 
one to beguile me: Brahmd is beyond the reach 
of those agitated by the waves of infirmity.’ I 
had subdued my passions, and was about to 
attain divine knowledge. This was foreseen by 
him by whom this girl has been sent hither. Fie 
on the passion that has obstructed my 
devotions. All the austerities that would have 
led to acquisition of the wisdom of theVeda 
have feeen rendered of no avail by passion that 
is the road to hell.' The pious sage, having thus 
reviled himself, turned to the nymph, who was 
sitting nigh. and said to her. 

TS UY SOMATA Ae HS Act TANT 

Sa Teele Hae aTeTawT oI 

a wal Has way waleitaur ate 

aa rage Aayfiass VA We ¥ 2 

SMa Aa TAY Ve: fee at HAMAS Aa 

waa atat Prat aareatsta sa: iY 2 

SAM VR TAea Hat A ATA AT: 


aa fae at HEMMER Gaaftaarq x 3 


‘Go. deceitful girl. whither you will: you 
have performed the office assigned you by the 
monarch of the gods of disturbing my penance 
by your fascinations. I will not reduce you to 
ashes by the fire of my wrath. Seven paces 
together is sufficient for the friendship of the 
virtuous, but you and I have dwelt together. 
And in truth what fault have you committed? 
why should I be wroth with you? The sin is 
wholly mine. in that I could not subdue my 
passions; yet fie upon you, who, to gain favour 
with Indra, have disturbed my devotions; vile 
bundle of delusion.’ 


ae sare 
arate a fant welfr qaerar 
MAS TARAS AT MyATATATT 11% Vt 
wauATot Gad Raatacat airs 
TES TeS iT GMAT AA ATT Sk Il 
a g frticant a fatten aera 
MTT AS HAT TRISTATE I 


95 


gale gat al Area AaMTHTTEeTa| 
Fratstarat martin weraestentt 411 si 
ato Wetal MAN Se VATS: | 
FRING WT War Wee ASEAN YC 


Thus spoken to by the Muni. Pramlocha 
stood trembling, whilst big drops. of 
perspiration started from every pore; till he 
angrily cried to her, ‘Depart, begone.' She 
then. reproached by him, went forth from his 
dwelling, and, passing through the air. wiped 
the perspiration from her person with the 
leaves of the trees. The nymph went from tree 
to tree, and as with the dusky shoots that 
crowned their summits she dried her limbs, 
which were covered with moisture, the child 
she had conceived by the Rsi came forth from 
the pores of her skin in drops of perspiration. 


a gan ayehite ea 7 wed: | 
Har areanfaat wih: A dat as yt ssi 


FATS AEN STAT 

at wereatet Al Gat: BAYT WH WHTATATATI & 0 II 
HUST AT FAVA MRA 
ANT AMT Aa: Weearaaaay AT AMG 2M 


The trees received the living dews, and the 
winds collected them into one mass. “This,” 
said Soma. “I matured by my rays, and 
gradually it increased in size. till the 
exhalation, that had rested on the tree tops 
became the lovely girl named Marisa. The 
trees will her to you, Pracetasas: let your 
indignation be appeased. She is the progeny of 
Kandu, the child of Pramlocha the nursling of 
the trees, the daughter of the wind and of the 
moon. 


a aa wary aug: after auf aaa: 
Fearne We fanart Tat 2 
aa TAA ASNT St: | 
TANG Hay ACHAT: | 
seaagrerint Paaratl ora & 31 


The holy Kandu after the interruption of his 
picus exercises, went, excellent princes, to the 


96 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





rcgion of Visnu termed Purusottama where, 
Maitterya’ with his whole mind he devoted 
himself to the adoration of Hari; standing 
fixed, with uplifted arms, and repeating the 
prayers that comprehend the essence of divine 
truth. 


WHA HY: 
wa FA: sHgftrsma: wor way 
ATA BUSA SAY AAT TEA HTT |G I 
The Pracetasas said, “We are desirous to 
hear the transcendental prayers by inaudibly 


reciting which the pious Kandu propitiated 
Kesava.” 


BM Sara 
Ue Ut femora: 
Ut: Tea: Tea 
FT TAIT: ATTN: 
Us WMOTAT UTTATT 1G 4H 
AMG HrconreTats ha 
cenit Sq: WeTeT: 
ary de We atend- 
wtetradte WaT 4 GI 
Wal Wyse A Tay 
Tal wai wfrceaas at 
Taran Faas F faquy- 
TUTTE IATA SH & 9 
Teast et ansat year: | 
TAT WTA STAT: WAY WHT ATG CI 
On which Soma repeated as follows: 
“Visnu is beyond the boundary of all things: 
he is the infinite: he is beyond that which is 
boundless: he is above all that is above: he 
cxists as finite truth: he is the object of the 
Veda; the limit of elemental being; 
unappreciable by the senses; possessed of 
illimitable might: he is the cause of cause; the 
cause of the cause of cause; the cause of finite 
cause, and in effects, he both as every object 


and agent, preserves the universe: he is 
Brahma the lord, Brahma all beings; Brahma 


the progenitor of all beings; the imperishable: 
he is the eternal, undecaying, unborn Brahma, 
incapable of increases or diminution: 
Purusottama is the everlasting, uncreated, 
immutable Brahma. May the imperfections of 
my nature be annihilated through his favour.’ 


amy sara 
Wie Tel Wet F tad we WTI 
Taya UTA fate AAT A AMSA 4 eI 
sae ane years a at Tah a: 
SRMNANTM: GAT Hetaay F11 of 
STgaT Mira fawap ge adhe SAAT: | 
TOUS TEMA aeaaTa afer: & VI 
smrtferrerar fawy: wre WeaataT Aa: 
at quiets wer a a merrarssaq & 211 
WTA AAAS FAAS AST 
Tera Aya fame A ATTA g 3 
Wag Uta: PATE aa Se ST 
AMAT TAT YA: MATa AAS TY A & VI 
BUTT HaeT HATA 
SAA UT AAs TATATETea ATT & GI 


Soma siad— Reciting this eulogium, the 
essence of divine truth, and propitiating 
Kesava, Kandu obtained final emancipation. 
“Who Marisha was of old I will also relate to 
you, as the recital of her meritorious acts will 
be beneficial to you. She was the widow of a 
prince, and left childless at her husband's 
death: she therefore zealously worshipped Vis 
nu who, being gratified by her adoration, 
appeared to her, and desired her to dcmand a 
boon, on which she revealed to him the wishes 
of her heart. ‘I have been a widon, lord,’ she 
exclaimed, ‘even from my infancy, and my 
birth has been in vain: unfortunate have I been 
and of little use, oh sovereign of the world. 
Now therefore I pray you that in succeeding 
births | may have honourable husbands, and a 
son equal to a patriarch amongst men: may I 
be possessed of affluence and beauty: may I be 
pleasing in the sight of all: and may I be born 


BOOK I, CHAP. 15 


97 





out of the ordinary course. Grant these 
prayers, oh you who are propitious to the 
devout.’ 


By sare 
aay Sag EA sara ANT) 
WOUATATYMET ATS: UTAAT 1G & I) 
eae SareT 
Vaart Teta waftra aa 
WENASHAOY TAM: eat ST g oI 
WS GAIA saa 
waafaeraes AAATAAPT PITT & 21 
at Ta aed Soratery afar 
Aeareaahae Greares argefacaian & 81 
BTR Meat WUlSATUT TAT 
TMH JO AaraTaTe AEA 9 o I 
Syeared carat fagmefacireany 
UT ST AAT Ara FETISH FATT: 19 2 


Soma said— Hrisikesa, the god of gods, the 
supreme giver of all blessing, thus prayed to, 
raised her from her prostrate attitude, and said, 
‘In another life you shall have ten husbands of 
mighty prowess, and renowned for glorious 
acts; and you shall have a son magnanimous 
and valiant, distinguished by the rank of a 
patriarch, from whom the various races of men 
shall multiply, and by whose posterity the 
universe shall be filled. You virtuous lady, 
shall be or marvellous birth, and you shall be 
endowed with grace and loveliness, delighting, 
the heart of men.’ Thus having spoken, the 
deity disappeared, and the princess was 
accordingly afterwards born as Marisha who is 
given to you for a wife.’ 


UTMT TATA 
Wt: GT TAIRA WITT: | 
Wee AM gaat: ueit ator MITT BH 
SMA wade alas weet: 

Wa eat Tera a: YS Tessa 3 


BY aah we: wot YEA 

TAT SATA HATTA: 1119 1) 
srenig aise fruetsa aqaar 

Test TAN: HA You WPT: os I 
@ OBI VAST cat: UsTeergar fara: 

Sat W SPAT HPAMTAT TASH YE II 
Ie aT Ge: Uafagfatrea! 

AY Fare Sea AMT MAA TAT: 11 99 Il 
TATA SATE SAR 

aa: waft Tra wet Basar: 9d 
BReAS SATS CAMS YAMA AST: 
aaa: Fag rereraraaaryi 9 8 


Parfsara said—Soma having concluded, 
the Pracetasas took Marisa as he had enjoined 
them righteously to wife, relinquishing their 
indignation against the trees: and upon her 
they begot the emincnt patriarch, Daksa, who 
had (in a former lifc) been born as the son of 
Brahmi.” This great sage, for the furtherance 
or creation, and the increase of mankind, 
created progeny. Obeying the command of 

rahma, he made movable and immovable 
things, bipeds and quadrupeds; and 
subsequently, by his will, gave birth to 
females, ten of whom he bestowed on Dharma, 
thirteen on Kasgyapa, and twenty-seven, who 
regulate the course of time, on the moon’. Of 
these, the gods, the Titans, the snake gods, 
cattle, and birds, the singers and dancers of the 
courts of heaven, the spirits of evil, and other 
beings, were born. From that period forwards 
living creatures were engendered by sexual 
intercourse: before the time of Daksa they 
were variously propagated, by the will. by 
sight, by touch, and by the influence of 
religious austerities practised by devout sages 
and holy saints. 


aya Jara 


Sarg Sat: Ye St: Ht WAM 
ae MTA YI: A ASA ETA 6 ol 


98 


wa H Gea Te Trl ele att 

ae ater: FAT UA: BAT WAS a 

Maitreya said— Daksa. as I have formerly 
heard, was born from the right thumb of 
Brahma: tell me, great Muni. how he was 
regenerate as the son of the Pracetasas. 
Considerable perplexity also arises in my 
mind, how he, who, as the son of M4risha, was 
the grandson of Soma. could be also his 
father-in-law. 


TINT SaTeT 
safes Ate Fett aay cer 


MASA A Yeltet I ara Ferrey 21 

Ot At wad eae BATT: | 

wad fread fagreaa a yafane an 

rc . 3 ; . Ya fe 7 j 

ay wa nitasye werasta AOA 2 YI 

Parasara said—Birth and death are constant 
in all-creatures: Rsis and sagcs, possessing 
divine vision, are not perplexed by this. Daksa 
and the other eminent Munis are present in 
every age, .and in the interval of destruction 
cease to be’: of this the wise man entertains no 
doubt. Amongst them of old there was neither 
senior nor junior; rigorous penance and 
acquired power were the sole causes of any 
difference of degree amongst these more than 
human beings. 


aay sara 
cami saris wWeraheeayary 
sata faerie Wa Tar Wea CuI 


Maitreya said— Narrate to me, O venerable 
Brahman, at length, the birth of the gods, 
Titans, Gandharvas, serpents, and goblins. 


UU SATA 
Ta: Uata anfes: ys car: TarAyaM 
TOM TAT MATT MT SUT VTA 6 Gt 
amas x want ye earswor aan 
SAGA WTA STAT TATA CII 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


aera fin are areradat ar: wat: | 
ad: VT a UA: Ulead: waa cu 


apa atu fagafafaar: wert: 
afeinaed Sat ators Waa 8 
Yat Yara sat Ted crane 

aT Yasar Awat ws Faq 8 ott 
afqet saarara ated: marae: | 

ar opt ane fay: dfaadiaey sam 
Wea freadarel cafaftaraaten < 2 


Paragara said~ In what manner Daksa 
created living creatures, as commanded by 
Brahma, yon shall hear. In the first place he 
willed into existence the deities. the Rsis, 
quiristers of heaven, the Titans, and the snake- 
gods. Finding that his will-born progeny did 
not multiply themselvcs, he determined, in 
order to secure their increase, to establish 
sexual intercourse as the means of 
multiplication. For this purpose he espoused 
Asikni, the daughter of the patriarch Virana,' a 
damsel addicted to devout practiceJ, the 
eminent supportress of the world. By her the 
great father of mankind begot five thousand 
mighty sons, through whom he expected the 
world should be peopled. Narada. the divine 
Rsi, observing them desirous to multiply 
posterity, approached them, and addressed 
them in a friendly tone: 


ARE SarT 

@ Fea Ueratal: wet get aafeeaa 

Seu wet BAY Maat aaa e VI 

arene aa get f aren wre St ya: 

STRAINS He WAT A HAT 8 SH 

og Petreta ger wfeear ae: 

Tel BANE Yar AAT Wa FAI AMPS evi 

Narada said~ “Illustrious Haryasvas, it 1s 

evident that your intention is to beget 
posterity; but first consider this; why should 


you, who, like fools, know not the middle, the 
height, and depth of the world,’ propagate 


BOOK 1, CHAP. 15 


99 





offspring ? When your intellect is no more the patriarch, on finding that all these his sons 
obstructed by interval, height, or depth, then had vanished, was incensed, and denounced an 
how, fools, shall you not all behold the term of imprecation upon Narada.'° 


the universe ?" 

WIS Saya 
a 9 Weert en wane: Waa feery 
arenta a Fray WAST SATTAT SG I 
SANAT AVG SI: Weta: YA 
STOTT UAT AERA W118 
faagtareret J ACM: WaT: WAI 
Udith Fat Te ASA Wellfaat: Fel 
aS ATTET Ves ANTS warght: | 
AAU Weat da WAM AA AMAT cn 
Weal WATT YA WaT: BRATS Ad: 
asta ta anor warat: Waal fer 
stenta +t Faded BAT SATNAV 
aa: waft St wat wae fet 
Waal AVafa aM AA chr FasTAATI! Yo ott 
aaa ABT fag yar cat: warTafet: | 
Hl WH ASAT ANE A VISIT All Po Vl 


Parasara said~~ Having heard the words of 
Narada, the sons of Daksa_ dispersed 
themselves through the regions, and to the 
present day have not returned; as rivers that 
lose themselves in Ocean come back no more. 
The Haryasvas having disappeared, the 
patriarch Daksa begot, by the daughter of 
Virana a thousand other sons. They, who were 
named Savalasvas, were desirous of 
engendering posterity, but were dissuaded by 
Narada in a similar manner. They said to one 
another, ““What the Muni has observed is 
perfectly just. We must follow that path that 
our brothers have travelled, and when we have 
ascertained the extent of thc universe, well 
will multiply our race.” Accordingly they 
scattered themselves through the regions, and, 
like rives flowing into the sea, they rcturned 
not again. Henceforth brother seeking for 


waren fag a tae warata: 

Ue aaSya Haat A: FAT Yo VW 
Bat TAM TAT ByATTT Alay 

AafagMs BATT UAISHBAAA 20 311 

% Ua Agar & Uanera aa 

& Heene faet arat ars F sq go xi 
SUM TAA SAT MAST 

UZ A Yea a Mea faa TAT SM oul 
USM TT AAI A TOT 

favearg fag: AEM WAI STAT Fo Gil 
Tea Wea AAR AHA: WAT: Yow 
Ute AAA: YAT FEMA WE MAT: | 
aS Besa arate | AAS Yo ci 
Yrctiart TarSIa STAT 

USCUAY Vale Ae AEST Wa FU Vo 

a araaguon tar SNA: WAT: | 
SUAS HY WANSMATTST SATA FATATTN QM 
sat gaa was awstats at: | 

WITT Wa AMAT ATA: VAT: 11 Vail 
STURT Yat ATS: ST STA ear 

TAR Ya MTA STA TTT BL 
Bel Way aul aaeat Aq VTA 

TTA VAL HAT FACAAT TTA 223 I 
Taree: Feet: wrote THOTT 
SUPTeTeT FRAT ATT TEM: YAY Wasa 1 Rev 
arferantasta gt YaTarreret UI 

SUTAYA: HUTT PCA STTTTTTI B24 I 
aaa Vina faye Aa GEST: 

aed Hlaarry clfdeha Stet VT 1 Veg 
yea fag: gaghe area sara 

a ast cacrenta amracit wifi ¢ go 


Then, Maitreya, thc wisc patriarch, it is 


brother disappears, through ignorance of the handed down to us, bcing anxious to people 
products of the first principle of things. Daksa the world, created sixty daughters of the 


100 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





daughter of Virana;'' ten of whom he gave to 
Dharma, thirteen to KaSyapa, and twentyseven 
to Soma. four to Aristanemi. two to 
Bahuputra, two to Angiras, and two to 
Krsasva. I will tell you their names. Arundhati, 
Vasu. Yami, Lamba, Bhant, Marutvati, 
Sankalpa, Muhdrttaé, Sadhya, and Visva were 
the ten wives of Dharma, '” and bore him the 
following progeny. The sons of Visva were the 
Visvadevas;'? and the Sadhyas. those of 
Sadhyaé. The Maruts, or winds, were the 
children of Marutvati; the Vasus, of Vasu. The 
Bhanus (or suns) of Bhanu, and the deities 
presiding over moments, of Muhirtta. Ghosa 
was the son of Lamba (an are of the heavens); 
Nagavitta (the milky way), the daughter of 
Yami (night). The divisions of the earth were 
born of Arundhati; and Sankalpa (pious 
purpose), the soul of all, was the son of 
Sankalpa. The deities called Vasus, because, 
preceded by fire, they abound in splendour and 
might,'° are severally named Apa. Dhruva, 
Soma, Dhava (fire), Anila (wind), Anala (fire), 
Pratyisha (day-break), and Prabhdsa (light). 
The four sons of Apa werc Vaitandya. Srama 
(weariness), Sranta (fatigue), and Dhur 
(burthen). Kala (time), the cherisher of the 
world, was the son of Dhruva. The son of 
Soma was Varchas (light), who was the father 
of Varcasvi (radiance). Dhava had, by his wife 
Manohara (loveliness), Dravina, Hutahavya- 
vaha. Sisra, Prana, and Ramana. The two sons 
of Anila (wind). by his wife Siva, were 
Manohara (swift as thought) and Avijiatagati 
(untraceable motion). The son of Agni (fire), 
Kumara, was born in a clump of Sara reeds: 
his sons were Sakha, Visakha, Naigameya, and 
Prishthaja. The offspring of the Krttikas was 
named Kartikeya. The son of Pratyisha was 
the Rsi named Devala, who had _ two 
philosophic and intelligent sons.'° 


gear uit ace gerafi 
STS VHP AAT PITTA 226 1 
WHA FT A Wat AAMAS TI 
fag VATA TT WATAAT: 1 289 


aut freqagannnt fester safe: 

WAOTATS Tae Set Hreqsat AT 11 Voll 

a; aaa faurif taqat dart zi 

WTA eT FHT WATATA: 1 22 vi 

ae Tar’ wanear aa Y OI 

SAHUCTARAR VAT FTAA 

BATT: Yat frat ATA: 11 2 VMI 

BY Aga Ara: | 

qurenftey prey quel Tareq 223 11 

WUT Was Act WT ATTA 

Teena Mea BATA TAT: 11 VP VII 

wed aa Ware SAoAfadtTary 

The sister of Brhaspati, lovely and 

virtuous, Yogasiddha, who pervades the whole 
world without being devoted to it, was the 
wife of Prabhdsa, the eighth of the Vasus, and 
bore to him the patriarch Visvakarma, the 
author of a thousand arts, the mechanist of the 
gods, the fabricator of all ornaments, the chicf 
of artists, the constructor of the self-moving 
chariots of the deities, and by whose skill men 
obtain subsistence. Ajaikapid, Ahirvradhna. 
and the wise Rudra Tvastri were born; and the 
self-born son of Tvasta was also the celebrated 
Visvarapa. There are eleven well-known 
Rudras, lords of the three worlds, or Hara. 
Bahuriipa, Tryambaka. Aparajita, Vrsakapi. 
Sambhu. Kaparddi, Raivata. Mrgavyadha, 
Sarva. anil Kapali;'’ but there are a hundred 


appellations of the immeasurable mighty 
Rudras."® 


stfefafetady: caret atte YT AAT eVu i 
Uefafera da a IIT SM 

magi hs oat carey B OTN LVM 
Tara RST HAMA TATA: | 

fear ant AsaArararaASATT 229 
SUAS aT AMT AA AAT: | 
AMAA: Vel TATA TTT 22 SII 
arrest Ft cat atfaht weataya a1 

Wat WEA: SAY aaa LAH 


BOOK I, CHAP. 15 


Wagan J a wa wyTea Wa: 

TTA AVATAR FER SAHA 23 0 UI 
aa farses vray WaT Fata TT 

STINT Wet AMAT A AGT YST Ag AM 23 vil 
fara ofan da fast aeor va ai 

STE EMfahrST STEM TSM BAT: 1 23 VII 
ATI FMT ST Ge: YT 
Aaraasaat F A sea Bey BAT: 3 311 


The daughters of Daksa who were married 
to KaSyapa were Aditi, Diti, Danu. Arishta, 
Surasd, Surabhi, Vinata, Tamra, Krodhavasa, 
Ida, Khasa Kadru, and Muni;’’ whose progeny 
I will describe to you. There were twelve 
celebrated deities in a former Manvantara, 
called Tuahkas,”’ who, upon the approach of 
the present period, or in the reign of the last 
Manu, Caksusa, assembled, and said to one 
another, “Come, let us quickly enter into the 
womb of Aditi, that we may be born in the 
next Manvantara. for thereby we shall again 
enjoy the rank of gods:” and accordingly they 
were born the sons of Kasyapa, the son of 
Marici, by Aditi, the daughter of Daksa; 
thence named the twelve Adityas, whose 
appellations were respectively, Visnu, Sakra, 
Aryaman, Dhtti, Tvastri, Pashan, Vivasvat, 
Savita, Mitra, Varuna, Ansa. and Bhaga.”” 
These, who in the Caksusa Manvantara were 
the gods called Tusitas, were called the twelve 
Adityas in the Manvantara of Vaivasvata. 


UM: Bafana: rat: Vaasa Tae: | 
Tal WAAR AT: PAT 23 VI 
areata Sara a 
STEAM ATAATANS GST 234 I 
aguas faguartat faga: eye: 
Waste: AST eat Tea AHAT: 1 23 & I 
PMT J CalcaTSTOM: Ve: | 

We Bragard Area Fata fei V3 911 


The twenty-seven daughters of the 


101 


lunar constellations, which were called by 
their names, and had children who were 
brilliant through their great splendour”. The 
wives of Aristanemi bore him _ sixteen 
children,”’ The daughters of Bahuputra were 
the four lightnings”. The excellent 
Pratyangirasa Richas were the children of 
Angiras’’. descended from the holy sage: and 
the deified weapons of the Beas were the 
progeny of Krsasva. 


aed sarod wae YF TIT: 
waraute aad Frotateafereeaai 93 ci 
aa alee ay searenranfael 

Ua taal aerate Br TAN 23 el 


These classes of thirty-three divinities”’ are 
born again at the end of a thousand ages, 
according to their own pleasure; and their 
appearance and disappearance is here spoken 
of as birth and death: but, Maitreya, these 
divine personages exist age after age in the 
Same manner as the sun sets and uses again. 


feet: Yaga aa avaaniatt 7 AAAI 
facoranforgaa facrarey gat: 11 ex oll 
faeat untad aan faufat oftre: 
fecoaenfgrat: garsreant: whirettsra: 11 gy 8 
WIS Bes werasa agar! 

UBT Teraal Seratgrfarergars i Ys VI 
Vat WAY HERI Waa WAS] Avi 

Waele: UAT win @ Sats WATE Ow 3ll 
qerxcltadt afg: wargrataat feat 
Taare wa fam argea afe Ferd wey 
Tatard: afer Peraer aera wet 
TMNT AHA TT UTR AAT VEG I 


It has been related to us, that Diti had two 
sons by Kasyapa, named Hiranyakasipu and 
the invincible Hiranyaksa: she had also a 
daughter, Sinhiké, the wife of Vipracitti. 
Hiranyakasipu was the father of four mighty 
sons, Anuhlada, Hlada, the wise Prahlada, and 


patriarch who became the virtuous wives of the heroic Sanhlada. the augmentor of the 


the moon were all known as the nymphs of the 


Daitya race’. Amongst these, the illustrious 


102 


Prahlada. looking on all things with 
indifference, devoted his whole faith to 
Janarddana. The flmes that were lighted by the 
king of the Daityas consumed not him, in 
whosc heart Vasudeva was cherished; and all 
the earth trembled when, bound with bonds, he 
movcd amidst the waters of the ocean. 


a fra fated: wera teria: 

Wea HST MAAATTATA: 11 VS E It 
fae ST Be SeaTEfaa: | 

APTA HUTA AYTSSATA: | LYM 
VTRTSSIST A: VAY ERAT 

AAT ATTA: WTO FACT ATTOTS HTT 11 LS II 
Tatyecarreayaeyd waaay 

cert ceaufear fart carifrarfaami ex 2 


His firm body, fortified by a mind 
engrossed by Acyuta. was unwounded by the 
weapons hurled on him by order of the Daitya 
monarch; and the serpents sent to destory him 
breathed their venomous flames upon him in 
vain. Overwhelmed with rocks, he yet 
remained unhurt, for he never forgot Visnu, 
and the recollection of the deity was his 
armour of proof. Hurled from on high by the 
king of the Daityas, residing in Svarga, earth 
received him unharmed. 

aay UMwaA ayes Sraeal art: | 

STAT Vers WaT ATEAI V4 ol 
famronigqarn wees Ferra: | 

TET GAM WaT Segura: 1 84 VM 
eq aleafear Hear sersrgaifedt: | 

SS ARTA YT MAST HTT HG 
Wang gt Aart Agents: | 

afer wah weno ony faa oe 3 
deragerred eg Benet faa 
ITATATS APTA ATT 8 VI 
aren aatar a: wea wqa 
BOTA aA OT Hapa 24 GU 
TNT UIP MSU TATA 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


STUNG AAT A: WSNTATI 24 Gil 
sta sfifaegarat yeratst ugreyitseara: | 


The wind sent into his body to wither him 
up was itself annihilated by him, in whom 
Madhustidana was present. The fierce 
elephants of the spheres broke their tusks, and 
vailed their pride, against the firm breast 
which the lord of the Daityés had ordered 
them to assault. The ministrant priests of the 
monarch were baffled in all their ritcs for the 
destruction of one so steadily attached to 
Govinda: and the thousand delusions of the 
fraudulent Samvara, counteracted by the 
discus of Krsna, were practised without 
success. The deadly poison administered by 
his father's officers he partook of 
unhesitatingly, and without its working any 
visible change; for he looked upon the world 
with mind undisturbed, and. full of benignity, 
regarded all things with equal affection, and as 
identical with himself. He was righteous; an 
inexhaustible mine of purity and truth; and an 
unfailing model for all pious men. 


NOTES 

1. Or. ‘immersed in the six trmis’ (Sftrem); 
explained hunger thirst, sorrow, stupefaction, 
decay, and death. 

2. There is some confusion here in regard to the 
person addressed but the context shows that the 
insertion of Maitreya's name is an inadvertence, 
and that the passage is a continuation of Soma's 
speech to the Pracetasas. 

3. The phrase is WIAA AT| ‘made up of the 
farther boundary of Brahma;' implying either 
‘comprehending the supreme, or Brahma, and 
transcendental wisdom; Para;’ or. ‘consisting of the 
farthest limits (Para) or truths of the Vedas or 
Brahma;' that is, being the essence of the Vedanta 
philosophy. The hymn that follows is in fact a 
mantra or mystical prayer, commencing with the 
reiteration of the word Para and Para’; as faeeocon: 
RACA: UNS) FT TOR: TRY: WT: TeoTafy 
wa: | Para means Supreme, infinite;’ and Para. 
'the.-farther bank or limit,' the point that is to be 
attained by crossing a river or sea. or figurtively the 
world or existence. Visnu, then, is Para, that which 


BOOK I, CHAP. 15 


103 





nothing surpasses. and Para. the end or object of 
existence : he is Apara para, the farthest bound, of 
that which is illumitable, or space and time : he is 
Param parebhyah, above or beyond the highest, 
being beyond or superior to all the elements : he is 
Pararmatha rapi, or identical with final truth, or 
knowledge of soul: he is Brahma para, the object or 
essence of spiritual wisdom. Parapatabhita is said 
to imply the farther limit (Para) of rudimental 
matter (Para); He is Para, or chief Pardnam, of 
those objects which are beyond the senses; and he 
is Parapara, or the boundary of boundaries, that is. 
he is the comprehensive investure of, and exterior 
to, those limits by which soul 1s confined; be is free 
from all encumbrance or impediment. The passage 
may be interpreted in different way, according to 
the ingenuity with which the riddle is read. 

4. This part of the legend is peculiar to our text, 
and the whole story of Mérisha's birth is nowhere 
else so fully detailed. The penance of the 
Pracetasas, and its consequences, are related in the 
Agni, Bhagavata. Matsya, Padma, Vayu, and 
Brahma Puranas, and allusion is briefly made to 
Mérisha's birth. Her origin from Kandu and 
Pralocha in narrated in a different place in the 
Brahma Purana where the austerities of Kandu and 
the necessity for their interruption, are described. 
The story, from that authority, was translated by the 
late Professor Chezy, and is published in the first 
number of the Journal Asiatique. 

5. The second birth of Daksa, and his share in 
the peopling of the earth, is narrated in most of the 
Purdnas in a similar manner. It is perhaps the 
original legend, for Daksa seems to be an irregular 
adjunct to the Prajapatis, or mind-born sons of 
Brahma (ch. VII. N. 2); and the allegorical nature 
of his posterity in the character (Ch. VII.) intimates 
a more recent origin. Nor does that series of 
descendants apparently occur in the Mahabhértam 
although the existence of two Daksas is especially 
remarked there (Moksa Dh.); Fe & APT THs car: 
@ sfa aera In the Adi Parva, which seems to be the 
freest from subsequent improvements, the Daksa 
noticed is the son of the Pracetasas. The 
incompatibility of the two accounts is reconciled by 
referring the two Daksas to different Manvantaras. 
The Daksa who proceeded from Brahma as a 
Prajapati being born in the first, or Svayambhuva. 
and the son of the Pracetasas in the Chaksusa 


Manvantara. The latter however, as descended from 
Uttaénapada. should belong to the first period also. 
It is evident that great confusion has been made by 
the Puranas in Daksa's history. 

6. That, is. they are the Naksatras, or lunar 
asterisms. 

7. 'They are removed’ (ffe=r4), which the 
commentator explains by  qaaaedlad ‘are 
absorbed, as if they were fast asleep;’ but in every 
age or Yuga, according to the text—in every 
Manvantara. according to the comment—the Rsis 
reappear, the circumstances of their origin only 
being varied. Daksa therefore, as remarked in the 
preceding note. is the son of Brahma in one period. 
the son of the Pracetasas in another. So Soma. in 
the Svayambhuva Manvantara, was born as the son 
of Atri; in the Chaksusha, hc was produced by 
churning the ocean. The words of our text occur in 
the Hari Varhsa, with an unimportant variation : 
seahia Pus Rea yay wie weaisa A qed 
fagiada 4 SH: | ‘Birth and obstruction are constant 
in all beings, but Rsis and those men who are wise 
are not perplexed by this :' that is, not. as rendered 
above, by the alternation of life and death : but, 
according to the commentator on the Hari Vamsa. 
by a very different matter, the prohibition the 
unlawful marriages. Utpatti of birth of progeny,’ is 
the result of their will: Nirodha. ‘obstruction,’ 1s the 
law prohibiting the intermarriage of persons 
connected by the offering of the funeral cakc; fret 
freamarengefa fraA: | to which Rsis and sages are 
not subject, either from their matrimonial unions 
being merely platonic, or from the bad example act 
by Brahma, who, according to the Vedas, 
approached his own daughter; C 
wagheasaearatefa afa:1 a mystery we have already 
had occasion to advert to (Ch. VII. n. 5). The 
explanation of the text, however, given by the 
commentator appears forced, and less natural than 
the interprctation preferred above. 

8. This is the usual account of Daksa's marriage, 
and is that of the Mahabbarata, Adi P. and of the 
Brahma Purana, which the Hari VamsSa, in the first 
part, repeats. In another portion, the Puskara 
Mahatmya. however, Daksa, it is said. converts half 
himself into a female, by whom he begets the 
daughters presently to be noticed: <a: Wadeereai 


Sa SAI: | CereaMfafien Heat: Tara: | This 


seems to be merely a new edition of an old story. 


104 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





9. Yalsetegaaya! The commentator explains it 
to mean the origin, duration, and termination of 
subtile rudimental body: but the Padma and Linga 
Purana distinctly express it, 'the extent of the earth:' 
Fa: WAM: Pedy aa qaAy Ta Al 

10. Ndarada's  interfcrence, and the fruitless 
generation of 'the first progeny of Daksa. is an old 
legend. The Mahabharata (Adi P.) notices only one 
set of sons, who, it is said, obtained Moksa, or 
liberation. through Narada's teaching them the 
Sankhya philosophy. The Brahma, Matsya, Vayu. 
Linga. Padma, Agni, and Bhatgavata Puranas tell 
the story much as 1n the text, and not inferquently 
in the same words. In general they merely refer to 
imprecation denounced upon Narada, as above. The 
Bhagavata specifies the imprecation to be perpetual 
peripateticism. Daksa says to him. There shall not 
be a resting place for you in all these regions:" 
qeAecHsy FI YS A Taqysd: Wz The Karma repeats 
the imprecation merely to the effect that Narada 
shall perish, and gives no legend. In the Brahma 
Vaivaitta. Narada is cursed by Brahm, on a similar 
occasion, to become the chief of the Gandharvas, 
whence his mus‘cal propensities: but the 
Bhagavata, VI, 7. has the reverse of this legend, 
and makes him first a Gandharva, then a Sidra, 
then the son of Brahma. The Brahma Purana, and 
after it the Hari Vamsa and the Vayu P,. have a 
different and not very intelligible story. Daksa, 
being about to pronounce an imprecation upon 
Narada, was appeased by Brahma and the Rsis. 
And it was agreed between them that Narada 
should be again born; as the son of Kasyapa. by one 
of Daksa's daughters. This seems to be the gist of 
the legend, but it is very confusedly told. The 
version of the Brahma Purana, which is the same as 
that or Hari Vamsa, may be thus rendered: “The 
smooth-speaking Narada addressed the sons of 
Daksa for their destruction and his own: for the 
Muni Kasyapa begot him as a son, who was the son 
of Brahma, on the daughter of Daksa, through fear 
of the latter's imprecation. He was formerly the son 
of Paramesthi (Brahma). and the excellent sage 
Kasyapa next begot him, as if he were his father, on 
Asikni. the daughter of Virana. Whilst be was 
engaged to beguiling the sons of the patriarch, Daks 
a, of resistless power, determined on_ his 
deatruction; but he was solicited by Brahma, in this 
presence of the great sages, and .it was agreed 


between'them that Narada, the son of Barhméa, 
should be born of a daughter of Daksa. 
Consequently Daksa gave his daughter to 
Parameshthi. and by her was Narada born.’ Now 
several difficulties occur here. Asikni is the wife, 
not the daughter. of Daksa: but this may be a 
blunder of the compiler, for in the parallel passage 
of the Vayu no name occurs. In the next place, 
‘who is this daughter? for, as we shall see. the 
progeny of all Daksa's daughters are fully detailed, 
and in no authority consulted is Narada mentioned 
as the son of either of them. or as the son of 
Kasyapa. Daksa. too, gives his daughter, not to 
Kasyapa. but to Paramesthi. or Brahma. The 
commentator of the Hari Vamsa solves this by 
saying he gives her to Brahma for Kasyapa. The 
same bargain is noticed in the Vayu, but Narada is 
also said there to be adopted by Kagyapa: 4 fay: 
erage Hr: | Again, however, it gives Daksha's 
imprecation in the same words as the Hari Varhsa, a 
passage, by the way, cmitted in the Brahma: 4R¢ 
aed Ward aaft 41 Narada, (in your present 
form). and take up your abode in the womb.’ 
Whatever may be the original of this legend, it is 
evidently imperfectly given by the authorities here 
cited. The French translation of the passage in the 
Hari VamSsa can scarcely be admitted as correct : 
assuredly sftameatival wat cafteaa:: ad yt 
waramara fara J Afryta| is not le Devarchi Dakcha. 
epoux d'Asikni. fille de Viradna, fut | 'aieul de cet 
illustri mouni ainsi regenere, @af¥aaH: is more 
consistenly said by the commentator to mean 
Kasyapa The Vayu Purana in another part, a 
description of the different orders of Rsis, states 
that the Devarsis Parvata and Narada were sons of 
Kasyapa : Wadi aneada seaqeegit In the 
account of K4rttavirya. in the Brahma Purana and 
Hari Varnsa, Narada is introduced as a Gandharbha. 
the son of Varidisa; being the same, according to 
the commentator on the latter, as the Gandharva 
elsewhere called Upavarhana. 

11. The prior specification (p. 96) was fifty. The 
Mahabharata, Adi P.. and, again, Moksa Dharma, 
has the same number. The Bhagavata, Kurma, 
Padma, Linga. and Vayu Purana state sixty. The 
former is perhaps the original, as the fullest and 
most consistent details relate to them and their 
posterity. 


BOOK I, CHAP. 15 


105 





12. This is the usual list of Dharma's wives. The 
Bhagavata substitutes Kakud for Arundhati. The 
Padma Purana, Matsya Purana, and Hari Vaima 
contain two different account of Daksa's 
descendants: the first agrees with our text: the 
second, which is supposed to occur in the Padma 
Kalpa, is somewhat varied, particularly as to the 
wives of Dharma, who are said to be five. The 
nomenclature varies, or 


Padma Purana Hari Vara. Matsya. 
Laksmi Laksmi Laksmi 
Sarasvati Kirtti Sarasvati 
Ganga Sadhya Sadhya 
Visvesa Viswa Visvesa 
Savitri Marutwati Urjjaswati. 


There is evident inaccuracy in all the copies, and 
the names may in some instances be erroneous. 
From the succeeding enumeration of their 
descendants, it appears that Kama was the son of 
Laksami; the Sadhyas, of Sadhya; the Visvadevas. 
of Visva; the Maruts. of Marutvati; and the Vasus 
of Devi, who may be either the Sarasvati or Savitri 
of the previous enumeration. 

13. The Visvadevas are a class of gods to whom 
sacrifices should be offered daily. Manu, If. 121. 
They are named in some of the Puranas, as the 
Vayu and Matsya : the former specifying ten; the 
latter, twelve. 

14. The Sadhyas. according to the Vayu, are the 
personified rites and prayers of the Vedas, born of 
the metres, and partakers of the sacrifices: M4 74 
TIM Sa BM: | Ded Akt! The same 
work names twelve, which are all names of 
sacrifice and formulae. as Darsa, Paurnamasa, 
Brhadasva, Rathantara. etc. The Matsya Purana, 
Padma Purana, and Hari V. have a different set of 
seventeen appellations, apparently of arbitrary 
selection, as Bhava, Prabhava, Isa, Aruni, etc. 

15, Or, accorbing to the Padma Purfna, because 
they are always present in light, or luminous 
irradiation : Safaurat Fa ear Savas Veda fest) aaaed 
SATA: 41 

16. The Vayu supplies their names Ksamavartta 
(patient) and Manasvia (wise). 

17. The passage 1s, LY cag Vag 
afar) wearers: yal faaect aerm:i Whose 
sons they are does not appear : the object being, 
according to the comment, to specify only the 
‘eleven divisions or modifications of the youngest 


Rudra. Twashta : Mea veedaresen fart; We 
have, however, an unusual variety of reading here 
in two copies of the comment : "The eleven Rudras, 
in whom the family of Tvashtri (a synonym, in may 
be observed, sometimes of Viswakarm4) is 
included, were born. The enumeration of the Rudra 
ends with Aparajita, of whom Tryambaka is the 
epithet : waft | FeaCawAT 
wera sft saraafagret: Accordingly 
the three last names in all thc other copies of the 
text are omitted in these two; their placcs being 
supplied by the three first, two of whom are always 
named in the lists of the Rudras. According to the 
Vayu and Brahma Purana the Rudras are the 
children of KaSyapa by Surabhi : the Bhagavata 
makes them the progeny of Bhiita and Sartipa :the 
Matsya. Padma. and Hari V., in the second series, 
the offspring of Surabhi by Brahm4. The names in 
three of the Pauranic -authorities run thus : 


Vayu Matsya Bhagavata. 
Ajaikapad Ajaikapad Ajaikapad 
Ahirvrudhn = Ahirvradhni Ahirvradhna 
Hara Hara Ugra 
Nirrita Nirritti Bhima 

Isvara Pingala Vama 
Bhuvana Dahana Mahan 
Angaraka Aparajita Bahurtipa 
Arddhaketu Mrgavyadha Vrsakapi 
Mrtyu Senani Aja 

Sarpa Sajja Bhava 
Kapali Kapali Raivata. 


The Brahm4 or Hari V., the Padma. the Linga. 
etc. have other varieties; and the Lexicons have a 
different reading from all. as in that of Jatadhara 
they are Ajaikapad. Ahivradhna. Virtpaksu. 
Suresvara. Jayanta. Bahurfipaka. Tryambaka, 
Aparajita, Vaivaswata, Sdvitra, and Hara. The 
variety seems to proceed from the writers applying 
to the Rudras, as they may legitimately do. different 
appellations of the common _ prototype, or 
synonyms of Rudra or Siva, selected at will from 
his thousand and eight names, according to the 
Linga Purana 

18. The posterity of Daksa's daughters by 
Dharma are clearly allegorical personifications 
chiefly of two classes, one consisting of 
astronomical phenomena, and the other of portions 
or subjects of the ritual of the Vedas. 


106 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





19. There is some, though not much. variation in 
these names in different Puranas. The Bhagavata 
has Sarama. Kashtha, and Timi, the parents 
severally of canine animals, beasts with uncloven 
hoofs, and fishes, in place of Vinaté, Khasd, and 
Kadru; disposing of the first and last differently. 
The Vayu has Prava in place of Arishta. and 
Andyus or Dénayus for Surasé. The Padma Purana, 
second leries, substitutes Kali, Anayus Sinhika, 
Pisacha, Vach for Arishta, Surasa, Suravi. Tamra, 
and Muni; and omits Ida and Khas@. In the Uttara 
Khanda of the same. Kasyapa's wives are said to be 
but four, Aditi, Diti. Kadru and Vinata. 

20. In the sixth reign, or that of Chaksusa Manu, 
according to the text; but in book JII.. ch. I. the 
Tushitas are the gods of the second or Svarochisa 
Manvantara. The Vayu has a much more complete 
legend than any other Purana on this subject. In the 
beginning of the Kalpa twelve gods, named Jayas. 
were created by Brahma, as his deputies and 
assistants in the creation. They, lost in meditation, 
neglected his commands : on which he cursed them 
to be repeatedly born in each Manvantara till the 
seventh. They were accordingly, in the several 
successive Manvantaras, Ajitas, Tusitas. Satyas, 
Haris, Vaikunthas, Sadhyas, and Adityas. Our 
authority and some others, as the Brahm4, have 
apparent’ ly intended to refer to this account, bul 
have confused the order of the series. 

21. The Puranas that contain this genealogy 
agree tolerably well in these names. The Bhagavata 
adds many details regarding some of the Adityas 
and their descendants. 

22. The Naksutra Yoginis. or chief stars of the 
lunar mansions, or asterisms in the moon's path. 

23. None of the authorities are more specific on 
the subject of Aristanemis' progeny. In the 
Mahabhfrata this is said to be another name of 
Kasyapa : : wey: ae gs a Td 
ake srayem fag: The Bhagavata 
substitutes Tarksa for this personage, said by the 
commentator to be likewise another name of 
Kasyapa. His wives are. Kadru, Vinata. Patangi, 
and Yamini. mothers of snakes, _ birds, 
grasshoppers, and locusts. 

24. Enumerated in astrological works as brown, 
red, yellow, and white; portending severally wind, 
heat, rain, famine. 


25. The Rahas, or verses, thirty-five in number, 
addressed to presiding divinities, denominated 
Pratyangirasas. The Bhagavata calls the wives of 
Angiras, Svadhé and Sati. and makes them the 
mothers of the Pitrs and the Atharvan Veda 
severally. 

26. The Sastra devatas, 'gods of the divine 
weapons :' a hundred are enumerated in the 
Ramayana. and they are there termed the sons of 
Krisva by Jaya and Vijaya, daughters of the 
Prajapati; that is, of Daksa. The Bhagavata terms 
the two wives of Krisaswa, Arcis (flame) and Dhis 
ana; the former is the mother of Dhtmaketu 
(comet); the latter, of four sages, Devala, 
Vedasiras, Vayuna. and Manu. The allegorical 
origin of the weapons is undoubtedly the more 
ancient. 

27. This number is founded upon a text of the 
Vedas, which to the eight Vasus. eleven Rudras, 
and twelve Adityas. adds Prajapati, either Brahma 
or Daksa, and Vasatkara ‘deified oblation ae aaa 
UHR Vel Heart: aft seqet:| They 
have the epithet Chhandajd, as born in different 
Manvantaras, of their own will : Ba: ered BIT 
Oak: | 

28. The Puranas generally concur in _ this 
genealogy, reading sometimes Anuhrdda. Hrada, 
etc. for Anuhlida and the rest. Although placed 
second in the order of Kasyapa's descendants, the 
Daityas are in fact the elder branch. Thus the 
Mahabharata, Moksa Dharma, calls Diti the senior 
wife of Kasyapa : ret sasrrafeft: | and the Vayu 
terms Hiranyakasipu and Hiranyaksa the eldest of 
all the sons of that patriarch: 
wey, yedst aydti So, “Titan and his enormous 
brood” were “heaven's first born.” 

kkk 


BOOK I, CHAP. 16 


- CHAPTER 16 


Arson seara: 


(WATE veteattafarara: w:1) 

Way sara 

aaa aa Ae AAT AST 

HUTS Bat fawn AAA: 1 VI 

alae MIAME Wels Sea 

eels AAA gooey sifaaq 2 

WMT Age at were alert Fern 

quae faaafa fafa: aareati 31 

VeTHTeesiT A AA TA: TT 

aaa West ala wer trav 

weal wage fasted FA 

sigireante weleattd sear 4 

fa: fafa vreatfaerdt fetes 

fanctenteraterest Frérat qctereaz:11€ 1 

SUA: Vdd: HAT HAT Warrit:1 

fara: feaafeforate fe ar wears 

feet eat wa aerate: | 

Uyteaisewre wan: fe vergt:nen 

FUG cenpat Gayers fe FA 

Wea Aart Wea fe TAHATTIN eI 

retest fered GeTqeHETM: | 

were od fears ae sot at strat Qo 

Maitreya said—Venerable Muni, you have 

described to me the races of human beings and 
the eternal Visnu, the cause of this world; but 
who was this mighty Prahlada, whc whom you 
have last spoken; whom fire could not burn; 
who died not, when pierced by weapons; at 
whose presence in the waters earth trembled, 
shaken by his movements, even though in 
bonds; and who, overwhelmed with rocks, 
remained unhurt. I am desirous to bear an 
account of the unequalled might of that sage 


worshipper of Visnu, to whose marvellous 
history you have alluded. Why was he assailed 


107 


by the weapons of the sons of Diti ? why was 
so righteous a person thrown into the sea? 
wherefore was he overwhelmed with rocks? 
why bitten by venomous snakes? why hurled 
from the mountain crest? why cast into the 
flames? why was he made a mark for the tusks 
of the clephants of the spheres ? wherefore 
was the blast of death directed against him by 
the enemies of the gods? why did the priests of 
the Daityas practise ceremonies for his 
destruction; why were the thousand illusions 
of Samvara exercised upon him? and for what 
purpose was deadly poison administered to 
him by the servants of the king, but which was 
innocuous as food to his sagacious son? 


WA Va AAMT WET ETAT: | 

Utd Agta TETATaTT TAHT 8 Il 
a fe algect aa aa cee edt fe as 
sara faa a: wera Fare ez 
afer atur fret Serarcanen 
aA: Gay AANSHASHT: 11 V3 
aahats wean faa fara 

Aaa: Wed WAT TATATATGAST AI VY I 
meth erat ferme sift Aqer 

WO: waran aret fee Yat: ATT Vk I 
Wedd eee we faery 
OREO RICE IRICL SOL LC AES 
Ste sifaeygeet sernigt wleyiiseare: | 


All this I am anxious to hear: the history of 
the magnanimous Prahlada; a legend of great 
marvels. Not that it is a wonder that he should 
have been uninjured by the Daityas; for who 
can injure the man that fixes his whole heart 
on Visnu? but it is strange that such inveterate 
hatred should have been shown, by his own 
sin, to one so virtuous, so unweariedly 


occupied in worshipping Visnu. You can 


explain to me for what reason the sons of Diti 
offered violence to one so pious, so illustrious, 
so attached to Visnu, so free from guile. 
Generous enemies wage no war with such as 
he was, full of sanctity and every excellence; 


108 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





how should his own father thus behave 
cowards him? Tell me _ therefore, most 
illustrious Muni. the whole story in detail: I 
wish to hear the entire narrative of the 
sovereign of the Daitya race. 


108 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





was the god of riches; he was the judge of the 
dead; and he appropriated to himself, without 
reserve, all that was offered in sacrifice to the 
gods. The deities therefore, flying from their 
seats in heaven, wandered, through fear of the 
Daitya, upon the earth, disguised in mortal 
shapes. Having conquered the three worlds, he 
was inflated with pride, and, eulogized by the 
Gandharvas, enjoyed whatever he desired. The 
Gandharvas the Siddhas, and the snake-gods 
all attended upon the mighty Hiranyakasipu, 


CHAPTER 17 


CASMISEATT: 
(W@leahtdasary) 


UUs Saray as he sat at the banquet. The Siddhas delighted 
~~ - stood before him, some playing on musical 
tra oat AR ss 2 instruments. some singing songs in his praise, 


NSIT WalaTTaAA ET AST I VN 
fed: Yat verdiat fecaeferg: oem 
Actes aorfra Tet azarae: 11 21 
SRAAHNG I: W Ua Alaa waa 
AIT AT: ATTRA: 1 3 Ul 


and others shouting cries of victory; whilst the 
nymphs of heaven danced gracefull in the 
crystal palace, where the Asura with pleasure 
quafled the inebriating cup. 


TET UAT TEMA: MeBlal ATA ATT: | 
TONS AATTSMT WHS MASH: Lott 


CTA: AISI AW Waray es AA: = 

BMATATY A LAT TYMSTT VI dete ; praee-amee 

ay cat dee ie seal ales UATHeT Yea: fegderaaeaatn 2a 
Wanita Tear frat Faq 


facrerat wd famron oat ATT Gt 


faeen figat ud Sotedardetta: fewaafog: wre werent 2211 


The illustrious son of the Daitya king, 


sary wraddyy fara fra ¢ 


Urea wera feraafery wan 


Prahlada. being yet a boy, resided in the 
dwelling of his preceptor, where he read such 
writings as are studied in early years. On one 


STAs wae Farrag: Wie . 
occasion he came, accompanied by his 


HATHA TAMA teacher, to the court of his father, and bowed 


STS Waa: Fret Yatra 1c 1 before his feet as he was drinking. 
aa wpa Vaasa: | Hiranyakasipu desired his prostrate son to rise, 


ait Ut yer Yeh: Wray BATE eI ang sate 1 am 
Pardsara said—Listen Maitreya, to the fecoreaferyeara 


story of the wise and magnanimous Prahlada, yagat waat acd! ary Eenfaayl 
whose adventures are ever interesting and —_— wae fofirry 
instructive. Hiranyakasipu, the son of Diti, had mae a 
formerly brought the three worlds under his _ Hiranyakasipu said- “Repeat, boy, in 
authority, confiding in a boon bestowed upon Substance, and agreeably, what during the 
him by Brahma.' He had usurped the period of your studies you have acquired,” 
sovereignty of Indra, and exercised of himself yete zara 


the functions of the sun, of air, of the lord of 
waters, of fire. and of the moon. He himself Aaa ae: areata MNT aaa 


BOOK I, CHAP. 17 


109 





aera year sat aererareraTN Px 


SATE STG eg 
WOTASTET WEA WAHOTATUTTN 24 I 


Prahlada replied— “Hear, O sire, what in 
obedience to your commands I will repeat, the 
substance of all I have learned: listen 
attentively to that which wholly occupies my 
thoughts. I have learned to adore him who if 
without beginning, middle, or end, increase or 
diminution; the imperishable lord of the world, 
the universal causes.” 


UU Sata 
Wa fyra des: BTC: | 
fates TTS We VHRLATATISHT: 11 VE II 
Parasara said— "On hearing these words, 
the sovereign of the Daityas, his eyes red with 


wrath, and lip swollen with indignation, turned 
to the preceptor of his, son, and said, 


fewaanigrsart 


saan! fara a favangqrafar 

start wifedt area aaa sua! gon 

HiranyakaSipu said— “Vile Brahman, what 
is this preposterous commendation of my foe, 
that, in disrespect to me. you have taught this 
boy to utter?” 


TaEara 
cela! FT alae aerarTEa 
wae aad sate T Ya Veit 
The Guru replied— "O king of the Daityas, 
it is not worthy of you to give way to passion: 


that which your son has uttered, he has not 
been taught by me." 


fewaafergearas 
STMAaS Ta SAS AT! Wee BeAANT! 
aaafes Ae wealfa Teeran 2211 


Hiranyakasipu said— "by whom has this 
lesson, boy, been taught you? your teacher 
denies that it proceeds from him." 


ele sara 


wrett fawyrsreer arat at ete Fea: 

Ta UAT Aa! BH: BA VIA oll 

Prahlada answered— “Visnu, father is the 
instructor of the whole world: what else 


should any one teach or learn. save him. the 
supreme spirit?" 


fecoraferyeara 
aise far: qeda! a gale ga: WA: 
ATATHATAS FCA: WAT AT 2 


“Blockhead," exclaimed the king, "who is 
this Visnu, whose name you thus reiterate so 
impertinently before me, who am _ the 
sovereign of the three worlds?” 


Fele Sata 
T Vea Gey areas ut Ter 
Sat Ger tae fave a fay: TAIT AM 
"The glory of Visnu,"” replied Prahlada, "is 
to be medicated upon by the devout; it cannot 


be described: he is the supreme lord, who is all 
things, and from whom all things proceed." 


fevorafereara 
Utataaisa! feat wera 
aantet Weare Woratfe GA: FA 23 


To this the king rejoined, "Are you 
desirous of death, fool, that you give the title 
of supreme lord to any one whilst I survive?" 
Waele Sata 

aq haet aa! Wa WaT 
a Taya vases fea: | 
erat faery WATT 
Wale alg Her fare vi 

"Visnu, who is Brahma," said Prablada, "is 
the creator and protector, not of me alone, but 
of al! human beings, and even, father, of you: 


he is the supreme lord of all. Why should you, 
sire, be offended?" 


fevrraieryeara 
Was: aiser wea edad 


110 


STAM ACANATATATT: 1 VE 
Wele Jara 
q haet Neged a fawy- 
Tay Mar Vacated: | 
a Ut waardies faa: ! ary 
WARTS FAheh AAT VEU 


Hiranyakasipu then exclaimed, "What evil 
spirit has entered into the breast of this silly 
boy, that thus, like one possessed, be utters 
such profanity?" “Not into my heart alone," 
said Prahlada, "has Visnu entered, but he 
prevadas all the regions of the universe, and 
by his omnipresence influences the conduct of 
all beings, mine, father, and thine.”" 


feroratoryeara 

PETS SE: WITS TEI 

Alita guia: cat Faverfaaereqarn 291 

Away with the wretch." cried the king; 
"take him to hit preceptor's mansion. By 


whom could he have becn instigatcd to repeat 
the lying praises of my foe.’ 


WU Sara 
Symisat wer setifat yes WA: 
ware faa egret: 2c 
Hreasaa A Hell WeTEAALAT: | 
Waa aTat Fa! Ta afar WirsATAI 28 tt 


According to the commands of his father. 
Prahlada was conducted by the Daityas back to 
the house of his Guru; where, assiduous in 
attendance on his preceptor, he constantly 
improved in wisdom. After a considerable 
time had elapsed, the sovereign of the Asuras 
scnt for him again; and on his arrival in his 
presence, desired him to recite some poetical 
composition. Prahlada immediately began. 


Vela Sava 


Ya: WATER AAA ATATATA 
SU VHA FA fam: WataTi 3 oll 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


May he from whom matter and soul 
originate, from whom all that moves or is 
unconscious proceeds, he who is the cause of 
all this creation, Visnu, be favourable unto us. 


feaaigrgeara 

SUT SETA AMAT Set Sea 

MAHAN F: HeTSTAT We: 11 3 VU 
WUT Sara 

SUMATRA EAT WTA STAT: | 

SATA ATT AIT: TATA Il 3 VI 

On hearing which.  MHiranyakasipu 
exclaimed, "Kill the wretch; he is not fit to 
live, who is a traitor to his friends, a burning 
brand to his own race:" and his attendants, 
obedient to his orders, snatched up their 
weapons, and rushed in crowds upon Prahlada, 
to destroy him. 


were Sart 
fay: pray gore afer are sen Ferd: 
SATA ART AT PATARATAATAT TB 3 
TUN Sart 
aat: BAM eet: wreteareaisha Baz 
Waa ASATHCATATS FATT BV 


The prince calmly looked upon them and 
said, "Daityas, as truly as Visnu is present in 
your weapons and in my body, so truly shall 
those weapons fail to harm me:" and 
accordingly, although struck heavily and 
repeatedly by hundreds of the Daityas, the 
prince felt not the least pain, and his strength 
was ever renewed. 


fevoraisry sara 
ada! fatradea aftuereraten:| 
ara FT werearte wrferentatran 3 4 
Wele sara 
Te TaTaTaUeTfetur Fert 
areata aa free 
afer we warrrdate- 
Wats WalTaaaet ATA 3 & tl 


BOOK I, CHAP. 17 


11! 





His father then endeavoured to persuade 
him to refrain from glorifying his enemy, and 
promised him immunity if he .would not be so 
foolish as to persevere: but Prahlada replied, 
that he felt no fear as long as his immortal 
guardian against all dangers was present in his 
mind, the recollection of whom was alone 
sufficient to dissipate all the perils consequent 
upon birth or human infirmities. 


fevvratyryeara 


AT A: BUt! sTEaMTAAAT SATA 
famarenarada: Wa Tat Par 3191 


WUT Sara 
SIMI FAA: HEATH 
SMT AAA MAA ANCAUT: 13 SI 
SB aanata: HOT Saat Wert: | 
4 faderaat ut aeayerereaterd:113 811 


Hiranyakasipu, highly exasperated, 
commanded the serpents to fall upon his 
disobedient and insame son, and bite him to 
death-with their envenomed fangs: and 
thereupon the great snakes Kuhaka, Taksaka, 
and Andhaka, charged with fatal poison, bit 
the prince in every pare of his body; but he, 
with thoughts immovably fixed on Krsna.felt 
no pain from their wounds, being immersed in 
rapturous recollections of that divinity. 


aut: ae: 


ep fag Wort: Bhetat 
THUY AG CaIy: HATsI 
Wea aT: tacuatts a 
wonfer Seat! HTAHATN ¥ ott 
Then the snakes cried to the king. and said. 
"Our fangs are broken; our jewelled crests are 
burst; there is fever in our hoods, and fear in 
our hearts; but the skin of the youth is still 


unscathed: have recourse, monarch of the 
Daityas, to some other expedient.” 


fewaaigneara 
2 fern: ! agecafter! 


LE LSICULALE Ll 
cer ferret sate TET 
Barat: weaferat FATT: I ¥ Vl 
Ho. elephants of the skies" exclaimed the 
demon, "unite your tusks, and destroy this 
deserter from his father, and conspirer with my 
foes. It is thus that often our progeny are our 
destruction as fire consumes the wood from 
which it springs. 


UUs Jargy 
ad: & fenntatet wyfararafat: | 
Ufaat aroiys faarradifsa: X21 
ae Mifare: WEA: | 
vir ser waret wrer a wre fae AAT BN 
ot Tat Hlerenaraga: 
Vint aeat A act AAA 
Tetfaurarafaarritsa 
HATA TOT ATT: 1 SB UI 


The young prince was then assailed by the 
elephants of the skies, as vast as mountain 
peaks; cast down upon the earth, and trampled 
on, and gored by their tusks: but he continucd 
to call to mind Govinda, and the tusks of the 
elephants were blunted against his breast. 
"Behold,” he said to his father, "the tusks of 
the elephants, as hard as adamant, are blunted; 
but this is not by any strength of mine: calling 
upon Janarddana is my defence against such 
fearful affliction." 


feroratoryeare 

wareramra! afarcada fens: | 

aa BNA ea SATATAT WTA YG UI 
WU Saray 


AMHSITSATT aT Ad: | 

Ware adat afe cag: Tarerafaats vel 

Then said the king to his attendants, 
"Dismiss the elephants, and let fire consume 
him; and do you, deity of the winds, blow up 
the fire, that this wicked wretch may be 


112 


consumed." And the Danavas piled a mighty 
heap of wood around the prince, and kindled a 
fire, to burn him, as their master had 
commanded, 


Wele sara 
ade ate: warfcarsty 
TAT Sear WHAAS eT 
UVM VaeATON TATA 
via Bator feet Warr vio 


But Prahlada cried, "Father, this fire, 
though blown up by the winds, burneth me 
not; and all around I behold the face of the 
skies, cool and Fragrant, with beds of lotus 
flowers.”' 


WI Sata 
ay deat Wryubtaenen fet: 
Wife wera: Ae Aes aaa Yc 


Then the Brahmanas who were the sons of 
Bhargava, illustrious priests, and reciters of 
the Sama-Veda, said to the king of the 
Daityas, 


qian ay: 
TRH! Frerearat aay aetsa AAAS TM 
at tahrary art WH AA ve I 
aM Tat Aer T faa as TT 
aan fauararerra fartteret s1fereater & 0 
Alera Pacha craw Ba: 
AMSA BIAS AEP A ATS & Vl 
a mente Bt: wae sae ate 
ad: Feat Ta aha Farr & 2 


Priests said— "Sire, restrain your wrath 
against your own son. How should anger 
succeed in finding a place in heavenly 
mansions? As for this lad, we will be his 
instructors, and teach him obediently to labour 
for the. destruction of your foes. Youth is the 
season, king, of many errors, and you should 
not therefore be relentlessly offcnded with a 
child. If he will not listen to us, and abandon 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


the cause of Hari, we will adopt infallible 
measures to work his death." 


WU SAI 


Tamara dent: yaad: 
SRT PTAATS Yt Wa ASATTI & 3 1 


The king of the Daityas, thus solicited by 
the priests, commanded the prince to be 
liberated from the midst of the flames. 


aal THe Wet: U AA gear 
SATA YSU TIAL TATU 4 SU 


Again established in the dwelling of his 
preceptor, Prahlada gave lessons himself to the 
sons of the demons, in the intervals of his 
leisure. 


wele sara 
saat uaa A svar fees: | 
4 URES A ATO & & HI 
WA Sed dd: Wal aq: wena ata 
seareda Wala aatspears FTG GUI 
ae WMA WeqeeyaTM: | 
wera eyad AACA ASAT TATU G9 tI 


"Sons of the offspring of Diti,’' he was 
accustomed to say to them. "hear from me the 
supreme truth; nothing else is fit to be 
regarded; nothing else here is an object to be 
coveted. Birth, infancy, and youth and the 
portion of all creatures; and then succeeds 
gradual and inevitable decay, terminating with 
all beings, children of the Daityas. in death: 
this is manifestly vis'ble to all; to you as it is 
to me. 


Fae OT UA AAT ATT 

STTASS Ta aa AOE FaARaNG Cl 
marae aad F FAA 
MAMTA MAG | TANATAT TATA & 8 UI 
TTT Tesla Tay 

Wad Terai ¢:he fe A TANG oll 
setae sarara Bateorg 
MAA ATgAAATOT Wareista AarAa & VI 


BOOK I, CHAP. 17 


113 





That the dead are born again, and that it 
cannot be otherwise, the sacred texts are 
wattrant: but production, cannot be without a 
material cause; and as long as conception and 
parturition are the material causes of repeated 
birth, so long, be sure. is pain inseparable from 
every period of existence. The simpleton, in 
his inexperience. fancies that the alleviation of 
hunger, thirst, cold. and the like is pleasure; 
but of a truth it is pain; for suffering gives 
delight to those whose vision is darkened by 
delusion, as fatigue would be enjoyment to 
limbs that are incapable of motion.” 

ST PTAA YAATSTA HATTA: | 

SS AAMT AS-HAAN AEA WOT 1G VU 
ATA PaaS PEAT 
ae Aq Whar yal AH afanfs Big 3 


This vile body is a compound of phlegm 
and other humours. Wherc are its beauty, 
grace, fragrance, or other estimable qualitics? 
The fool that is fond of a body composed of 
flesh, blood, matter, ordure, urine,. membrane, 
marrow, and bones will be enamoured of hell. 


STAY: PRAT AAT TAT WHT AT EMT 

fad quae aq facie Bat: v1 

wife & searga! waa usm 

Mas WT Way SE Vales Teo han & Il 

Wad: Hed Wy: TAI Ara: Far 

aaa Fay Ces PSMA GG I 

wa we We wate aa aarafasa: | 

Tpereet aa Tee fersferi g ott 

WI Wed o-G fraarorey writ aq 

array Teas MAAN AG cI 

™ @ Gacrnstt sata 

ale aq Hes Aa TSH SATAN I 

The agreeableness of fire is caused by cold; 

of water, by thirst; of food, by hunger: by 
other circumstances their contraries are 
equally agreeable.* The child of the Daitya 


who takes to himself a wife introduces only so 
much misery into his bosom; for as many as 


are the cherished affections of a living 
creature, SO many are the thorns of anxiety 
implanted in his heart; and he who has large 
possessions in his house is haunted, wherever 
he goes, with the apprehension that they may 
be lost or burnt or stolen. Thus there is great 
pain in being born: for the dying man there are 
the tortures of the judge of the deceased, and 
of passing again into the womb. If you 
conclude that there is little enjoyment in the 
embryo state, you must then admit that the 
world is made up of pain. 


AeaaAy MAST Warr 

Tat Bead Tet fawapS: WTATATI 8 ot 

WT arta aa Sen cat Say VTA: | 

FU AAA-AATEN AT SRT ATA: IN'9 2 
Tess Wafearrat iret sara Fan 

Fare aren we afverencet fer 9 I 


Verily I say to you that in this ocean of the 
world, this sea of many sorrows, Visnu is your 
only hope. If you say, you know nothing of 
this; ‘we are children; embodied spirit in 
bodies is eternal; birth, youth, decay, are the 
properties of the body, not. of the soul.’ But it 
is in this way that we deceive ourselves. ‘I am 
yet a child; but it is my purpose to exert 
myself when I am a youth. I am yet a youth; 
but when I become old 1 will do what is 
needful for the good of my soul. 


gaelsé aa aalfor arent + aa 

fe aftenth waren aaa TA HAT 311 
Ue SUpAMAAAA: Ter: Tay 
TASS alt A Herfae Praha: os 
aed wletanrach Stay faassen: 

BA ATIF T Aga MATT SATTI GG 
TENE STEN facet Tat HT Aer 
MeT-Aeat-FaTaaeTaTaYA: 1119 & 


1 am now old, and all my duties are to be 
fulfilled. How shall. I, now that my faculties 
fail me do what was left undone when my 
strength was unimpaired?’ In this manner do 
men, whilst their minds are distracted by 


114 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





sensual pleasures, ever propose, and never 
attain final beatitude: they the thirsting. 
Devoted in childhood to play, and in youth to 
pleasure, ignorant and impotent they find that 
old age is come upon them. Therefore even in 
childhood let the embodied soul acquire 
discriminative wisdom, and, independent of 
the conditions of infancy, youth, or age, strive 
incessantly to be freed. 


aedg a Waren Ble Alt AAT! 
qearaa fan: aratat args: iol 
STA: TAU AIST Tae Teas wey 
Urea Tat VATA TAS 2 
ayaa afer afta feerfrerg 
WAM AAAS VASA WETTTIG 8 


This, then, is what I declare to you; and 
since you know that it is not untrue, do ‘ou, 
out of regard to me, call to your minds Visnu, 
the libcrator from all bondage. What difficulty 
is there in thinking upon him, who, when 
remembered, bestows prosperity; and by 
recalling whom to memory, day and night, all 
Sin is cleansed away? Let all your thoughts 
and affections be fixed on him, who is present 
in all beings, and you shall laugh at every care. 


aaNet aetahaet TTT 

WaT MAT YAY SA WA: HU Heo 
wa ator yet AACS UTA 

qe ante Hate aftarct Aas < gil 
aeaui Tas ee Har Vea AT: 
viearaeisfaaest carafe Aaa 2 2A 


The whole world is suffering under a triple 
affliction’ What wise man would feel hatred 
towards beings who are. objects” of 
compassion? If fortune be propitious to them, 
and I am unable to partake of the like 
enjoyments, yet wherefore should I cherish 
malignity towards those who are more 
prosperous than myself? I should rather 
sympathise with their happiness; for the 
suppression of malignant feelings is of itself a 


reward.® If beings are hostile, and indulge in 
hatred, they are objects of pity to the wise, as 
encompassed by profound delusion. 


Ud faatem dear faeneat: afsat vam 
PANTY Aa PAT: FAA AA c 31 
faa: wayres faonfeatad ara 
FOAM TETeNe ferent: tic vi 
AGMA Mes THE FI TA TTA 

aa aed aearay ger wearer Fras ferquc & ti 
Ol AAT A AAU aT Aa-ATIAM 
qaaqaaunai ar a feat BT Waal 
aaa a tees a fat: 

qT WASH uefaetetarerasya: ii coil 
TATA SAra- wile- TeMfeh ea 
Soe Wes: TITUS I 

7 Urhiad Shen Terdesem 
aIMTea Wet aca aera ete Waa Ss SI 


These are the reasons for repressing hate 
which are adapted to the capacities of those 
who see the deity distinct from his creatures. 
Hear, briefly, what influences those who have 
approached the truth. This whole world is but 
a manifestation of Visnu, who is identical with 
all things : and it if therefore to be regarded by 
the wise as not differing from, but as the same 
with themselves. Let us therefore lay aside the 
angry passions of our race, and so strive that 
we obtain that perfect, pure, and eternal 
happiness, which shall be beyond the power of 
the elements or their deities, of fire, of the sun, 
of the moon, of wind, of Indra, of the regent of 
the sea; which shall be unmolested by spirits 
of air or earth; by Yaksas, Daityas, or their 
chiefs; by the serpent-gods or monstrous 
demigods of Svarga; which shall be 
uninterrupted by men or beasts, or by the 
infirmities of human nature; by bodily 
sickness and disease,” or hatred, envy, malice, 
passion, or desire; which nothing shall molest, 
and which every one who fixes his whole heart 
on KeSava shall enjoy. 


BOOK I, CHAP. 17 


115 





carta 

Tr at ate wast Tata 

Waa sear: WaaTyTA 
TAA TIATR ATE 8 9 It 

afer wat feaftrercaenat 
THAT CURA 

SaaS. TATA 
fa: tered wre SF WaT HOTT BN 

Sta sitferaya ear werniel MeeeISeATA: | 

Verily I say unto you, that you shall have 
no satisfaction in various revolutions through 
this treacherous world, but that you will obtain 
placidity for ever by propitiating Visnu, whose 
adoration is perfect calm. What here 1s 
difficult of attainment, when he is pleased ? 
Wealth, pleasure, virtue, are things of little 
moment. Precious is the fruit that you shall 
gather, be assured, from the exhaustless store 
of the tree of true wisdom." 

: KKK 
NOTES 

1. The boon, according to the Vayu Purana. was, 
that he should not be slain by any created being : 
the Kirma adds. except by Visnu. The Bhagavata 
has a similar boon as the Vayu, and therefore, says 
the commentator. Visnu assumed the form of the 
Nrsirmhha. as being that of neither a man oor an 
animal. 

2. The Puranas teach constantly incompatible 
doctrines. According to this passage, the Supreme 
Being is not the ioert cause of creation only.. but 
exercises the functions of an active Providence. The 
commentator quotes a text of the Veda in support 
of this view: We Wari Peale! Universal soul 
entering into men, governs their conduct.’ 
Incongruities, however, are as frequent in the 
Vedas as in the Puranas; but apparently the most 
ancient parts of the Hindu ritual recognised an 
active ruler in the Creator of the universe; the 
notion of abstract deity originating with the schools 
of philosophy. 

3. This is the purport of the sentence apparently, 
and is that which the comment in part confirms. 
Literally it is. ‘A blow is the pleasure of those 
whose eyes are darkened by ignorance, whose 


limbs, exceedingly benumbed, desire.pleasure by 
exercise, The commentator divides the sentence, 
however, and reads it, 'As fatigue would be like 
pleasure to paralyzed limbs; and a blow is 
enjoyment to those who are blinded by delusion; 
that is, by love; for to them a slap, or even a kick. 
from a mistress would be a favour.’ It is not 
improbably an allusion to some such venerable 
pastime as blindman's buff. The interpretation, 
however. leaves the contruction of the first half of 
the sentence imperfect, unless the nominative and 
verb apply to both portions : aeratatharmat sara 
Fehon wise werish War | 

4. They are so far from being sources of pleasure 
in themselves, that, under different contrasts, they 
become sources of pain. Heat is agreeable in cold 
weather : cold is agreeable in hot weather; heat 
would then be disagreeable. Drink is pleasant to a 
thirsty man :_ thirst is agreeable to one who has 
drunk too much; and.more drink would be painful. 
So of food, and of other contrasts. 

5. 'Divine knowledge is the province only of 
those who can separate soul from body : that is. 
who live independent of bodily infirmities and 
passions. We have not overcome corporeal 
vicissitudes, and have therefore no concern with 
such abstruse inquiries.’ This is the commentator's 
explanation of the passage, 

6. frafaa:1 Alluding, says the commentator, to 
the fable of a washerman, who, whilst washing his 
clothes in the Ganges, proposed daily to drink of its 
waters, but forgot his purpose in his occupation : or 
of a boy. who proposed the same as he pursued fish 
after fish, and never accomplished his intention, 
being engrossed by his sport : both died without 
drinking. 

7. The three kinds of affliction of the Samkya 
philosophy : internal, as bodily or mental distress; 
external, as injuries from men, animals etc.; and 
superhuman, or inflictions by gods or demons. See 
S. Karika, ver. 1. 

8. The construction of the text is elliptical and 
brief, but the sense is sufficiently clear. 3a watt 
So SA MSU | Ae TTY Heala siseHet Aa: 11 The 
order of the last pada is thus transposed by the 
commentator : Ud! gue Bilata tell ‘Whence (from 
feeling pleasure) the abandonment of enmity 1s 
verily the consequence.’ 


116 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





9. The orininal rather unpoetically specifies 
some of these, or fever, ophthalmia, dysentery, 
spleen, liver, etc. The whole of these defects are the 
individuals of the three species of pain alluded to 
before. 

kk K 


116 


CHAPTER 18 
STBTETISEATA: 
(weet faatora ceary whet 
facoraforarest:) 


WIN Sara 
wee eras est deradstar 
STAY: A AAT YEMTEA WaT: Il 8 
The Danavas. observing .the conduct of 
Prahlada, reported it to the king, least they 


should incur his despleasure. He sent for his 
cooks, and said to them, 


fewaraigeaa 
@ Wal Wa yAstrataraty safe: 
qantesrat SBT seafarers 2 
wettest fad wet wduety dra 
samara wat stat aT faerstarqi 3 1 


O cooks! My vile and unprincipled son is 
now teaching others his impious doctrines: be 
quick, and put an end to him. Let deadly 
poison be mixed-up with all his vainds, 
without his knowledge. Hesitate not, but 
destroy the wretch without delay, 


UUM Sata 
aq dle Aa: Welter Weer 
fanart aera frat Tet AeA: ISI 
ated fad ate a: 
ara Ue AIT Ay ANTI G HI 
saat Taq Ya Weld: MATA: | 
Saal ALATA APSA & II 
AAMT VATE Sot EBT wefsaA 
SATU Wore AGaTI 9 1 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


Accordingly they did so, and administered 
poison to the virtuous Prahlada, as his father 
had commanded them. Prahlada, repeating the 
name of the imperishable, ate and digested the 
food in which the deadly poison had been 
infused, and suffered no harm from it, either in 
body or mind for it had been rendered 
innocuous by the name of the eternal. Be- 
holding the strong poison digested, those who 
had prepared the food were filled with dismay, 
and hastened to the king, and fell down before 
him, and said, 

Yal Sg: 
cena! fad carentirefasiiror 
afot G4 Wert WEIeT Yas Aci 

Cooks said— “King of the Daityas, the 
fearful poison given by us to your son has 


been digested by him along with his food, as if 
it were innocent. 


ferrrenhergeart 
waa aadat & & wer serge: 
Hea eT faarens sare At Freq el 
HiranyakaSipu, on hearing this, exclaimed, 
"Hasten, hasten, ministrant priests of the 


Daitya race I instantly perform the rites that 
will effect his destruction !" 


TIGL Sara 
MATA Ad: MeTeeA GUA: | 
araqaaMay a were fara aT 20 


Then the priests went to Prahlada, and, 
having repeated the hymns of the Sama-Veda, 
said to him, as he respectfully hearkened. 


qufen ay: 
WANA St ayer! TIN: Her 
cee aaa fervaenforatsarq 2 ei 
fa ta: fanada fara dar: 
faat t adettarat a ata afaeafan 22 
aed Ua wt faverceraieary 
are fiat PAT TROT UTA Ss VB 


BOOK I, CHAP. 18 


"You have been born prince, in the family 
of Brahma, celebrated in the three worlds, the 
son of Hiranyakasipu, the king of the Daityas; 
why should you acknowledge dependance 
upon the gods? why upon the eternal? Your 
father is the stay of all worlds, as you they self 
in turn shall be. Desist, then, from celebrating 
the praises of an enemy; and remember, that of 
all venerable preceptors, a father is most 
venerable. | 


Welg Sava 


VARTA: | PATTER 

Aid: WaHswMpary Acted Bsa FTI vit 

fren a wm wafer soregeRpetea: | 

WAAR AAAATT ATTA 24 I 

Teorey weet frat wet Ts: 

Gers wife cacait fe + feet 26 1 

fat Wet Wes: WT: WaT: | 

aaa areata af A Pera ol 

Teed ferry Fo eeTy 

al galt wargth fag Aaq aatsdadqi ec 

Prahlada replied to them, "Illusctious 
Brahmanas, it is true that the Family of Maric1 
is renowned in the three worlds; this cannot be 
denied: and I also admit, what is equally 
indisputable, that my father is mighty over the 
universe. There is no error, not the least, in 
what you have said, 'that a father is the most 
venerable of all holy teachers:' he is a vene- 
rable instructor, no doubt, and is ever to be 
devoutly reverenced. To all these things I have 
nothing to object; they find a rcady assent in 
my mind: but when you say, 'Why should I 
depend upon the eternal?’ who can give assent 
to this as right ? the words are void of 
meaning." 


SUA Aisvaaatt vat Maar: | 
WES U YA: we fads arate 29 Il 
ay At: faartst By Mt WTar WA 
FAM Aardt Aig WS A ACAI Fol 
TUAHAMAM: Feat Sere: | 


117 


aqeatad wend wear fee fate gare ei 
Tifafesdator adarherad: | 

MY: WATT; ATATTAMTTUT: 11 VA 
AAA PRAT TET TAT ATCA 
AATTARHAT YR ARTA: 1 2 3 I 
ASS AeA A Aaa HAUT 
fares TST FTI It 

aa antares aimantt wet feat: | 

carta fe fateranrat feagerti 24 1 


fas agikht Tara Way WA 
aaq Ay aTsary. ferrets CATHACTS : 11 2 & I 


Having said thus much, he was silent 
awhile, being restrained by respect to their 
sacred functions; but he was unable to repress 
his smiles, and again said, "What need is there 
of the eternal? admirable! most worthy of you 
who are my venerable preceptors. Hear what 
need there is of the eternal. If to hearken will 
not give you pain. The fourfold objects of men 
are said to be virtue, desire, wealth, final 
emancipation. Is he who is the source of all 
these of no avail ? Virtue was derived from 
the eternal by Daksa, Marichi, and other 
patriarchs; wealth has been obtained from him 
by others; and by others, the enjoyment of 
their desires: whilst those who. through true 
wisdom and holy contemplation, have come to 
know his essence, have been released from 
their bondage, and have attained freedom from 
existence for ever. The glorification of Hari, 
attainable by unity, is the root of all riches, 
dignity, renown, wisdom, progeny. 
righteousness, and liberation. Virtue, wealth, 
desire, and even final freedom, Brahmans, are 
fruits bestowed by him. How then can it be 
said, 'What need is there of the eternal ? But 
enough of this: what occasion is there to say 
more? You are my venerable preceptors, and 
speak you good or evil, it is not for my weak 
judgment to decide." 


quiet wy: 
SEAM a eA are Tara: | 


118 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





Wa FT aed Ta AASV SAN 2011 

Tees TA AT AAT 

aa: Heat Fraga Ta SBA SHAUN 

The priests said to him, "We preserved you, 
boy, when you were about to be consumed by 
fire. confiding that you would no longer 
eulogize your father's foes: we knew not how 
unwise you were: but if you will not desist 
form this infatuation at our advice, we shall 
even proceed to perform the rites that will 
inevitably descroy you." ' 
Waele Sava 

&: SA Sala Wr: BH: rT WA 

afer wath Aare MAT AY AAACN 22M 

To this menace. Prahlada answered, "What 
living creature slays, or is slain ? what living 
creature preserves, or is preserved? Each is 
his own destroyer or preserver, as be follows 
evil or good’." 


TU Sata 
SMTA A Heel SeTTVa fear: | 
FAMGAMAAT FSA ATA TAG HATN 3 0 1 
STAT ANTE UTS ATTRA TTA: | 
Wert A YaHasl Ft Waray aafan 3 v1 
a AT Ras WT Vor Grerey AAT 
SMI list Wat aaa Para ATTN VU 
SATA WTA Caer Site: | 
WET Walt AAA A VTS ST HAN 31 
SOY aa Uae Urfeay AT ATA: | 
AAT A AAA] HCA AL ATT AN 3 VA 
Pa ceric facter a wera: 
wife POA AMATI 34 I 


Thus spoken to by the youth, the priests of 
the Daitya sovereign were incensed, and 
instantly had recourse to magic incantations. 
by which a female form, enwreathcd with 
fierce flame, was engendered: she was of 


fearful aspect, and the earth was parched 
beneath her tread, as she approached Prahlada, 
and smote him with a fiery trident on the 
breast. In vain! for the weapon fell, broken 
into a hundred pieces, upon the ground. 
Against the breast in which the imperishable 
Hari resides the thunderbold would be 
shivered, much more should such a weapon be 
split in pieces. The magic being, then directed 
against the virtuous prince by the wicked 
priests, turned upon them, and, having quickly 
destroyed them, disappeared. But Prahlada, 
beholding them perish, hastily appealed to Krs 
na, the eternal, for succour, and said, 


Wele sata 


Rae HIG STRATA 

Ute famPrarreang 3: Aer raTTaaT TN 3 & UI 
aM ay yay MASA TITS: | 

fama aa wa Stade afer: 3N 
aan wane fay WAT FT Urry 
fartarafiaastt stadt gufeari 320 
y Sqartant at Afent Agave: 

afer quot ew: ats Arf aei 
tag frames wa: uiisfer 4 afar 


aon Barer VAT Pa T TATA: NY ON 


"Oh Janarddana ! who are every where, the 
creator and substance of. the world, preserve 
these Brahmans from this magical and 
insupportable fire. As you are Visnu, present 
in all creatures, and the protector of the world, 
so let these priests be restored to life. If, whilst 
devoted to the omnipresent Visnu, I think no 
sinful resentment against my foes, let these 
priests be restored to life. If those who have 
come to slay me, those by whom poison was 
given me, the fire that would have burned, the 
elephants that would have crushed. and snakes 
that would have stung me, have been regarded 
by me as friends; if I have been unshaken in 
soul, and am without fault in your sight; then, 
I implore you, let these, the priests of the 
Asuras, be now restored to life. 


BOOK I, CHAP. 19 | 119 





UU Sara 
sepledt F aa Wee Prova: 
AATAfE YAR: WHAT ATTTN y VI 


Thus having prayed, the Brahmanas 
immediately rose up, uninjured and rejoicing; 
and bowing respectfully to Prahlada, they 
blessed him, and said, 


quien ay: 
aalqunfted-aeraera rae: | 
Yasar act! WAAAY git 


Excellent prince, may your days be many; 
irresistible be your prowess; and power and 
wealth and posterity be thine. 


WIP Jara 
SQM F aa wea wage Feat: | 
SAAT THAN TAT AGA ¥ 3 It 
Stet siferaygerat werrigiswreRseara: | 


Having thus spoken, they withdrew, and 
went and told the king of the Daityas all that 
had passed. 

NOTES 

]. This 1s not the doctrine of the impassibility of 
soul, taught in the Vedas : #1 Wad Saf Sas 
edi ot a a fast aa eft a e274 'We do not 
recognise either the doctrin. that supposes the 
slayer to slay or the slain to be killed; this (spiritual 
existence) neither kills nor is killed.’ The same is 
inculcated at great length, and with great beauty. in 
the Bhagavat Gita : 44 fe<Fa went 74 cela orae: | 
Ft FAT FT VTA AeA: | "Weapons wound it 
not; fire doth not consume it; water cannot drown 
it: nor doth it wither before the winds:' or, as 
rendered by Schlegel, "Non illum penetant tela; non 
illum comburit flamma; neque illum perfundunt 
aquae; nec ventus exsiccat,' P.17. new edition. But 
in the passage of our text. all that the Hindus 
understand of Fate. is referred to. Death or 
immunity, prosperity or adversity, are in this life 
the inevitable consequences of conduct in a prior 
existence : no man can suffer a penalty which his 
vices in a preceding state of being have not 
incurred, nor can he avoid it 1f they have. 

kK 


BOOK I, CHAP. 19 | 119 





CHAPTER 19 
Waltfagnsee: 
(meré wf farvaanforarete:, water 
fawoyetazy) 


UUM SaArT 
feats: year at grat facetaary 
Mea Yor UTES WTATATET AITOTAT 81 
Parasara said——- When Hiranyakasipu heard 
that the powerful incantations of his priests 
had been defeated, he sent for his son, and 


demanded of him the secret of his 
extraordinary might. 


fewweeaferyeara 
Were! quearatsta faraq t faateaq 
Uarafentragarel Wet Aa 2 


UW Savy 

Ua yseer frat werets qtarets: | 

wrest fig: Welfae TaAATATTN 3 11 

"Prahlada," he said, "you are possessed of 

marvellous powers; whence are they derived? 
are they the result of magic rites? or have they 
accompanied you from birth? Prahlada. thus 
interrogated, bowed down to his father's feet, 
and replied. 
Waele Sarey 

qT Wafeged ata! A ar Fate wT 

WTS UT AAPA TT ARTETA BARN YI 

are at a arora faracareey ae 

wey UTI! Bearers ferewaAN & 

SUT ATA ATA UAUST Hehe A: 

Aah Het wa TT ATP GI 

ase 7 wafers a ate aarhs an 

feray weyprereraty a Aya 911 

Wat was FG ta Yaa TAM 

aaa YM TTY a Hao 

ua way wey afacearenton 


120 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





aren ufisdaiear ways seq <u 


"Whatever power I possess, father, is 
neither the result of magic ritcs, nor is it 
inseparable from my nature; it is no more than 
that which is possessed by all in whose hearts 
Acyuta abides. He who meditates not of wrong 
to others, but considers them as himself, is 
free from the effects of sin, inasmuch the 
cause does not exist; but he who inflicts pain 
upon others, in act, thought, or speech, sows 
the seed of future birth, and the fruit that 
awaits him after birth is pain. I wish no evil to 
any, and do and speak no offence; for I behold 
KeSava in all beings, as in my own soul. 
Whence should corporeal or-mental suffering 
or pain, inflicted by elements or the gods, 
affect me, whose heart is thoroughly purified 
by him? Love, then, for all creatures will be 
assiduously cherished by all those who are 
wise in the knowledge that Hari is all things." 


UUM Tare 
sft grat a derg: wrarefyrat feaa:1 
MITTS: Wes eras go 
GUAT RETA AT, WATS 
fafa wacatery forenfirarg tate: eet 
amet faferg: wa art eeaerar:| 
aura aise: ferat weaaaer fer V2 
Ua STE SETI Sera 


wage sentra Shei 93 1 
When he had thus spoken, the Daitya 
monarch, his face darkened with fury, 
commanded his attendants to cast his son from 
the summit of the palace where he was sitting, 
and which was many Yajanas in height, down 
upon the tops of the mountains, where his 
body should be dashed to pieces against the 
rocks. Accordingly the Daityas hurled the boy 
down, and he tell cherishing Hari in his heart, 
and Earth, the nurse of all creatures, received 
him gently on her lap, thus entirely devoted to 

KeSava, the protector of the world. 


ddl facter f cawafaghuifeac 


ferrreahey: wie wreat WAT ATTN ev 


Beholding him uninjured by the fall and 
sound in every bone, Hiranyakasipu addressed 
himself to Samvara, the mightiest of 
enchanters, and said to him, 


feroaafgrgeara 
wena: waad eqaat safrarers: | 
Tat aft watercress Frei g& 


"This perverse boy is not to be destroyed 
by us: do you, who are potent in the arts of 
delusion, contrive some device for his 
destruction." 


Wat sara 
qearag ters Uys wraract AAI 
TEAM Tar aes SHEP TAT VE 1 
Samvara replied. “I will destroy him: you 
shall behold, king of the Daityas, the power of 


delusion, the thousand and the myriad artifices 
that it can employ." 


TI Sarg 
Wa: MT AIT WA Were Weas yr: 
farrier cafes: Waa AUST Vol 
wferafeiar preatsty farreac: 
Baa! aisht were: We ATASAAN eI 
aa MTA TAT Tae MRT AA 
STAT VAS SATTATeT YSRTAAI 23 UI 
ot Wee Tea MAM 
OTST THT SHAHAVAT ATI Poll 
Ayes TM aes SerareaaraTat| 
VE Hae BUEN Aaa SATII 2 i 
TARA J ser faag wat oy 
vias fereat: BATT AeTeATheTg AS: 2 
CASA A Tal SIGH: | 
RAAT AAA SANT ATTOATTTN 23 Il 
COMARAA A F AAAI 
UG) SARA: Ha: W Al WaT: AAAI vil 


BOOK I, CHAP. 19 


121 


Then the ignorant Asura Samvara practised fewwaafgrsara 


subtile wiles for the extermination of the firm- 
minded Prahlada: but he, with a tranquil heart, 
and void of malice towards Samvara. directed 
his thoughts uninterruptedly to the destroyer of 
Madhu; by whom the excellent discus, the 
flaming Sudarsana, was dispatehed to defend 
the youth; and the thousand devices of the 
evil-destined Samvara were every one foiled 
by this defender of the prince. The king of the 
Daityas then commanded the withering wind 
to breathe its blighting blast upon his son: and, 
thus commanded, the wind immediately 
penetrated into his frame, ' cold, cutting, 
drying, and insufferable. Knowing that the 
wind had entered into his' body, the Daitya 
boy applied his whole heart to the mighty 
upholder of the earth, and Janarddana, seated 
in his heart, waxed wroth, and drank up the 
fearful wind, which had thus hastened to its 
own annihilation. 


aitung Wang wat a at 

BM Aisha wat WTS ATA VA 

seUSTTARH Af TeawHSMETT 

WSAATS FT Alot UM AMAA FATT 2 tt 

Yatra Ft feats Aer Wes 

WA aed afer erase fore yon 
ara Sara 


Terrifagrearet Yat Sarat! Fea: 
Welextadt aft wntaur sath Vo 


When the devices of Samvara were all 
frustrated, and 
perished, the prudent prince repaired to the 
residence of his preceptor. His teacher 
instructed him daily in the science of polity, as 
essential to the administration of government, 
and invented by Usanas for the benefit of 
kings; and when he thought that the modest 
prince was well grounded in the principles of 
the science, he told the king that Prahlada was 
thoroughly conversant with the rules of 
government as laid down by the descendant of 
Bhrgu. 


the blighting wind had. 


frag ade aeaftaty yore: 

Were! fay arery eT we ATTN VS 

aa TreMag aeraany ai 

ang ulaig wigateraty a3 ot 

Pepatanmy siefaaaert 

Wels HAA WAH AM HEH 3 eI 

WAT TAeretd Weay AT 

aa W eearat wa Tae WATAAI 3 2H 

Hiranyakasipu therefore summoned the 
prince to his presence, and desired him to 
repeat what he had learned; how a king should 
conduct himselt towards friends or foes; what 
measures he should adopt at the three periods 
(of advance, retrogression, or stagnation); how 
he should treat his councillors, his ministers, 
the officers of his government and of his 
household, his emissaries, his subjects, those 
of doubtful allegiance, and his foes; with 
whom should he contract alliance; with whom 
engage in war; what sort of fortress he should 
construct; how forest and mountain tribes 
should be reduced; how internal grievances 
should be rooted out: all this, and what else he 
had studied, the youth was commanded by his 
father to explain. 


UUM Sava 

wforaer fag: wret mem weTeNpAOT: 113 31! 

WEE: We Cas Hatafergertan 

To this, Prahlada having bowed 

affectionately and reverentially to the feet of 
the king. touched his forehead and _ thus 
replied: 
Waele sata 

anes aaet Teun at der: 

Teas wat fag A weed AN 3 vi 

ar Mawes YeeuSt sarah 

sort: aise: aed frarearst Ara 3 Gt 

arate a avant frardtearat! AT He: 1 


122 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





eas Weatel! wert: fee wars 3 & II 
way Ae! SATA Ta 

Teast Wes fanfare aa: 3911 
wear wrary fama aaa ater a: 
aderisa fat F yaaa yrs se: NRel 


aera guresiifaaats) 
sfaaenicdet: dered! PNAS eH 


ferenrgtegticeraragrarg, Aa! SETA 
Jaretista fa a eterrgtat! waa ¥ ol 

"It is true that ‘I have been instructed in all, 
these matters. by my venerable preceptor, and [ - 
have learnt them, but I cannot in all approve » 
them. It -is - said” that. conciliation, gifts, 
punishment, and sowing dissension are the 
means of securing friends (or overcoming 
foes)!: ‘but J, father—bc not angry-“know 
neler Blends nor foes, and where no object is 
to be accomplished, the means of effecting it 
are superfluous. It were idle to talk of friend or 
foe in Govinda, who is the supreme soul, lord 
of the world, consisting of the world, ‘and who 
is identical with all beings. The divine Visnu 
is in you, father, in me and in all every where 
else; and hence how can I speak of friend or 
foe. as distinct from myself? It is therefore 
waste of time to cultivate such tedious and 
unprofitable sciences, which are but false 
knowledge, and all our energies should be 
dedicated to the acquirement of true wisdom. 
The notion that ignorance is knowledge arises, 
father, from ignorance. Does not the child, 
king of the Asuru. imagine the firefly to be a 
spark of fire? 


aq ae aa were a faen a faq 
srararanmt ad fara freatgurg x 
AAA ATTA 

fra vert! store galt aus eh 
3 fercata at tet at et arfraresfan 
aae MMASHs We At 31 

aa Wa Wert! Het wht ater: | 
cate Gat arent ater yfreda: Sv 


WSRTAAASATA TUNA WT 
ARMM Teen aeetferreraran 4 
TAT Fat ay a sesedt Here 
afirel waned a Fratorait teva vg 
tal AEM: Wye: wlargeravaa: | 
waar fanitiiatra fer vie 
Uae Wa Wy Waa 
swarmag faupiaise frersHil ¥ s 11 
Ua Hed BW MTarATE: WAT: 
 efigereqrenttay wee aetersiara: Thal 


-That-is active duty, which is not for our 
ea that 1s knowledge, which is for our 
liberation: all other duty is good only unto 
weariness; all other knowledge is only the 
cleverness of an artist. Knowing this, I look 
upon all such acquirement as profitless. That 
which is really profitable hear me, oh mighty 
monarch, thus prostrate before you, proclaim. 
He who cares not for dominion, he who cares 
not for wealth, shall assuredly obtain both in a 
life to come. All men. illustrious prince, are 
toiling to be great; but the destinies of men, 
and not their own exertions, are the cause of 
greatness. Kingdoms are the gifts of fate, and 
are bestowed upon the stupid, the ignorant, the 
cowardly, and those to whom the science of 
government is unknown. Let him therefore 
who covets the goods of fortune be assiduous 
in the practice of virtue: let him who hopes for 
final liberation learn to look upon all things as 
equal and the same. Gods, men, animals, birds, 
reptiles, all are but forms of one eternal Visnu, 
existing as it were detached from himself. By 
him who knows this, all the existing world, 
fixed or movable, is to be regarded as identical] 
with himself, as proceeding alike from Visnu, 
assuming a universal from. When this is 
known, the glorious god of all who is without 
beginning or end, is pleased; and when he is 
pleased, there is an end of affliction." 


UAHA F ANT AYES ATTA 
| TeURATY: YA Vat AAEM STATI & 01 


BOOK I, CHAP. 19 


Jara TU ala aad: wwacfaan 
Faferer orforar urfor eqenrey Ste GaN & Bh 


On hearing this, HiranyakaSipu started up 
from his throne in a fury, and spurned his son 
on the breast with his foot. Burning with rage, 
he wrung his hands, and exclaimed, 


faruzantgryeara 
& fanfert! & wet! & acta wera 


aPracedea fererat at Perera & 21 
STMT THe Maen staat: | 


HAA YSRT AAA GTAP G 3 

SEM Aftasantas wears: | 

Tafa HUT SEAT aa WaT: 1 VII 

"Ho Vipracitti! ho Rahu! ho Bali”! bind 
him with strong bands.’ and cast him into the 
ocean, or all the regions, the Daityas and 
Danavas. will become converts to the 
doctrines of this silly wretch. Repeatedly 
prohibited by us, he still persists in the praise 
of our enemies. Death is the Just retribution of 
the disobedient. 


UU SATE 
ade Tea seat Fazal Ft APTA: | 
Tea Yee falerq: aforereran & 4 I 
AAT Meta Weer Weare: | 
SHAS TL UL ATU WAAAY Il 
yeteanhaet FBT TAM AeTsTaTI 
ferraenfergdentente AETATI 4 it 


The Daityas accordingly bound the prince 
with strong bands, as their lord had 
commanded, and threw him into the sea. As he 
floated on the waters, the ocean was convulsed 
throughout its whole extent, and rose in 
mighty undulations, threatening to submerge 
the earth. 


facorenforqeara 
ada: Bae: Meraa aeuneat 
Fittest: wae: wasters grafts 4 ol 
alfadefa tard yreatigoat A ret: 


123 


arg Ata a area a fador TFTA G SI 

a arene data wid aa farts 
aTeshepfanisd APATaishe staat & o 1 
qe AAMNaAT WAH Weta: 
FSSA MOT STAT FART: 1G I 
Aat Cea SST Tater Tele 

START ST UPA ASAT: VA 

a faa: wade: Wax WEraa: | 
qpranignderananrrmaacegag & 3 Il 


This when Huiranyakasipu observed, he 
commanded the Daityas to hurl rocks into the' 
sea, and pile them closely on one another, 
burying beneath their incumbent mass him 
whom fire would not burn, nor Weapons 
pierce, nor serpents bite; whom the pestilential 
gale could not blast, nor poison nor magic 
spirits nor incantations destroy; who fell from 
the loftiest heights unhurt; who foiled the 
elephants of the spheres: a son of depraved 
heart, whose life was a perpetual curse. 
“Here.” he cried, "since he cannot the, here let 
him live for thousands of years at the bottom 
of the ocean, overwhelmed by mountains. 
Accordingly the Daityas and Danavas hurled 
upon Prahlada, whilst in the great ocean, 
ponderous rocks, and piled them over him for 
many thousand miles: but he, 'still with mind 
undisturbed, thus offered daily praise to Visnu, 
lying at the bottom of the sea, under the 
mountain heap. 


Satdq 


are Yosttara! Ae Tea 


Tre Taare! Aa farsa & wi 
TA TeTatara Agrees A 
WRT HOT Aas ABT TAN 4H 
Terad Gat fat frat west FA: 


RATT Hou THs faa € Ei 
Zar aargu: fag arm wrest: | 
faye Terasfa ATE: UTaeM & Oli 
Yat: waste frdiferar: atrgur:| 





124 THE VISNU-PURANAM 
TAY ANT AY: PTET: CAPAM TA Cl gods and the fathers of mankind, receivest 
ee agra aT TOT: burnt-offerings and oblations. 

WAST UTA AAA ATTA & Fl wu WER At Fea Boiss 
Prahlada said~ "Glory to you, god of the ne EC Saas : i 

lotus eye: glory to you, most excellent of art waifor a evar 

spiritual things : glory to you, soul of all WSR TANT 9 ¥ Il 

worlds: glory to you, wielder of the sharp aaa gemnfefagrrorat- 

discus: glory to the best of Brahmans; to the 

friend of Brahmans and of kine; to Krsna, the Aether Ae ALATA TA 

preserver of the world: to Govinda be glory. faaafadt qa want 


To him who, as Brahma, creates the universe; 
who in its existence if its preserver; be praise. 
To you, who at the end of the Kalpa. takest the 
form of Rudra; to you, who are triform; be 
adoration. You, Acyuta, are the gods, Yaksas, 
demons, saints, serpents, choristers and 
dancers of heaven, goblins, evil spirits, men, 
animals, birds, insects, reptiles, plants, and 
stones, earth, water, fire, sky, wind, sound, 
touch, taste, colour, flavour, mind, intellect, 
soul, timc, and the qualities of nature: you are 
all these, and the chief object of them all. 

faenfaa war Gerad wt faurgai 

vas Fows wat delfed warqiiot 

eH aT Haron aT 

wana faut! aaifir adeatnetar aq et 

Tas TTT yatT A 

daa anfatwehquredafaa warii9 21 

wat Dimer wat sata a afer: 

saa faycaaaaygHl 9 3 1 


You are knowledge and ignorance, truth 
and falsehood, poison and ambrosia. You are 
the performance and discontinuance of acts”: 
you are the acts which the Vedas enjoin: you 
are the enjoyer of the fruit of all acts, and the 
means by which they are accomplished. You. 
Visnu, who are the soul of all, are the fruit of 
all acts of piety. Your universal diffusion, 
indicating might and goodness, is in me, in 
others, in all creatures, in all worlds. Holy 
ascetics meditate on you: pious priests 
sacrifice to you. You alone, identical with the 


Tat AT TERRAIN G I 
aaa Watery! AT MTT Aa 
Torta Trae PPTATS FLAT § Ul 
TAATERT Ara TTATENaSIUM 
WAU at as VT TTT 9! 
HAA Aga TAY ATT TAT 
eafatteh 1 wentts cafattntshacres F921 


The universe is you intellectual form;' 
whence proceedcd you subtile form, this 
world: thence are you all subtile elements and 
elementary beings, and the subtile principle, 
that is called soul, within them. Hence the’ 
supreme soul of all objects, distinguished as 
subtile or gross, 'which is imperceptible, and 
which cannot be conceived, 1s even a form of 
you. Glory be to you, Pursottama; and glory to 
that imperishable form which, soul of all, is 
another manifestation of you might, the 
asylum of all qualities, existing in all 
creatures. I salute her, the supreme goddess, 
who is beyond the senses; whom the mind, the 
tongue, cannot define; who is to be 
distinguished alone by the wisdom of the truly 
wise. 


THEA ANTS AAAS UST 

ae A Tela ais Peraaraeveadis 9 8 Il 
AMAA AA facitena: | 
BAVA: UL BE ANT WEI Zo II 


Om! Salutation to Vasudeva: to him who 1s 
the eternal lord; he from whom nothing 1s 
distinct; he who is distinct from all. Glory be 


BOOK I, CHAP. 20 


to the great spirit again and again: to him who 
is without name or shape; who sole is to be 
known by adoration; whom, in the forms 
manifested in his descents upon earth, the 
dwellers in heaven adore; for they behold not 
his inscrutable nature. 


MSARASANTT TRA: ATTA 

at adenfaront faway areal TATA ¢ eI 
TMs fauna wat wenhtafad sea 
AT: A WTA: WaT AAT Se 2 
aaa Wear fanart 
MMT: AA A wetag F eee zit 
TASTY foro TH TET WA: TAs 
Wa Ud Ad: Wa A: Vd Waa Iv 
AAMT A WaTera eA: | 

Wa: Wane aa als we GATTI CGI 
STENT Feat: WATT: | 
TAUASTAAY WAT AUT: TANCE I 
gfe sttfamygerat wenigt wartferpsera: | 


I glorify the supreme deity Visnu. the 
universal witness, who seated internally, 
beholds the good and ill of all. Glory to that 
Visnu from whom this world is not distinct. 
May he, ever to be meditated -upon as the 
beginning of the universe have compassion 
upon me: may he, the supporter of all, in 
whom every thing is warped and woven’, 
undecaying. imperishable, have compassion 
upon me. Glory, again and again, to that being 
to whom all returns, from whom all proceeds; 
who is all, and in whom all things are: to him 
whom | also am; for he is every where; and 
through whom all things are from me. I am all 
things: all things are in me, who am 
everlasting. I am undecayable, ever enduring, 
the receptacle of the spirit of the supreme. 
Brahma is my name; the supreme soul, that is 
before all things, that is after the end of all. 
NOTES 

1. These are the four Upayas. 'means of success,’ 
specified in the Amara-kosa Halevs: 9A 
SATA AGES | 


125 


2. Celebrated Daityas. Brhaspati is one of the 
chief Danavas, or sons of Danu, and appointed king 
over them by Brahma. R&hu was the son of 
Simhikaé, more known as the dragon's head. or 
ascending node, being a chief agent in eclipses. 
Bali was sovereign of the three worlds in the time 
of the dwarf incarnation, and afterwards monarch 
of Patala. 

3. With Nagapasas, "snake-nooses.’ tortuous and 
twining round the limbs like serpents. 

4. Acts of devotion-—sacrifices, oblations, 
observance of rules of purification, alms-giving, 
and the like—opposed to ascetic and contemplative 
worship, which dispenses with the ritual. 

5. Havya and Kavya. oblations of ghee or oiled 
butler; the former presented to the gods, the latter 
to the Pitrs. 

6. Mahat, the first product of nature, intellect. 

7. The preceding passage was addressed to the 
Purusa. or spiritual nature, of the supreme being : -. 
this is addressed to his material essence, his other 
energy, sTareifts: | that is, to Pradhana. 

8. Or rather, 'woven as the warp and woof;' aad 
Wd fad—sq meaning wovea by the long threads, 
and Wid ‘by the cross threads.’ 

RRR 


BOOK I, CHAP. 20 


CHAPTER 20 
fagniseara: 
(sinrrad anfanta: , fecuaenfgrqacts) 


GUM sata 


Ua aferray fameadearert fest 
TATA AL WY UA ATTA 21 
facet arent araq fafsrenraa 
STEAATAA SAT: TATA ARATTN 2 1 
Tea AHSAN attoraraesy S HUTA 
YSsa HN fap arse: 13 
STMT METS Te Fer TaAS |T 
PARMA ae Tet AVIT v 
YAMS: Aitelat ated Werota: | 
WENT UT Wet Wal MMA & I 
Ba a vera eeaeeraatahei 


125 


126 


wiarer cong afeentasars aerate gt 
SET ST BG aN WATTS ATOTY 
Weletsala WAN GAUIATTAATII 9 
qera aw yrdiarante year 
VRAIN AAaTAAA a: I oI 


ParaSara said—-Thus meditating upon Vis 
nu, as identical with his own spirit, Prahlada 
became as .one with him, and finally regarded 
himself as the divinity : he forgot entirely his 
own individuality, and was conscious of 
nothing else than his being the inexhaustible, 
cternal, supreme soul; and in consequence of 
the efficacy of this conviction of identity, the 
imperishable Visnu, whose essence is wisdom, 
became present in his heart, which was wholly 
purified from sin. As soon as, through the 
force of his contemplation, Prahlada had 
become one with Visnu, the bonds with which 
he was bound burts instantly asunder; the 
ocean was violently uplifted; and the monsters 
of. the deep were alarmed; earth with all her 
forests and mountains trembled; and the 
prince, putting aside the rocks which the 
demons bad piled upon him, came forth from 
out the main. When he beheld the outer world 
again, and contemplated earth and heaven, he 
remembered who he was, and recognised 
himself to be Prahlada; and again he hymned 
Purusottama, who is without beginning or end; 
his mind being steadily and undevia cingly 
addressed to the object of his prayers, and his 
speech, thoughts, and acts being firmly under 
control. 


WETS ava 
HAT: WUT WET TAT ATT | 
leah Held AaHeet FSI 8 i 
TONS Yorent Fforrery yor AT 
Waly Wenge Yer PRATEPEI Vol 
aterararenery frente 
ACU WHA ACURA 2211 
Renter forarretntira 
War TPS AYA CHTT 22M 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


A: WAT: Whe: Weary 
aq: Taya td Way: 
AMISeq TA FRAT 23 11 

"Om glory to the end of all: to you. lord, 
who are subtile and substantial; mutable and 
immutable; perceptible and impcrceptible; 
divisible and indivisible; indefinable and 
definable; the subject of attributes, and void of 
attributes; abiding in qualities, though they 
abide not in you; morphous, and amorphous; 
minute and vast; visible and_ invisible; 
hideousness and beauty; ignorance and 
wisdom; cause and effect: existence and non- 
existence; comprehending all that is good and 
evil; essence of perishable and imperishable 
elements; asylum of undeveloped rudiments. 
Oh you who are both one and many, 
Vasudeva, first cause of all; glory be unto you. 
Oh you who are large and small, manifest and 
hidden; who are all beings, and are not all 
beings; and from whom, although distinct 
from universal cause, the universe proceeds; to 
you, Purusottama, be all glory." 


UUW Sateq] 


we cara ta: wafahret weda: | 
aay wary Uae eft: esi 
TARTANA AAMT ATHMATT| 
was famrdette cmrentrane fA e411 


Whilst with mind intent on Visnu, he thus 
pronounced his praises, the divinity, clad in 
yellow robes, suddenly appeared before him. 
Startled at the sight, with hesitating speech 
Prahlada pronounced repeated salutations to 
Visnu, and said, 


Were Sara | 
Sa WarirEt Was HE yall 
AMSAT YAY A WTAEAAI 2E I 


Prahlada said— "Oh you who removest all 
worldly grief, Kesava. be propitious unto me; 
again sanctify me, Acyuta, by your sight." 


BOOK I, CHAP. 20 


127 





HAATATTATET 
FARA weaisé wftrreatirenftaihy 
aanretean wa: were feat ati gon 
The deity replied— "I am pleased wit: the 
faithful attachment you have shown to me: 


demand from me, Prahlada. whatever you 
desire.” 


Waele Sar] 

we Mirageag ay ay sTTET 

ay weaeger ufareqareg wear wafen ec 

at wifafadart faaerorh 

AUT: AT RAATATSTAT AT VF it 
SINATATTATT 

afa aera wyatsad vfaern 

ata Wa: Wate faaat serait: zo 

Prahlada replied, "In all the thousand births 

through which 1 may be doomed to pass, may 
my faith in you, Acyuta, never know decay; 
may passion, as fixed as that which the 
worldly-minded feel for sensual pleasures, 
ever animate my heart, always devoted unto 
you." Bhagavan answered, "You have already 


devotion unto me, and ever shall have it: now 
choose some boon, whatever is in your wish." 


WEele sara 
nfa gargeeiisyd ayngad aa 
afrgerepa Ud Sat TET WOTPAgH 2 eI 
yreanfar ufaarae feat vented 
Sforaantedt aes a AT 2 UH 
ag VAS aq fara aferatsfen foretera: 
arent areata att at Has Wi 23H 
cafe uftanat Rured acaMTaS Aq 
SMA WA Wereta Beta F fra evi 


Prahlada then said, "I have been. hated, for 
that I assiduously proclaimed your praise: do 
you, oh lord, pardon in my father this sin that 
he has committed. Weapons have been hurled 
against me; I have been thrown into the 
flames; I have been bitten by venomous, 


snakcs; and poison has been mixed with my 
food; I have been bound and cast into the sea; 
and heavy rocks have bcen heaped upon me: 
but all this. .and whatever ill beside has been 
wrought against me; whatever wickedness has 
been done to me, because I put my faith in 
you; all, through your mercy, has been 
suffered by me unharmed: and do, you 
therefore free my father from th.s iniquity." 


ATTA ATT 
Were Wada F naraere wiser 
ary a at afer fererarergqara 24 tt 


To this application Visnu replied, "All this 
shall be unto you. through my favour: but I 
give you another boon: demand it, son of the 
Asura." 


Waele Sata 

PARAS Tay TOT ae aa 

Maat Marae HATA TOT 2 & I 

emia: fs ara yfarerer at fer 

areal yet mer afta: Pere waa 291 

Prahlada answered and said, “All my 
desires, oh lord, have been fulfilled by the 
boon that you have granted, that my faith in 
you shall never know decay. Wealth, virtue, 
love, are as nothing; for even liberation is in 
his reach whose faith is firm in you, root of the 
universal world." 


ATTA 
aera fayet dar uf veantaay 
wean wf Harares Fata ucarafan 2 cit 


Visnu said. "Since your heart is filled 
immovably with trust in me, you shalt, 
through my blessing, attain freedom from 
existence." 


UW Sara 
Syeda fap tra! waa: 
wang Grey aare aot fT eH 
a fan Taequers utes a dfsaq 
Wradieng acafa anarsraay feat 3 ofl 


128 


Sifrmianrag attragendt werg7: | 
yefiaaranta yqat distr ata 3 en 
foretuiiy at afaeccqrefaon 

fae ashe tearat Aaerge afsrera: 3 2H 
at Tega wer antyfgat feat 
qaiis garrett a331 
aftonfaanrt: & wat yuaurafeaterr: | 

aera weragearany wt Fratoramarg 3 x 


Thus saying, Visnu vanished from his 
sight, and Prahlada repaired to his father, and 
bowed down before him. His father kissed him 
on the forehead’, and embraced him, and shed 
tears, and said, "Dost you live. my son?" And 
the great Asura repented of his former cruelty, 
and treated him with kindness: and Prahlada, 
fulfilling his duties like any other youth, 
continued diligent in the service of his 
preceptor and his father. After his father had 
been put to death by Visnu in the form of the 
man-lion’. Prahlada became the sovereign of 
the Daityas; and possessing the splendours of 
royalty consequent upon his piety, exercised 
extensive sway, and was blessed with a 
numerous progeny. At the expiration of an 
authority which was the reward of his 
meritorious acts, he was freed-from the 
consequences of moral merit or demerit, and 
obtained, through meditation on the deity, 
final exemption from existence. 


Tannnat teatsat Axaraiarerate: | 

Wert wae Fas aaa 384 

Teac AI Wee WTA: | 

sya AeA UTTTAT WeN treat Parr 3&1 

aed Wd yea at: 

quay Uday Hae eaateft A MMT I 

Waa TAT TST 

Brevat ar aarenitt wwermet fas 3 cu 

Were waerag sar varary eft: 

aa tert wets sponte Ut War 3 8H 
sfa stfaeyreret wemigt fagisera: 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


Such, Maitreya, was the Daitya Prahlada, 
the wise and faithful worshipper of Visnu, of 
whom you wished to hear; and such was his 
miraculous power. Whoever listens to the 
history of Prahlada is immediately cleansed 


. from his sins: the- iniquities that he commits, 


by night or by day, shall be expiated by once 
hearing, or once reading, the history of 
Prahlada, The perusal of this history on the 
day of full moon, of new moon, or on the 
eighth or twelfth day of the lunation, shall 
yield fruit equal to the donation of a cow’. As 
Visnu protected Prahlada in all the calamities 
to which he was exposed, so shall the deity 


protect him who listens constantly to The tale”. 
kK 


NOTES 

{. Literally, ‘having smelt his forehead.’ I have 
elsewhere had had occasion to observe this practice 
: Hindu Theatre. 11. 45. 

2. Here is another instance of that brief reference 
to popular and prior legends, which is frequent in 
this Purina. The man-lion Avatiara is referred to in 
several of the Purinas, but I have met with the story 
in detail only in the Bhagavata. It is there said that 
Hiranyakasipu asks his son, why if Visnu is every 
where, he is not visible in a pillar in the hall, where 
they are assembled. He then rises, and strikes the 
column with his first: on which Visnu, in a fotm 
which is neither wholly a lion nor a man, issues 
from it, and a conflict ensues, which ends in 
Hiranyakasipu's being torn to pieces. Even this 
account, therefore, is not in all particulars the same 
as the popular version of the story. 

3. The days of full and new moon are sacred 
with all sects of Hindus : the eighth and twelfth 
days of the lunar half month were considered holy 
by the Vaisnavas, as appears from the text. The 
eighth maintains its character in a great degree from 
the eighth of Bhadra being the birthday of Krsna; 
but the eleventh, in more recent Vaisnava works, as 
the Brahma Vaivartta Purana, has taken the place of 
the twelfth, and is even more sacred than the 
eighth. 

4. Or any solemn gift: that of a cow is held 
particularly sacred; but it implies accompaniments 
of a more costly character, ornaments and gold. 


BOOK I, CHAP. 21 129 





5. The legend of Prahlada is inserted in detail in 
the Bhagavata and Naradiya Purdnas, and in the 
Uttara Khanda of the Padma: it is adverted to more 
briefly’ in the Vayu, Linga, Kiirma, etc . in the 
Moksa Dharma of the Mahabharata, and in the Hari 
VamSa. 

eke 


BOOK I, CHAP. 21 


129 





CHAPTER 21 
wafagisea: 
(TIAN RAT) 
WUYR SaTI 
derega sens fofaateet wa eI 


fatrerreg wrerfedfeetst fatreren 2 

ae: YaMIarae SUAS Warqt! 

faroqergqaeynay Wa Wa WeaeT: 1 2 

TER: Wha Pra AAM 

TST WTAE: HUTANTLAATTT: 11 3 

The sons of Sarihrada. the son of 

Hiranyakasipu were Ayausman, Sivi. and Vas 
kala'!. Prahlada had a son named Virocana; 
whose son was Bali, who had a hundred sons, 
of whom Bana was the eldest’. Hiranyaksa 
also had many sons, all of whom were Daityas 
of great prowess; Utkura, Sakuni, 
Bhiitasantapana, Mahanabha, the mighty- 
armed and the valiant Taéraka. These were the 
sons of Diti”. 


way ayes feat WETKTM 

SAS: VIB: ATT: MAT ATAT ¥ 

URUAT ACTA RAT AETACT: | 

Loa TTay A YONA A ATA AG 

Wt Ot: qm: wan farfafay drtary 

UA WHT HAT Yifeage ataaaw € 

STEAM: MMA ATH ASAT I 

The children of Kagyapa by Danu were 

Dvimtrddha, Sankara, Ayomukha, Sankusiras, 
Kapila, Samvara, Ekachakra, and - another 
mighty Taraka, Svarbhanu, Vrsaparvan. 
Puloman, and the powerful Vipracitti; these 


were the renowned Danavas, or sons of Danu’. 
Swarbhanu had a daughter named Prabha”; 
and Sarmistha® was the daughter of Vrs 
aparvan, as were Upadanavi and Hayasira’. 


Saya BY YHA Hea AAT VII 
Sa Ya Hera Aiea ule: 

ant yraeentor afseltaraaar: i ci 
Weare Hreahawy Akasa: War: 
qasUy Yerateay areurreatarrean: 118 1 


Vaisvanara® had two daughters, Puloma 
aud Kalika. who were both married to 
Kasyapa, and bore him sixty thousand 
distinguished D4anavas, called Paulomas and 
Kalakanjas’, who were powerful, ferocious, 
and cruel. 


fatgaramaraa fanfare: gare 

CAT: VET AAA WAS AEST Voll 

aantryfasya seat: GATE 

BAA ETA HAAS Al V2 

Taulag verdes Weraet: | 

UW F Sra: ABT eqayaasar: 1 V2 

Waal TAUB Yaya AeA: | 

Teles J eres Farner: Her V3 

Aqua: Treat AAT waaaes: | 

The sons of Vipracitti by Sinhika (the sister 

of Hiranyakaasipu) were Vyansa. Salya the 
strong. Nabha the powerful. Vatap1, Namuchi. 
Jlwala. Khasrima. Anjaka. Néaraka, and 
Kalanabha, the valiant Swarbhanu, and the 
mighty Vakttayodhi™. These were the most 
eminent Danavas'', through whom the race of 


Danu_ was multiplied by hundred, and 
thousands through succeeding generations. 


ue Yat: YReTaarerara: Ufcant frat: 11 ew 
Yat vat a sit a yet yfergferen 
Yout YAMA MYTHS 84 Hl 
yet yaaa ara wary Waray yerafa 
eacarl verry gatat J STAT VI 
AEM Weis aware: wealfere: 


130 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





In the family of the Daitya Prablada, the amongst the birds, or in the waters, that were 


Nivata Kavachas were born, whose spirits 
were purified by rigid austerity'". Tamra (the 
wife of Kasyapa) had six illustrious daughters, 
named Suki, Syeni. Bhasi, Sugrivi, Suchi, and 
Gridhrka. Suki gave birth to parrots, owls, and 
crows'*: Syeni to hawks; Bhasi to kites; 
Grdhrka to vultures; Suci to water-fowl; 
Sugrivi to horses, camels, and asses, Such 
were the progeny of Tamra. 


fararareg yal et fercardt weerenitn got 

Qual: waa St erEor: TATA: | 

Vinaté bore to Kasyapa two celebrated 
sons, Gardda and Aruna : the former, also 
called Suparna, was the king of the feathered 
tribes, ana the remorseless enemy of the 
serpent race’. 


Gear Wearg watonahrdrarq ve 1 
SHAM TE WET WaT 
The children of Surasé were a thousand 


mighty many-headed serpents, traversing the 
sky'*, 


agaarg afer: agate: ee 
Quan Tar Ait Taree: | 
Tat MUTA Hara fantaraAr: it oN 


Vg: Aat Never: Area ae 
UTI ANT: Hel SH- TAHA 2 VU 
Ud UY aT agar Sagat fagreaur: | 
The progeny of Kadru were a thousand 
powerful many-headed serpents, of 


immeasurable might, subject to Garuda; the 
chief amongst whom were Sesa, Vasuki Taks 


uka. Sankha, Sweta. Mahapadma. Kambala, 
Asvatara, Elapatra, Naga, Karkkota, 
Dhananjaya, and many other fierce and 


venomous serpents, . 
mt aay fat ven: aa a efeor 12 VM 
went: wWeatseney ere: fafa: 
ATF AAATATA Fergie STAC 2 3 


The family of Krodhavasa were all Sharp- 
toothcd monsters'’, whether on the earth, 


devourers of flesh. 
TR & aaa yehraifeaiean 
SU FA-Ha-ACoH GUANA AAT: | 
GA J Tatas APACE 2 v1 
after q Were werah, Wain 


Surabhi!® was the mother of cows and 
buffaloes’®: Ir, of trees and creeping plants 
and shrubs, and every kind of grass: KhaSa, of 
the Rakshasas and Yakgas”’: Muni, of the 
Apsarasas”’: and Arista, of the illustrious 
Gandharvas. 


UA BRATS: Alferea: ATT]-ABAT 1 VM 


Mat Yay Ula Prayisa Wea: 

These were the children of Kasyapa, 
whether movable or stationary, whose 
descendants multiplied infinitely through 


successive generations", 


US Wat Wl Gary TaNifas BANE MI 
Saeed a weft areny feat sett 

erat gaunt ft warent sere Von 
Ye aay MANIA AA APTA 

Yara BETAS Tae HATS Bs 
Taiifeart aaa WA! 


This creation, oh Brahman, took place in 
the second or Sv4rociga Manvantara. In the 
present or Vaivasvata Manvantara, Brahma 
being cngaged at the great sacrifice instituted 
by Varuna, the creation of progeny, as it is 
called, occurred; for he begot, as his sons. the 
seven Rsis,, who were formerly mind- 
engendered; and was himself the grandsire of 
the Gandharvas, serpents, Ddnavas, «nd 
gods" : 


fafafaagsgar & atearara BATA VV 
Tal UN: MAIS HVAT AT: 
AO BHAT A A Ar AHaATAN Z oll 
qafrgaaata watery 

Bq wa ay were weal ya 3 vil 
Sra I ATT HYATATY ATA Gl 


BOOK I, CHAP. 21 


131 





wae Yat Frean a afe met yreeerq 3 2 
aafeanta waar ufeat areata. 
saayacn at tal aga: ayaat ght: 3 31 
cat at a at mi we phere 
mMineaMNMAa Head Ararfin 3 v1 


 yerarrese farareratert: | 
Teva Noyes WH PTA BG 


Diti, having lost her children, propitiated 
Kasyapa; and the best of ascetics, being 
pleased with her, promised her a boon; on 
which she prayed for a son of irresistible 
prowess and valour, who should destroy Indra. 
The excellent Muni granted his wife the great 
gift she had solicited, but with one condition : 
"You shall bear a son, he said, "who shall slay 
Indra, if with thoughts wholly pious, and 
person entirely pure, you carefully carry the 
babe in your womb for a hundred years. ' 
Having thus said, KaSyapa departed; and the 
dame conceived. and _ during — gestation 
assiduously observed the rules of mental and 
personal purity. When the king of the 
immortals learnt that Diti bore a son destined 
for his destruction, he came to her, and atten- 
ded upon her with the utmost humility. 
watching for an opportunity to disappoint her 
intention. 


Ha AKT ART FAMAAATAA 

SHAM Weal: Pret fate: Wana 3 & i 

Fesrenarare wear: Hie wiava a: ! 

Samford frees A AAAI 391 

Ue USaAMT aot warterferersury 

ur Tate St yeR: YA: YATATTT 3 

aisvaq waa wir: Bat: FA: 

Ucha Aaa ae aaonfefaarhor 3 81 

Weal AT cared ayqurahra: | 

Gath A Waa Ata WeASMATI ¥ ol 

sta sifaegerey weaAss Wenfaretseara:| 

At last, in the last year of the century, the 

opportunity occurred. Diti retired one night to 


rest without performing the prescribed 
ablution of her feet, and fell asleep; on which 
the thunderer divided with his thunderbolt the 
embryo in her womb into seven portions, The 
child, thus mutilated, cried bitterly; and Indra 
repeatedly attempted to console and silence it. 
but in vain: on which the god, being incensed, 
again divided each of the seven portions into 
seven, and thus formed the swift-moving 
deities called Marutas (winds). They derived 
this appellation from the words with which 
Indra bad addressed them (Ma rodih, 'Weep 
not’); and they became forty-nine subordinate 
diviniities, the associates of the wielder of the 
thunderbolt.” 


NOTES 

1. The Padma Purana makes these the sons of 
Prahlada. The Bhagavata says there were five sons, 
but does not give the names. It also insects the sons 
of Hlada, making them the celebrated demons 
Iiwala and Vatapi. The Vayu refers to Hlada, other 
Daityas, famous in Pauranic legend. making his 
son, Nisunda; and his sons. Sunda and Upasunda : 
the former the father of Maricha and Taraka; the 
latter, of Mika. 

2. The Padma Purana and Vayu name several of 
these, but they are not of any note : the latter gives 
the names of two daughters, who are more 
celebrated, Piitana and Sakuni. 

3. The descendents of Hiranynksa are said, in the 
Padma Purana. to have extended to seventy-seven 
crores. or seven hundred and seventy millions. 
Some copies, for Taraka, read Kalanabha. 

4, The Padma and Vayu Purana furnish a much 
longer list of names. but those of most note are the 
same as of the text. with which also the Bhagavata 
for the most part agrees. 

5. The Bhagavata makes Prabha the wife of 
Namuci : according to the Vayu, she is the mother 
of Nahusa. 

6. Married to Yayati. as will be related. 

7. The text might be understood to imply that the 
latter two were the daughters of VaiSwanara; and 
the Bhagavata has, "The four lovely daughters of 
VaiSwanara were Upadanavi, Hayasiras, Puloma, 
and Kélaka." The Padma substitutes Vajra and 
Sundari for the two formet names. The Vayu 


132 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





specifies only Puloma and K4lika as the daughters 
of VaiSwanara, as does our text. Upadanavi, 
according to the Bhagavata. is the wife of 
Hiranyaksa : and Hayasiras. of Kratu, 

8. Though not specified by the text as one of the 
Danavas, he is Included in the catalogue of the 
Vayu, and the commentator on the Bhagavata calls 
him a son of Danu. 

9. The word is also read Kilakas and Kalakeyas: 
the Mahabharata, I. 643, has K4lakanjas. 


10. The text omits the two most celebrated of the 
Sainhikeyas, or sons of Sinhika, Rahu (sec ch. IX. 
note 8.) and Ketu. who are specified both in the 
Bhagavata and the Vayu, the former as the eldest 
son, Of the other sons it is said by the Vayu that 
they were all killed by Parasurdma. 


11. Two names of note, found in the Vayu, are 
omitted by the Visnu; that of Puloman. the father of 
Sachi. the wife of Indra. and mother of Jayanta; and 
Maya, the father of Vajrakaéma and Mahodari. 


12. The Bhagavata says the Paulomas were 
killed by Arjuna. who therefore, the commentator 
observes, were the same as the Nivata Kavachas : 
but the Mahabharata describes the destruction of 
the Nivata Kavachas and of the Paulomas and 
Kélakeyas as the successive exploits of Arjuna. 
Vana Purana 8. I. 633. The story is narrated of 
detail only in the Mahabharata, which is 
consequently prior to all the Puranas in which the 
allusion occurs. According to that work, the Nivata 
Kavachas were Danavas, to the number of thirty 
millions, residing in the depths of the sea : and the 
Paulomas and Kalakanjas were the children of.two 
Daitya dames, Pulomé and Kalaka, inhabiting 
Hiranyapura, the golden city, floating in the air. 

13. All the copies read Yat Waroraqyat 
WAITPHLI which should be, Suki bore parrots; and 
Ulaki, the scveral sorts of owls :’ but Uldki is 
nowhere named as one of the daughters of Tamra; 
and the reading may be, 3cq@yaeqHarqi ‘Owls and 
birds opposed to owls, i. e, crows. The authorities 
generally concur with our text; but the ‘Vayu has a 
somewhat different account: or. Saki, married to 
Garuda, the mother of parrots; : Syeni. married to 
Aruna, mother of Sampati and Jataéyu : Bhasi, the 
mothcr of jays, owls, crows, peacocks, pigeons, and 
fowls : Kraufici, the parent of curlews, herons, 
crancs : and Dhrtarastri, the mother of geese, ducks, 


teal, and other water-fowl. The three last are also 
called the wives of Garuda. 

14. Most of the Purdnas agree in this account: 
but the Bhagavata makes Vinata the wife of Tarksa 
and in this place substitutes Sarama, the mother of 
wild animals. The Vayu adds the metres of the 
Vedas as the daughters of Vinata : and the Padma 
gives her one daughter Sau-damini. 

15. The dragons of modern fable. Anayusa or 
Danayusa is substituted for Surasa in the Vayu, and 
in onc of the accounts of the Padma. The 
Bhagavata says Raksasas were her offspring. The 
Matsya has both Surasé and Anayusa, making the 
former the parent of all quadrupeds, except cows; 
the latter, the mother of diseases. 

16. The Vayu names forty : the most noted 
amongst whom, in addition to those of the text, are 
Airavata, Dhrtarastra, Mahanila Balahaka. Afijana, 
Puspadanstra, Durmukha, Kaliya, Pundarika, 
Kapila. Nahusa, and Mani. 

17. By Danstma (4f81:) some understand 
Serpents, some Rdaksasas; but by .the context 
carnivorous animals, birds, and fishes seem 
intended, the Vayu makes Krodhavasa the mother 
of twelve daughters, Mrgi and othcrs, from whom 
all wild animals, deer, elephants. monkeys, tigers, 
lions, dogs. also fishes, reptiles, and Bhiittas and 
Pisichas, or goblins, sprang. 

18. One copy only inserts a half stanza here; 
"Krodha was the mother of the Pisachas;" which is 
an interpolation apparently from the Mataya or Hari 
Vamsa. The Padma Purana. second legend, makes 
Krodha the mother of the Bhitas; and Pisaca, of the 
Pisacas. 

19, The Bhagavata says, of animals with cloven 
hoofs. -The Vayu has, of the eleven Rudras. of the 
bull of Siva, and of two daughters, Rohini and 
Gandharbi: from the former of whom descended 
horned cattle; and from the latter, horses. 

20. According to the Vayu, Khasa had two sons, 
Yaksa and Raksas. severally the progenitors of 
those beings. 

21. The Padma, second series, makes Vach the 
mother of both Apsarasas and Gandharvas: the 
Vayu has long lists of the names of both classes, as 
well as of Vidyadharas and Kinnaras. The Apsaraas 
are distinguished as of two kinds, Laukika, 
‘worldly,’ of whom thirty-four are specified; and 
Daivika, or 'divine.' ten in number : the latter 


BOOK I, CHAP. 22 


133 





furnish the individuals most frequently engaged in 
the interruption of the penances of holy sages, such 
as Menaka. Sahajanya, Ghrtaci. Pramloca, Visvaci, 
and Pirvacitti. Urvasi is of a different order to both, 
being the daughter of Narayana. Rambha, 
Tillotama, Misrakesi. are included amongst the 
Laukika nymphs. There are also fourteen Ganas, or 
troops, of Apsaraas, bearing peculiar designations, 
as Ahitas. Sobhayantis, Vagavatis, etc. 

22. The Kirma, Matsya, Brahma, Linga. Agni. 
Padma, and Vayu Puranas agree generally with our 
text in the description of Kasyapa’s wives and 
progeny. The Vayu enters most into details, and 
contains very long catalogues of the names of the 
different characters descended from the sage. The 
Padma and Matsya and the Hari Varhsa repeat the 
story, but admit several variations, some of which 
have been adverted to in the preceding notes. 

23. We have a considerable variation here in the 
commentary, and it may be doubted if the allusion 
in the text is accurately explained by either of the 
versions. In one it is said that ‘Brahmé. the 
grandsire of the Gandharvas. etc., appointed the 
seven Rsis. who were born in a former Manvantara. 
to be his sons. or to be the intermediate agents in 
creation : he created no other beings himself, being 
engrossed by the _ sacrificial ceremony 

i fraraet xen 
Tea wranifter saad 7 WM wast wa 
TaTATgdcare| Instead of "putratwe," 'in the state of 
sons.’ the reading is sometimes "Pitratwe." in the 
character of fathers .' that is, to all other beings. 
Thus the gods and the rest, who in a former 
Manvantara originated from KaSyapa, were created 
in the present period as the offspring of the seven 
Rsis. The other explanation agrees with the 
preceding in ascribing the birth of all creatures to 
the intermediate agency of the seven Rsis, but calls 
them the actual sons of Brahma, begotten at the 
sacrifice of Varuna, in the sacrificial fire : Ta He 
wa SIA FN eaaeeea tafe at ea Ure: 
aasa: Yaca wieta sfa! authority for the story is no 
given, beyond its being in other Puranas, WMI it 
has the air of a modern mystification. The latter 
member of the passage is separated altogether from 
the foregoing, and carried on to what follows : thus; 
"In the war of the Gandharvas, serpents. gods and 
demons, Diti having lost her children,” etc.: the 
word 'virodha’ being understood, it 1s said, fates sf 


WTI This is defended by the authority of the Hari 
Vamsa, where the passage occurs word for word, 
except in the last half stanza, which, instead of 
Tes ea CAAA A FAL! occurs Tal fares earat 
ear a Wai The parallel passages are thus 
rendered by M. Langlois : 'Le Mouni Svarotchicha 
avoit cessé de régner quand cette création eut lieu : 
c'était sous l'empire du Menoa Vevasvata le 
sacrifice de Varouna avait commencé. La premiére 
création fut celle de Brahma, quand il Jugea qu'il 
était temps de procéder 4 son sacrifice, et que, 
souverain aieul du monde- il forma luiméme dans 
sa peasée et enfanta les sept Brahmarchis.’ 

24. This legend occurs in all those Puranas in 
which the account of Kasyapa's family 1s related. 

2K 2K 2K 


BOOK I, CHAP. 22 


133 





CHAPTER 22 
Blfagnseara: 
(inmradt faonsrgfaateutrauiay) 


UU Jara 
erhafirn: a yy: ya wed Tefahr:| 
a; HAUT WSMT Sat Ste TATAE 11 VI 
Tera-78-faarTt ARTETA: | 
Be Weseae Fan seat TTaTAA 211 
Tat Qqavt WH Hera TeUt qa 
STfeearat Ute fay aa Waa 3 1 
WaT earq araa Weary 
CaM SHAMIS Werenfad acti vit 
fagnt ani dad wsissaveaaqi 
Uerad WaPo srgrarott afer sat 
Uaaons Tes Carafe araayl 
Sh ATTA Fay TATA A & I 
Berg AMT ETO Fareritarey 
Sea WaT WaTAaNAaTTATI 9 1 


Pardsara said— When Prthu was installed in 
the government of the earth, the great father of 
the spheres established sovereignties in other 
pares of the creation. Soma was appointed 
monarch of the stars and planets, of Brabmans 


134 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





and of planes, of sacrifices and of penance. 
Vaisravana was made lung over kings; and 
Varuna, over the waters. Visnu was the chief 
of the Adityas; Pavaka. of the Vasus; Daksa, 
of the patriarchs; Vasava of the winds. To 
Prahlada was assigned dominion over the 
Daityas and Danavas; and Yama, the king of 
Justice, was appointed the monarch of the 
Manes (Pitrs). Aitaévata was made tlie king of 
elephants; Garuda of birds; Indra, of the gods. 
Ucchaisravas was the chief of horses; Vrsabha. 
of kine. Sesha became the snake-king; the 
lion, the monarch of the beascs; and the 
sovereign of the trees was the holy fig-trcc..' 

wa fanaa tents fest wera 

warafaahisen wreaara waa c it 

yeeat Fafer Tet ATTRA HTT: 

fem: wet Bra gd J asa ei 

afaureat fafer car Hare WaT: | 

Ut PTS AMT TST AS ATTA ott 

ufeeat fefer aan Trea: Ga 

gat NSA TarPahafawar{ 2a 

can facvetranot aise WaT: 

sdreat fefer caf were Taq 22 11 

aft yfadt wat wagrar wai 

aerate cet: UFTITETA 83 II 


Having thus fixed the limits of each 
auchority, the great progenitor Brahma 
stationed rulers for the protcction of the 
different quarters of the world: he made 
Sudhanvan, the son of the patriarch Virdja. the 
regent of the east; Sankhapdda, the son or the 
patriarch Kardama, of the south; the unmoctal 
Ketumat, the son of Rajas, regent of the west, 
and Hiranyaroman, the son of the patriarch 
Parjanya, regent of the north.’ By these the 
whole earth, with its seven continents and its 
cities, is to the present day vigilantly 
protected, according to their several limits. 


Ud Ba vawer fact faandterc:| 
farrier went & aret yGraaan oxi 


a ufasata a aat: at yea fan 

a aa aauaes faotter FETT BG II 

a 9 Fanfare 8 @ tenfeoreem 
eraris & are a Are: fafsrenforarq 2 i 
Ug & a waa: waar af a ufo 
Aare Bato array Ai got 
aro cadres a wacarter Asean: | 

atthe adarey & vasa arat ect 
Yad weyers fewatttereag scat: | 

a fe wrerrarsetga aaat efeq ee 
feat feat enna warren aeafaq 2 ol 
Bay weger Rat wis wares: 

Slat eae ET Tat ATS ATT: 1 2 
agar: wget uget afer: fer 
TTS BUTT UGal GATT: 12 IM 
WSN TAMA OAT ATT 
Tats: Tea: VST 23 
ATMA: MAA ATT: 

set aget dash adasat irqUT i Veit 


All these monarchs, and whatever others 
may be invested with authority by the mighty 
Visnu, as instruments for the preservation of 
the world; all the kings who have been, and all 
who shall be; are all, most worthy Brahman, 
but portions of the universal Visnu. The rulers 
of the gods, the rulers of the Daityas, the rulers 
of the Danavas, and the rulers of all malignant 
spirits; the chief amongst beasts, amongst 
birds, amongst men, amongst serpents; the 
best of trees, of mountains, of planets; either 
those that now are, or that shall hereafter be, 
the most exalted of their kind; are but protions 
of the universal Visnu. The power of 
protecting created things, the preservation of 
the world, resides with no other than Hari, the 
lord of all. He is the creator, who creates the 
world; he, the eternal, preserves it in its 
existence; and he, the destroyer, destroys it; 
invested severally with the attributes of 
foulness, goodness, and gloom. By a fourfold 


BOOK I, CHAP. 22 


135 





manifestation does Janarddana operate in 
creation, preservation, and destruction. In one 
pottion, as Brahma, the invisible assumes a 
visible form; in another portion he, as Marichi 
and the rest, is the progenitor of all creatures; 
his third portion is time; his fourth is all 
beings: and thus he becomes quadruple in 
creation, invested with the quality of passion. 


weiss feat faa: aoe fray 
TAC RUMTAT HITSANSTLOT A VG A 
wayyy aaa dfs: wet vr 

Bea TUT aT HT: TRATTT  V 
STAT AA Sra AT FA: 

CRS WISI VAR: 1 291 
STH AAA Sie ei 
TAS AMSA: MAA ATTN VSI: 
ferret qelererer aged Were: | 
fasimrenctat Gary Beat Mant feraat 2 8 


In the preservation of the world he is, in 
one portion. Visnu; in another portion he is 
Maun and the other patriarchs; he is time in a 
third; and all beings in a fourth portion: and 
thus, endowed with the property of goodness, 
Purusottama preserves the world. When he 
assumes the property of darkness, at the end of 
all things, the unborn deity becomes in one 
portion Rudra; in another, the destroying fire, 
in a third, time; and in a fourth, all beings: and 
thus, in a quadruple form, he is the destroyer 
of the world. This, Brahman, is the fourfold 
condition of the deity at all seasons, 


Ta cared: areTeraracrtaa: | 
fayaat ettar sa: BfeeAa: 113 ott 
fanptarea: art: way a feat! 
faatiitenpres fawittar fara: 3 eh 
CATA VAS TAT: | 
VGA Weraraen Marea: 11 3 2 
SMetat qe Hea Olea werare fin 
eat Wilferfteter Feaa SraRTeTUTN 3 3 11 
Ten gureantcarer waferyaTAt: | 


SUC AIM Waa MATT I 3 YI 
a area fat gen gfefreanreat fan 
A WATT: Wa FT Parhaenrda: 3 4 


wana framtise Pareraqqufeyad 
agal tacerer Ta werd qaTN 3 GI 


Brahmd, Daksa, time, and all creatures are 
the four energies of Hari, which are the causes 
of creation. Visnu, Manu and the rest, time, 
and all creatures are the four energies of 
Visnu, which are the causes of duration. 
Rudra, the destroying fire, time and all 
creatures are the four energies of Janarddana 
that are exerted for universal dissolution. In 
the beginning and the duration of the world, 
until the period of its end, creation is the work 
of Brahm, the patriarchs, and living animals. 
Brahma creates in the beginning; then the 
patriarchs beget progeny; and then animals 
incessantly multiply their kinds: but Brahm is 
not the active agent in creation, independent of 
time; neither are the patriarchs, nor living 
animals. So. in the periods of creation and of 
dissolution the four portions of the god of gods 
are equally essential. 


afar Goud Aa waanet & few 

ae GAIT TH A Aa A BTS BVM 

Sheet at Ae, watery, fenfarg yet WaT 

WATT AG Ve Ara AT! CI 

Wana ANAT STATA aaa 

WATE HATA QAM; MARA HATES BH 

wifey fret arate 

YOAFAT UT WE MATT AEA ¥ oll 

areas ate cada 

UT-MA TAT TERT TTT: 11 VI 

Whatever, oh Brahman, is engendered by 

any living being, the body of Hari is 
cooperative in the birth of that being; so 
whatever destroys any existing thing, movable 
or stationary, at any time, is the destroying 


form of Janarddana as Rudra. Thus Janarddana 
is the creator, the preserver, and the destroyer 


136 © 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





of the whole world—being threefold—in the 
several seasons of creation, preservation, and 
destruction, according to his assumption of the 
three qualities: but his highest glory’ is 
detached from all qualities; for the fourfold 
essence of the supreme spirit is composed of 
true wisdom, pervades all things, 1s only to be 
appreciatcd by itself, and admits of no 
similitude, 


ava sara 
UG Waa AT TENA St TAI 
Wag BIA Gerth WH WaAi ¥ Il 
Maitreya said—But, Muni, describe to me 


fully the four varieties of the condition of 
Brahma, and what is the supreme condition’. 


UWI Sarat 

Aaa art shh Wet Waa! 

MAR ALANA Ararealaqanreas: il ¥ 3 Al 

Aira akaarres wrorarfearerry 

MAG Wg Yada AA vil 

Serena Wet Get ATA fe Ae 

BMS: WONT TAA SF PANY UI 

qat: serge aet Aq Tet ATT: | 

ParaSara replied—That, Maitreya, which is 
the cause or a thing is called the means of 
effecting it; and that which it is the desire of 
the soul to accomplish is the thing to be 
effected. The operations of the Yogi who is 
desirous of liberation, as suppression of breath 
and the like, are his means: the end is the 
supreme Brahma, whence he returns to the 
world no more. Essentially connected with, 
and dependant upon, the means employed for 
emancipation by the Yogi, is discriminative 


knowledge; and this is the first variety of the 
condition of Brahma’. 


aeretattagns feitaisent wer ye Il 
sereafauns Meraearais aA 
faarngnd Tanisad watfea: Yi 
Ware Ure faster a wary 


MATSON SPRATT ¥ 6 I 

fahren anifraaderyi 

STATA AAATS VAATAATITA ¥ 8 1 

WIAs Ygatanreara say 

fanaa TAA TE WET Y ON 

The second sort is knowledge that is to be 
acquired by the Yogi whose end is escape 
from suffering, or eternal felicity. The third 
kind ts the ascertainment of the identity of the 
end and the means, the rejection of the notion 
of duality. The last kind is the removal of 
whatever differences may have been 
conceived by the three first varities of 
‘knowledge, and the consequent contemplation 
of the true essence of soul. The supreme 
condition of Visnu, who is one with wisdom, 
is the knowledge of truth; which requires no 
exercise; which is not to be taught; which is 
internally diffused; which is unequalled; the 
object of which is self-illumination; which is 
simply existent, and is not to be defined; 
which is tranquil, fearless, pure; which is not 
the theme of reasoning; which stands in need 
of no support’. 


dara May ara Ve AA 
Waredonet a afar Fratsrat fast & en 
wameanane Fret saree 
amentarfed aware WF Ta G 1 
Te Te Ue AN aay Aaa A: | 
AYVAGOA ATH AOTC MTS FATT: It 3 


Those Yogis who, by the annihilation of 
ignorance, are resolved into this fourfold 
Brahm, lose the seminal property, and can no 
longer germinate in the ploughed field of 
worldly existence. This is the supreme 
condition, that is called Visnu, perfect, 
perpetual, universal, undecaying, entire, and 
uniform: and the Yogi who attains this 
supreme spirit (Brahma) returns not to life 
again: for there he is freed from the distinction 
of virtue and vice, from suffering, and from 
soil. 


BOOK I, CHAP. 22 


137 





% SU caus ya aT 
TUATATSY F Maya Aa & VII 

wat A Ut Ta at Tahas TT 
USAT AMATO UTIL & Git 
WA TAM: vifaeredahaet AN 
TATATTAGUAS, AGA ACTAAT | 
PIEMVAIS a Teamwear Pera & EI 


TelaeyfHar TE WAT HRIPTAT: | 

aay Sar Aka AT TATA: | 9 

aay APM: Ural WI Ufe-AergT: | 

PAT FATS FA-TOMATATT: 1G 6 

qereat fret sryhanhaert 

sTfanta-ferca-SA- ATE FaHeTAT I & 8 I 

There are two states of this Brahma’, one 
with, and one without shape; one perishable, 
and one imperishable; which are inherent in all 
beings. The imperishable 1s the supreme being, 
the perishable is all the world. The blaze of 
fire burning on one spot diffuses light and heat 
around, so the world is nothing more than the 
manifested energy of the supreme Brahma: 
and inasmuch as, Maitreya. as the light and 
heat are stronger or feebler as we are near to 
the fire, or far off from it, so the energy of the 
Supreme is more or less intense in the beings 
that are less or more remote from him. 
Brahma. Visnu, and Siva are the most 
powerful energies of god; next to them are the 
inferior deities, then the attendant spirits, then 
men, then animals, birds insects, vegetables; 
each becoming more and more feeble as they 
are farther from their primitive source. In this 
way, illustrious Brahman, this whole world, 
although in essence imperishable and eternal, 
appears and disappears, as if it was subject to 
birth and death. 


Taare fauny: WAG TAUISITA! 

a ae aint: ye armestg fara § ott 
Ata Nea: Wala BT Mia: | 
TAM WAY YA ATT FTG 8 
BU: WayAlAal TAO: WATT: | 


ye Ger Vert Wage VT: 2 

wa wate setagafaet wT 

Wal WER aary a sense FAN Bu 

arrermay fanfare: | 

FRNA HIAs WRUTRAASIaATI & XII 

The supreme condition of Brahma, which 
is meditated by the Yogis in_ the 
commencement of their abstraction, as 
invested with form, is Visnu, composed of all 
the divine energies, and the essence of 
Brahma, with whom the mystic union that is 
sought, and which is accompanied by suitable 
elements, is effected’ by the devotee whose 
whole mind is addressed to that object. This 
Hari, who is the most immediate of all the 
energies, of Brahma, is his embodied shape, 
composed entirely of his essence; and in him 
therefore is the whole world interwoven; and 
from him, and in him, is the universe, and he, 
the supreme lord of all, comprising all that is 
perishable and imperishable, bears upon him 
all material and spiritual existence, identified 
in nature with his ornaments and weapons. 


axa sara 
WiTeaare Bdefaet TTL 
fafa wrrary faerperareareaT greta & & I 


Maitreya said— Tell me in what manner 
Visnu bears the whole world, abiding in his 
nature, characterised by ornaments and 
weapons. 


TU SAT 


Wea fara wafer 
aaa area afast WATT & & 1 
SAAS Sa FretaayorTery 

fanft alquaftread sary eft:11§ 911 
Hae aT AAT 

WaT fegrarret TESA ATTA cil 


Parasara replied— Having offered 
salutation to the mighty and indescribable 
Visnu, I repeat to you what was formerly 
related to me by Vasistha. The glorious Har 


138 


wears the pure soul of the world, undefiled and 
void of qualities, as the Kaustubha gem. The 
chief principle of things (Pradhdna) is seated 
on the eternal, as the Srivatsa mark. Intellect 
abides in Madhava, in the form of his mace. 


yotanatsantes teasers: | 
Farafat wygeator wrgzator a Peery sit 


AAAI APa eT 

anery Tl edt faay: at feraq 9 01 

UHR F AM wen axe wanya:: 

AM YAeTaaTA Yara A Ss fEtii9 gi 

arifarvasrentar afgenaternts a 

PISTON SOT A eT ATEN VA 

fanfe wenfarerega sera 

faarrag maranfaaranrgra haar 0 3 

Sa YO WIS FIESTA UI 

Wat U Raa wt: Bakgarfor a 

faenfaad a tia adda wns oxi 

STAY AST BUA: | 

fauft wraredisat dee wT BT eu I 

Farr shanties | 

fauft yostiarended WET KN 

The lord (ISwara) supports egotism 
(Ahamk4ra) in its twofold division, into 
elements and organs of sense, in the emblems 
of his conch-shell and his bow. In his hand Vis 
nu holds, in the form of his discus, the mind, 
whose thoughts (like the weapon) fly swifter 
than the winds. The necklace of the deity 
Vaijayanti, composed of five precious gems’ is 
the aggregate of the five elemental rudiments, 
Janarddana bears, in his numerous shafts, the 
faculties both of action and of perception. The 
bright sword of Acyuta is holy wisdom, 
concealed at some seasons in the scabbard of 
ignorance. In this manner soul nature, 
intellect, egotism, the elements. the senses, 
mind ignorance, and wisdom, are all 
assembled in the person of HrsikeSa. Hari, in a 


delusive form embodies the 
elements of the world, as his weapons and his 


shapeless - 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


ornaments, for the salvation of mankind’. 
Pundarikaksa, the lord of all, assumes nature, 
with all its products, soul and all the world. 


Ml faa Mt aasfaan Aq Ws VATA 
aq Wa Baya AIT ATTEAM oi 

wen aarer- rear fe- fear BIT: | 
AAR WTA BATETT 119 6 
Yetasa Yactea: aetna yfraas! 
TEATeTT: Wes Maetrear sa fay: wos 
Hera: waar yaaraty Yast: | 

STN: Walaa waa Ee: Raat con 
Sa-ATTN-Vaaraeaaeny: FT: | 

AA: AAMAS Yaya ¢ gM 
at ale art atarrdonts a 


ghrerataderg sardy aaMHaT 6 I 


All that is wisdom, all that is ignorance, all 
that is, all that is not, all that is everlasting, 1s 
centred in the destroyer of Madhu, the lord of 
all creatures. The supreme, eternal Hari is 
time, with its divisions of seconds, minutes, 
days, months, seasons, and years: he is the 
seven worlds, the earth, the sky. heaven, the 
world of patriarchs, of sages, of saints, of 
truth: whose form is all worlds; first-born 
before all the first-born; the supporter of all 
beings, himself self-sustained: who exists in 
manifold forms', as gods, men, and animals; 
and is thence the sovereign lord of all, eternal: 
whose shape is all visible things; who 1s 
without shape or form: who is celebrated in 
the Vedanta as the Rk, Yajus. Sima. and 
Atharva Vedas inspired history, and sacred 
science. 


aa Beet antenteMa a 

VAI IAPATaH A FAAS 3H 
area & afag rarakaents a 
wrenhracaae ayfenirerert: ie 

TI taenai arta at safer 

ara a aagaratt wif waif weg ne 4 


The Vedas, and their divisions; the ins- 
titutes of Manu and other lawgivers; 


BOOK I, CHAP. 22 


139 





traditional scriptures, and religious manuals;"° 
poems, and all that is said or sung; are the 
body of the mighty Visnu, assuming the form 
of sound. All kinds of substances, with or 
without shape, here or elsewhere, are the body 
of Visnu. 

TRA HA: HCO 

Seyal WT A AT Ak 
WAKA atat TARA ¢ & IN 


{ am Hari. All that I behold is Janarddana; 
cause and effect are from none other than him. 
The man who knows these truths shall never 
again experience the afflictions of worldly 
existence. 


Seay ASM: WIA: YUoreares a fi! 
aura aaa BAL ga Ws: WET! C191 
SMA TERT Blageat A WTI 
aes qa was Bares Aa Sou 


tatefigradaandrtas Way 
waht oat: Yat Sava aay FAI Vil 
sfx staat weraigt etfersttseart:: 
TAM: Tayo: 

Thus, Brahman, has the first portion of this 
Purana been duly revealed to you: listening to 
which, expiates all oflences. The man who 
hears this Purana obtains the fruit of bathing in 
the Puskara lake!’ for twelve years, in the 
month of Kartik. The gods bestow upon him 
who hears this work the dignity of a divine 
sage, of a patriarch, or of a spirit of heaven. 

He he He He 
NOTES 

1. These are similarly enumerated in the Vayu, 
Brahma, Padma. Bhagavata, etc.. with some 
additions; as, Agni, king of the Pitrs; Vayu. of the 
Gandharvas; Silapani (Siva), of the Bhitas : 
Kubera, of riches, and of the Yaksas; V4suki of the 
Nagas; Taksaka, of serpents; Chitraratha, of the 
Gandharvas; Kamadeva, of the Apsaraas; 


Vipracitta, of the Danavas; R&hu, of meteors;. 


Parjanya, of clouds; Samvatsara, of times and 


seasons Samudra, of rivers; Himavat, of 
mountains, etc. 

2. We have already had occasion to notice the 
descent of those Lokapalas, as specified in the 
Vayu Purana; and it is evident, although the Visnu 
does not supply a connected series of generations, 
yet that both accounts are derived from a common 
sOUICe. 

3. Vibhiti, superhuman or divine power or 
dignity. 

4. The question, according to the commentator, 
implies a doubt how the supreme being, who is 
without qualities, can be subject to specific variety, 
or to existence in divided and different conditions. 

5. Of Brahmabhiita (#@tYAe4); of him who or that 
which becomes identified with the supreme spirit, 
which is the same respectively with absolute 
wisdom. Jiiana (a4 ), and discriminative wisdom. 
Vijnana (faa); leading to felicity, or the condition 
of Brahma, expressed by the words. Satcitanandam 
(after ), ‘entire tranquillity of mind, ‘or internal 
enjoyment :’ the same also with the combination of 
wisdom and tranquillity, which the devotee 
believes to exist in Adwaita ‘non-duality.” or unity 
of god and himself: and finally the same with the 
aggregate of these three processes or the conviction 
that spirit is one, universal, and the same. 

6. The epithets of Jnana, ‘wisdom,’ here 
employed, are taken from the Yoga philosophy. 
‘Requires no exercise,’ Nirvyapara (eater), is 
explained, ‘without the practice of abstract 
contemplation,’ etc. (amieyRa). ‘Not to be taught.’ 
Anakhyeyam (aa7@r), ‘not capable of being 
enjoined’ = ( Internally diffused.’ 
Vyaptimatram (afer), means ‘menial 
identification of individual with universal spirit’ 
(ATM TEMSNATAASA ), The phrase armaaefasa 
translated 'the object of which is self-illumination.' 
is explained Tanai. 'Simply existent’ (GW ) is 
said to mean. ‘being unmodified by the accidents of 
happiness etc. (s1arfefarrayra), consequently it is 
not to be defined (1187 ). So the Yoga Pradipa 
explains Samddhi, or contemplation, to be the 
entire occupation of the thoughts by the idea of 
Brahma, without any effort of the mind. It is the 
entire abandonment of the faculties to one all- 
engrossing notion ( Tera fea: aT 

aattetad). ‘Tranquil,’ Prasantam 
(SII), is ‘being void of passion.’ etc. (Mey ). 


140 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





'Fearless:' not dreading agitation or perplexity by 
ideas of duality (@aepa4) ‘Pure;' undisturbed by 
external objects (fifya). ‘Not the theme of 
reasoning: (fae); that is. 'not to be ascertained 
by logical deduction’ (afaae ). ‘Stands in no need 
of support’ (3144), not resting or depending upon 
perceptible objects (ffayacae saya). 

7. The great Yoga is produced (Aerart ara). 
This great Yoga, or union, is to have its relation or 
dependence (@eT3A:). which is Visnu (a™a:; and 
its seed (els:), or mystical ejaculations; and to be 
accompanied with Mantras and silent repetitions, or 
Japa (Wate Alea). 

8. Or of pearl, ruby, emerald, sapphire, and 
diamond. 

9. We have in the text a representation of one 
mode of Dhyana, or contemplation, in which the 


conception of a thing is attempted to be rendered 
more definite by thinking upon its types : or in 
which, at least. the thoughts are more readily 
concentrated by being addressed to a Sensible 
emblem, instead of an abstract truth. Thus the Yogi 
here says to himself.:"I meditate upon the jewel on 
Visnu's brow, as the soul of the world : upon the 
gem on his breast, as the first principle of things;" 
and so on : and thus through a perceptible 
substance proceeds to an imperceptible idea. 

10. Akhyanani (ST@arTA) is said to denote the 
Puranas, and Anuvada (3f7fate:) the Kalpa, Sutra, 
and similar works, containing directions for 
supplementary rites. 

11. The celebrated lake Pokher in Ajmer. 


ite ake ok 


END OF THE FIRST BOOK 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 
BOOK I 


o 
> 
° 





CHAPTER 1 
WaMseara: 
(Traqaea yarot faarat, aay) 
aaa sara 
wre Weed Weehad wan 
aa: Threat aq gErsfat et wa wn 
ASTM Weegee nfs 
dare Rafreanta sarste aaa Vn 
fragatraarel Yat tarryaer ath 
THAT Ta: YARAA SAT 3 
fragaee Faleet act fast wafer: 
arg siqftreants weal aerate wn 


Maitreya said—- You have related to me, 
venerable preceptor, most fully, all that I was 
curious to hear respecting the creation of the 
world; but there is a part of the subject which | 
am desirous again to have described. You 
stated that Priyavrata and Uttanapada were the 
sons of Svayambhuva Manu, and you repeated 
the story of Dhruva. the son of Uttanapada: 
you made no mention of the descendants of 
Priyavrata, and it is an account of his family 
that I beg you will kindly communicate to me. 


WUT Sa 
Sera Haya frag: 
Wyre Hail a aaa ST TATRTATTT GH 
HEM etatat feria efaar: faq: 
frradgal: Taras aT F szoT GN 
aieanitrargs ager yfarareran 
Ten Wenfatatet: Wat: YT WT AN 
SHAM STAT WIAA Tals wa 
fraser Yarott werd aerate 1c 


Rantrag- arg Fay AeraTTVT: 

RUA MATA TURAL AAT TNS 

Fran: wader wreaney a 

up: fear sararratetente fear fF A 200 

ParaSara said— Priyavrata married Kimya, 

the daughter of the patriarch Kardama', and 
had by her two daughters, Samrat and Kuksi, 
and ten sons, wise, valiant, modest, and 
dutiful, named Agnidhra, Agnibaéhu, Vapus 
mat, Dyutimat, Medhatithi, Bhavya, Sabala, 
Putra, and the tenth was Jyotismat,’ illustrious 
by nature as by name. These were the sons of 
Priyavrata, famous for strength and prowess. 
Of these, three, or Medha, Putra, and 
Agnibahu, adopted a_ religious life: 
remembering the occurrences of a prior 
existence, they did not covet dominion, but 
diligently practised the rites of devotion in due 
season, wholly disinterested, and looking for 
no reward. 

fraaat cet dat wart Braet! 

faust wa grarht War Quererarq vei 

Wags TET Asters at fran 

TET TA Weld Weg aAATTTH 221 

Were A aT Waa 

RAST HET TA BAIL WY L3H 

Bias Wa Aswad aarfeyra 

WIRE UT VTE TA AYN VI 


at YER TW ATTA 4 

Priyavrata having divided the earth into 
seven continents, gave them respectively to his 
other seven sons.’ To Agnidhra he gave 
Jambidvipa; to Medhatihi he gave Plaksa- 
dvipa: he installed Vapusnat in_ the 
sovereignty over the Dvipa of Salmali; and 
made Jyotismat king of Kusa-dvipa: he 


142 


appointed Dyutimat to rule over Krauiica- 
dvipa; Bhavya to reign over Saka-dvipa; and 
Savala he nominated the monarch of the Dvipa 
of Puskara. 


wage ag ster yf 

TS PT YAR wonferaat Aan V6 11 

wh: faaeagte eftad serge: 

Ty fatwa wey Heigey Va AN Vil 

RPMI: MTASY FNSWATI 

Agnidhra, the king of Jambu-Dvipa. had 

nine sons, equal in splendour to the patriarchs: 
they were named Nabhi, Kimpurusa, 
Hariramvarsa. [lavrta, Ramya, Himvat, Kuru, 
Bhadrasva, and Ketumala.* who was a prince 
ever active in the practice of piety. 


wragrafanrtiey vat fax Fremran ec 

frat ad feneg ad arreq afer 

wae Ta at cet farpearas a1 Veil 

aaa tee at efraate award 

SUGAR Weal Wels YF AAT oll 

Aeracntand af carr weet fia 

Nt aeat as fia eet fecaan 2 a 

agwt yaa Te AL FA sel 

at: aur ae ae yeas NEMA 2 VM 

TATA ATA SAAMI 

serait eal WA: IVT: WAT V3 

atadg ar Garhufrer a yf: 

wea verguy Aa aes zat Vil 

Hear next, Maitreya, in what manner 

Agnidhra apportioned Jambu-Dvipa amongst 
his nine sons. He gave to Nabhi the country 
called Hima, south of the Himavat, or snowy 
mountains. The country of Hemakita he gave 
to Kimpurusa; and to Harivarsa, the country of 
Nisadha. The region in the centre of which 
mount Meru is situated he conferred on 
llavrta; and to Ramya, the countries lying 
between it and the Nila mountain. To Hiranvat 


his father gave the country lying to the north 
of it, called Sveta; and on the north of the 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


Sveta mountains, the country bounded by the 
Sringavan range he gave to Kuru. The 
countries on the east of Meru he assigned to 
Bhadrasva; and Gandhmadana, which lay west 
of it, he gave to Ketumala.” Having installed 
his sons sovereigns in these several regions, 
the pious king Agnidhra retired to a life of 
penance at the holy place of pilgrimage, 
Salagrama.° 


ait fangerat aatocast rene 

ae tannfaat fate: Genre Waa 240 
fara a weaker aaa J UI 

SHA AAT AAMT AAETAT: | 2G I 


7 Wealta Bae aaaIBTY Waal 


The eight Varsas, or countries, Kimpurusa 
and the rest, are places of perfect enjoyment, 
where happiness is spontaneous and 
uninterrupted. In them there is no vicissitude, 
not the dread of decrepitude or death: there is 
no distinction of virtue or vice, nor difference 
of degree as better or worse, nor any of the 
effects produced in this region by the 
revolutions of ages. 


fenitg wea a ah ATA 211 

AeIISHAY WaT Weceat Aerelfa: | 

BUTE UAT WA SIS: GAMTET Wl Vo 

Fal The tae weap fafaany War 

afar Yat VIS wed Gaara 28H 

qTa UAT: YR aah 

areata aaa Kara: 11 3 oll 

TIA BIAS AaT A A Aaah: | 

ara aigarsras set rarer: 3 eit 

al alet ye arat aheart aah Wa: 

TAY MI THAT WTA 3 VU 

wae aa: Tear ae witsat AAAI 

Nabhi, who had for his portion the country 

of Himahwa. bad by his queen Meru the 
magnanimous Rsabha; and he had a hundred 
sons, the eldest of whom was Bharata. Rsabha 
having ruled with equity and wisdom, and 
celebrated many sacrificial rites, resigned the 


BOOK I, CHAP. I 


143 





sovereignty of the earth to the heroic Bharata, 
and, retiring to the hermitage of Pulastya, 
adopted the life of an anchoret, practising re- 
ligious penance, and performing all prescribed 
ceremonies, until, emaciated by his austerittes, 
so as to be but a collection of skin and fibres. 
he put a pepple in his mouth, and naked went 
the way of all flesh.’ The country was termed 
Bharata from the time that it was relinquished 
to Bharata by his father, on his retiring to the 
woods.® 


Garang Ya: Ween 3 30 
area way eat wel tater: fren 
Garaget wea: A Tea Bw 
SRA: MOTEL PSTASeRTTA | 
stared a fasisat air wat Hern 34 it 
faa! wer ula wafsenta a ot: 

Bharata, having religiously discharged the 
duties of his station, consigned the kingdom to 
his son Sumati, a most virtuous prince; and, 
engaging in devout practices, abandoned his 
life at the holy place, Sdlagrama: he was 
afterwards born again as a Brahmana, in a 
distinguished family of ascetics. 1 shall 
hereafter relate to you his history. 


GAARA SATA 3 EH 
UUs waaay witerceateaa: | 

wherein Feat START ATT 3G 
GARTEN THT: RATATAT fay: 
UTRAASHAA AHN TT: WAN BCH 
ay Tey Araya fate aa: 

aa Ya Wararal efteriearerrastrearai 3 ¢ it 
HEAR RINTA TTL ATT: | 

mam aps faut Treen Yas volt 
PATA TT YAM WA! 

fauna: warred fiat afgar: wats y en 
afte are at watery 

vat aerrgaay yeast MTT TTY TH 
HAAAT EAGT SSA SAAT LT: 1H 3H 


From the illustrious Sumati was born 
Indradyumna: his son was Paramesthin: his 
son was Pratihara, who had a celebrated son, 
named Pratihartta: his son was Bhava, who 
begot Udgitha, who begot Prastara; whose son 
was Prithu. The son of Prithu was Nakta: his 
son was Gaya: his son was Nara; whose son 
was Virat. The valiant son of Virat was 
Dhimat, who begot Mahanta; whose son was 
Manasyu; whose son was Twasta: his son was 
Viraja: his son was Raja: his son was Satajit, 
who had a hundred sons, .of whom 
Visvagjyotis was the eldest.” Under these 
princes, Bharata-varsa (India) was divided into 
nine portions (to be hereafter particularised); 
and their descendants successively held 
possession of the country for seventy-one 
periods of the aggregate of the four ages (or 
for the reign of a Manu). 


Uy earaya: Gat Arg Yer TY 
are Fa! wed yaaa: iw wit 
ofa stage fata weratseara: 


This was the creation of Svayambhuva 
Manu. by which the earth was peopled, when 
he presided over the first Manvantara, in the 
Kalpa of Varaha."® 


NOTES 


1. The text reads Kanya (@¢3earasil Hi); and 
the commentator has, ‘he married the daughter of 
Kardama. whose name was Kanyé, (#7 
S-Trasid). The copies agree in the reading, and 
the Vayu has the same name’ Kany4; but the 
Markandeya, which is the same in other respects as 
our text, has Kamyd: Kamyé also is the name else, 
where given by the Vayu to the daughter of 
Kardama (Ch. X. n. 6). Kamya, as has been 
noticed, appears in the Brahma and Hari V. (Ch. 
VIL mn. 6) as the mother of Priyavrata, but 
erroneously : and the same authorities specify a 
Kamya as the wife of that sovereign. So the com- 
mentator on the Hari V. states, ‘another Kamya is 
mentioned (in the text), the daughter of Kardama, 
the wife of Priyavrata:" fraaaca sat aeaqt 
arearaene! The name Kanya is therefore most 
probably an error of the copyists. The Bhagavata 


144 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





calls the wife of Priyavrata. Barhismati. the 
daughter of Visvakarman. 

2. These names nearly agree in the authorities 
which specify the descendants of Priyavrata, except 
in the Bhagavata; that has an almost entirely 
different series of names, or Agnidhra. Idhmajihwa, 
Yajnabahu. Mahavira, Hiranyaretas, Medhatithi, 
Ghrtaprishtha, Savana. Vitihotra. and Kavi: with 
one daughter, Urjjasvati. It also calls the Manus 
Uttama, Tamasa, and Raivata the sons of Priyavrata 
by another wife. 

3. According to the Bhagavata, he drove his 
chariot seven times round the earth, and the ruts left 
by the wheels became the beds of the oceans, 
separating it into seven Dvipas. 

4. Even the Bhagavata concurs with the other 
Puranas in this series of Priyavrata's grandsons. 

5. Of these divisions, as well as of those of the 
earth, and of the minor divisions of the Varsas. we 
have further particulars in the following chapter. 

6. This place of pilgrimage has not been found 
elsewhere. The term is usually applied to a stone, 
an ammonite, which is supposed to be a type of Vis 
nu. and of which the worship is enjoined in the 
Uttara Khanda of the Padma P. and in the Brahma 
Vaivartta, authorities of no great weight or 
antiquity. As these stones are found chiefly in the 
Gandak river, the Salagrama Tirtha was probably at 
the source of that stream, or at its confluence with 
the Ganga. Its sanctity, and that of the stone, are 
probably of comparatively modem origin. 

7, ‘The great road’ or ‘road of heroes’ (Hema 
or Ake) The people was intended either to 
compcl perpetual silence, or to prevent the eating. 
The Bhagavata adverts to the same circumstance; 
ae ParAHya: | That work enters much more into 
detail on the subject of Rsabha'a devotion, and 
particularizes circumstances not found in any other 
Purana. The mot interesting of these are the scene 
of Rsabha's a wanderings, which is said to be 
Konka, Venkata, Kitaka. and southern Karnataka, 
or the western part of the Peninsula : and the 
adoption of the Jain belief by the people of those 
countries. Thus it is said, "A king of the Kankas, 
Venkatas, and Kitakas. named Arhat, having heard 
the tradition of Rsabha's practices (or his wandering 
about naked, and desisting from religious rites), 
being infatuated by necessity, under the evil 
influence of the Kali age will become needlessly 


alarmed, and abandon his own religious duty, and 
will foolishly enter upon an unrighteous and 
heretical path. Misled by him and bewildered by 
the iniquitous operation of the Kali age, disturbed 
also by the delusions.of the deity, wicked men will, 
in great numbers, desert the institutes and 
purifications of their own ritual; will observe vows 
injurious and disrespectful to the gods : will desist 
from ablutions, mouthwashings, and purifications, 
and will pluck out the hair of the head; and will 
revile the world, the deity, sacrifices. Brahmanas. 
and the Vedas." It if also said, that Sumati the son 
of Bharata, will be irreligiously worshipped by 
some infidels, as a divinity. Besides the import of 
the term Arhat, or Jain. Rsabha is the name of the 
first, and Sumati of the fifth Térthankara, or Jain 
saint of the present era. There can be no doubt, 
therefore, that the Bhagavata intends this sect, and 
as the Jain system was not matured until a com- 
paratively modern date, this composition is 
determined to be also recent. The allusions to the 
extension of the Jain faith in the western parts of 
the Peninsula, may serve to fix the limit of its 
probable antiquity to the 11 or 12 century, when the 
fains seem to have been flourishing in Guzerat and 
the Konkan. As. Res. XVII. 282, 

8. This etymology is given in other Puranas; but 
the Matsya and Vayu have a different one, deriving 
it from the Manu, called Bharata. Or the cherisher, 
one who rears or cherishes progeny— rg Wart a 
wpa spend | Peaeaea af wend Hyd! The Vayu 
has, in another place, the more common 
explanation also : fea cfarrad aca (atea) AT 
fagaen: 1 

9. The Agni. Karma, Markandeya, Linga, and 
Vayu Puranas agree with the Visnu in these 
genealogical details. The Bhagavata has some 
additions and variations of nomenclature, but is not 
essentially different. It ends, however, with Satajit, 
and cites a stanza which would seem to make 
Viraja the last of the descendants of Priyavrta : 
Yaad dake fascia: | rete areal fay, ger 
Gath 

10. The descendants of Priyavrata were the kings 
of the earth in the first or Svayambhuva 
Manvantara. Those of Uttanapdda his brother are 
placed rather incongruously in the second or 
Svarochisa Manvantara : whilst, with still more 
palpable inconsistency. Daksa, a descendant of 


BOOK II, CHAP. 2 145 





Uttanapada, gives his daughter to KaSyapa in the 
seventh or Vaivasvata Manvantara. It seems 
probable that the patriarchal genealogies are older 
than the chronological system of Manvantaras and 
Kalpas. and have been rather clumsily distributed 
amongst the different periods. 

keke 


BOOK II, CHAP. 2 


145 





CHAPTER I 


fadtatseara: 


(areggrrautay) 

aag sara 

wf watt Taq! wt: TarTAyasy Th 

Marana Se: Wet AVSet Years 11 Vl 

eat: ANT sores aaifor wera: | 

at afta; Tat tara Aa WAU VM 

TAATOe Wa Aerendt Aareray! 

Ware BT YY! Baas aA AN 3 

Maitreya said— You have related to me 

Brahman, the creation of Svayambhuva; I am 
now desirous to hear from you a description of 
the earth: how many are its oceans and islands, 
its kingdoms and it mountains, its forests and 
rivers and the cities of the gods, its dimen- 
sions, its contents, its nature, and its form. 
UUM Java 


AAT saad GataTE Med AAI 

area aera ag yea fe frets 

Wa-waeat grat wreaferrat feat 

HM; LARA Wh: GERI AAAI I 

Wa EIT: AAR AA BATA: | 

wany-qu-afadha-sa-aet: WAT I 

Parasara replied— You shall hear, Maitreya, 

a brief account of the earth from me: a full 
dctail I could not give you in a century. The 
seven great insular continents are Jambu, 
Plaksna. Salmali, Kusa. Kraufica. Saka. and 
Puskara: and they are surrounded severally by 
seven great scas; the sea of salt water (Lavana) 
of sugar-cane Juice (Iksu). of (wine (Sur4), of 


clarified butter (Sarpi), of curds (Dadhi). of 
milk (Dugdha). and of fresh water (Jala).! 


MAG: CHAANL Waa era: | 

weafe treta! wet aarHdad: 119 11 

UU ASA ASAT TEHA: | 

wag: weoreaa afreryeter fag c 

Wet Weweaneal frente WaT: | 

TUTTE Bere: BlOrenAN Ta PAT: | 8 

Jambt-dvipa is in the centre of all these: 

and in the centre of this continent is the golden 
mountain Meru. The height of Meru is eighty- 
four thousand Yojanas; and its depth below the 
surface of the earth is sixteen thousand. Its 
diameter ac the summit is thirty-two thousand 
Yojanas; and at its base, sixteen thousand: so 


thar this mountain 1s like the seed-cup of the 
locus of the earth.” 


ferary eaaes frees aferch 

Tet: VAT Tsk A Tat AUT: 11 Yo tl 
RAMAN Bl eat aera 
UCalenaraprarenraheenhowy An Vel 
Utd wee at ad: fanged wat 
shad warranted fet 22 
Tian af retary fexorey 

FAT: HUGS GMT SF TTT FAT V3 UI 
qaReatnannaey EerarT! 

Solas Tara aul Weefesa: 11 eX I 
Wages Ty Aaraealaca 

Solad AEMMT! AAI Waa: 11 24 I 
fanaa thera Avratsrraray reg: 1 LE 
YSU Heat ATT SATOH TRAST: | 
fager: afar unt quadsitt aya: 11 Voll 
HOTA Weer fruit qe Us a 
Wereyrerararean: rear Patna: 1 Vo 
THAR Ot aeainegyenyy| 
TEAM AAMT: HEMT ST 8 I 
Uatet WATT: YB viktronhl waa: | 


146 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





TO AGT WENTAT aa AMAT SU Vol 

aft vada a a trad afvarfate: | 

qT Taal AB Shea A Seer ATT: 2 I 

PUMA SATA SAAT AT TTA 

Ay AT Wel Baarafagnieran 

arate waft Yaut FrsyAorT 2 21 

The boundary mountains (of the earth) are 

Himavan, Hemakita, and Nisadha. which lie 
south of Meru; and Nila. Sveta, and Srngi, 
which are situated to the north of it. The two 
central ranges (those next to Meru, or Nisadha 
and -Nila) extend for a hundred thousand 
(Yojanas, running east and west). Each of the 
others diminishes ten thousand Yojanas, as it 
lies more remote from the centre. They are 
two thousand Yojanas in height, and as many 
in breadth. The Varsas or countries between 
these ranges are Bharata (India), south of the 
Himavan mountains; next Kimpurusa, between 
Himavan and Hemakita; north of the latter, 
and south of Nisadha, is Harivarsa; north of 
Meru is Ramyaka, extending from the Nila or 
blue mountains to the Sveta (or white) 
mountains; Hiranmaya ties between the Sveta 
and Srigi ranges; and Uttarakuru is beyond the 
latter, following the same direction as 
Bharata.* Each of these is nine thousand 
Yojanas in extent. [lavrta is of similar 
dimensions, but in the centre of it 1s the golden 
mountain Meru, and the country extends nine 
thousand Yojanas in each direction from the 
four sides of the mountain.” There are four 
mountains in this Varsa, formed as buttresses 
to Meru. each ten thousand Yojanas in 
elevation : that on the east is called Mandara; 
that on the south, Gandhamdadana; that on the 
west, Vipula; and that on the north, Suparsva:° 
on each of these stands severally a Kadamba- 
tree, a Jambu-tree, a Pipal, and a Vata;’ each 
spreading over eleven hundred Yojanas, and 
towering aloft like banners on the mountain. 
From the Jambu-tree the insular continent 
Jambu-Dvipa derives its appellations. The 
apples of that tree are as large as elephants: 


_ when they are rotten, they fait upon the crest 


of the mountain, and from their cxpressed 
juice is formed the Jambu river, the waters of 
which are drunk by the inhabitants; ‘and in 
consequence of drinking of that stream, they 
pass their days in content and health, being 
subject neither to perspiration, to foul odours, 
to decrepitude, nor organic decay. The soil on 
the banks of the river, absorbing the Jambu 
juice, and being dried by gentle breezes, 
becomes the gold termed Jambu-nada, of 
which the omaments of the Siddhas are 
fabricated. 


Ug Yaa WW: Hares Us 

ad & 7 Ares! aarted serge 231 
ad dad oa afercl emery) 

Sunt usd aaget FT BAAN evil 
STUN RENVTAAAAAS AAA! 
area went tavtran wae V4 


The country of BhadraSsva lies on the east 
of Meru, and Ketumala on the west; and 
between these two is the region of [lavrta, On 
the east of the same is the forest Caitraratha; 
the Gandhamadana wood is on the south; the 
forest of Vaibhr4ja is on the west; and the 
grove of Indra, or Nandana, is on the north. 
There are also four great lakes, the waters of 
which are partaken of by the gods, called 
Arunoda, Mahabhadra, Sitoda, and Manasa.* 


PARAS HUM Wega 
Sa_ITGT WT: Yad: HMI: | 
free: forigreta wag waerere 26 II 

freer efaoreter Baa: | 
fafaare: wad: afte artes: 
TERMS WEA SATA: 1 V9 11 
Wiese Woufesafeat: | 
VBREASA BWIA TAY AVTAAATAT: | 
HARTY TAT SAL HPT: 1 BSI 

The principal mountain ridges which 


project from the base of Meru, like filaments 
from the root of the lotus, are, on the east, 


BOOK II, CHAP. 2 


147 





Sitanta, Mukunda, Kurari, Malyavan, and 
Vaikanka; on the south, Triktta, Sisira, 
Patanga, Rucaka, and Nisadha; on the west, 
Sikhivasas, Vaidtrya, Kapila, Gandhamadana, 
and Jarudhi; and on the north, Sankhakiita, Rs 
abha, Naga, Hamsa, and K4alanjara. These and 
others extend from between the intervals in the 
body, or from the heart of Meru.” 


aqeragentar aera weg 

Uveaft Wa! gator: wire fafa 281 

ren: wae feerg faferrg a 

SSeS WEN: WAT: YT Zot 

faurrefarencan wrafrergarset 

waa Fat: Yat wgr. wats a fears en 

ar aa ufaar fee ugat wferverh 

Sar SeraTaT BT VHA A SA HTN 3 Vt 

yaar very dat F vet areraerm 

adel ysatur agaafa aroraq 3 311 

aaa OT ATTA 

wen ATL YeaT MANY HSMP 3 ¥ It 

WYAT UAT TA AH aT: | 

utah agurenet at TSA ATT 3 4 II 

RT Tea TUT HEL 

Sra TA WNT BG 

On the summit of Meru is the vase city of 

Brahma, extending fourteen thousand leagues, 
and renowned in heaven; and around it, in the 
cardinal points and the intermediate quarters, 
are situated the stately cities of Indra and the 
other regents of the spheres.'° The capital of 
Brahma is enclosed by the river Ganga, which, 
issuing from the foot of Visnu, and washing 
the lunar orb, falls here from the skies'' and 
after encricling the city, divides into four 
mighty rivers, flowing in opposite directions. 
These rivers are the Sita, the Alakananda, the 
Caksu, and the Bhadra. The first, falling upon 
the tops of the inferior mountains, on the east 
side of Meru, flows over their crests, and 


passes through the country of Bhadrasva to the 
ocean: the Alakananda flows south, to the 


country of Bharata, and dividing into seven 
rivers on the way tails into the sea: the Caksu 
falls into the sea, after traversing all the 
western mountains, and passing through the 
country of Ketumdala : and the Bhadra washes 
the country of the Uttarakurus, and empties 
itself into the northern ocean. 


SMteaarmnit wrewag- TIA 
aaa WE: afUTarATTa AA: 11 391 
WTA: AAT WAP: PTAA 
Ualfan AUST Wate MeTATEIT: 11 3 Ct 
Wav tages walarndaraat 

at cfaotratrarararterarereaat 3 ¢ 
TANT HeaTa yaaa 
Saar MlarTaa TAT ¥ © It 
Free: wifturer wareredargyn 

at: ufsafermt ger yet ae Petts en 
feygy arefesta sat aaa 


TRCN AT ATA RTA % 2 It 
saad yaaa waterqdareral 

waren: frat Aeraat gt st agfeyrrn w 31 
Wisrgiayt By wreat: Haga: 
Pirararen ya! ceraatta fe WANTAT: 11s wl 
Verma guar: fagarorataanr: | 
qeanie aan wey ares Foto Ans 4 
cent-fawatagaifeeart yaaa 
araraaraaifer serhr acfarat: i ws I 
Trae aa eeaerat:| 
Blt MY Tang Vesa vit 
aia Ba Bat: TaN aftrorrarerar yA! 
tag ureeHatoN arf srarereteftn vo 


Meru, then, is confined between the 
mountains Nila and Nisadha (on the north and 
south) and between Malyavaén and 
Gandhamadana (on the west and east): it lies 
between them like the pericarp of a lotus. The 
countries of Bharata, Ketumala, Bhadrasva 
and Uttarakuru lie, like leaves of the lotus of 
the world, exterior to the boundary mountains. 


148 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





Jathara and Devakita are two mountain ranges 
running north and south, and connecting the 
two chains of Nisadha and _ Nila. 
Gandhamadana and Kailadsa extend, east and 
west, eighty Yojanas in breadth, from sea to 
sea. Nisadha and P4riyatra are the limitative 
mountains on the westi stretching, like those 
on the ease, between the Nila and Nisadha 
ranges: and the mountains Trsriga and Jarudhi 
are the northern limits of Meru, extending, 
east and west, between the two seas. Thus I 
have repeated to you the mountains described 
by great sages as the boundary mountains 
situated in pairs, on each of the four sides of 
Meru. Those also, which have been mentioned 
as the filament mountains (or spurs), Sitdnta 
and the rest are exceedingly delightful. The 
vallies embosomed amongst them are the 
favourite resorts of the Siddhas and Charanas: 
and there are situated upon them agreeable 
forests, and pleasant cities, embellished with 
the palaces of Visnu, Laksmi, Agni, Strya, 
and other deities, and peopled by celestial 
spirits, whilst the Yaksas. Raksasas, Daityas, 
and D&anavas pursue their pastimes in the 
vales. These, in short are the regions of 
Paradise, or Svarga, the seats of the righteous, 
and where the wicked do not arrive even after 
a hundred births. 


we wary feos gator fea! 
awe: Hye F MAA Hangs ve 
ARTSY MS: HUAN WAT: | 
fayeunt Fast Gd: WAM BT kon 
TATA VLS A AAMAS STR: 
aft fanqeaatt autvast werg! 
Tay Ben area ate: amenfearqn 4 en 
Gear: wan Fragi: wag safaafiean:: 
aprelaraatant weentar Fererga: ns Bt 
7 ag ada eat sioraife ag a 
wa-Taea Aa AT WAT ETAT Y 3 tt 
waaay aly Wa UA Hee: 

Tey WaTaA: Wea at FASTA & wi 


sfa sitfaey quot fgttaigy fedtaiserra: 


In the country of Bhadrasva, Visnu resides 
as Hayasirsa (the horse-headed); in Ketumala, 
as Varaha (the boar); in Bharata, as the 
tortoise (Kirma); in Kuru, as the fish 
(Matsya); in his universal form, every where; 
for Hari pervades all places: he, Maitreya, ts 
the supporter of all things; he is all things. In 
the eight realms of Kimpurusa and the rest (or 
all exclusive of Bharata) there is no sorrow, 
nor weariness, nor anxiety, nor hunger, nor 
apprehension; their inhabitants are exempt 
from all infirmity and pain, and live in 
uninterrupted enjoyment for ten or twelve 
thousand years. India never sends rain upon 
them, for the earth abounds with water. In 
those places there is no distinction of Krta, 
Tretaé, or any succession of ages. In each of 
these Varsas there are respectively seven 
principal ranges of mountains, from which, oh 
best of Brahmans. hundreds of rivers take their 


rise. 
aK 


NOTES 

1. The geography of the Puranas occurs in most 
of these works; and in al] the main features, the 
seven Dvipas, seven seas, the divisions of Jambu- 
dvipas, the situation and extent of Meru, and the 
sub-divisions of Bharata, is the same. The Agni and 
Brahma are word for word the same with our text; 
and the Karma, Liniga, Matsya, Markandeya. and 
Vayu present many passages common to them and 
the Visnu, or to one another. The Vayu, as usual, 
enters most fully into particulars. The Bhagavata 
differs in its nomenclature of the subordinate 
details from all, and is followed by the Padma. The 
others either omit the subject, or advert to it but 
briefly. The Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva. has an 
account essentially the same, and many of the 
stanzas are common to it and different Puranas. It 
does not follow the same order, and has some 
peculiarities; one of which 1s calling Jambu-dvipas, 
SudarSana, such being the name of the Jambu-tree; 
it is said also to consist of two portions, called 
Pippala and Sasa, which are reflected in the lunar 
orb is in a mirror. | 


BOOK Il, CHAP. 2 


149 





2. The shape of Meru, according to this 
description, is that of an cverted cone; and by the 
comparison to the seed-cup its form should be 
circular: but there seems to be some uncertainty 
upon this subject amongst the Paurinikas. The 
Padma compares its form to the bell-shaped flower 
of the Dhutura. The Vayu represents it as having 
four sides of different colours; or white on the east, 
yellow on the south, black on the west, and red on 
the north; but notices also various opinions of the 
outline of the mountain, which, according to Atri 
had a hundred angles; to Bhrgu, a thousand: 
Savami calls it octangular; Bhaguri, quadrangular; 
and Vargayani says it has a thousand angles: Galava 
makes it saucer-shaped; Garga. twisted, like 
braided hair; and others maintain that it is circular. 
The Linga makes its eastern face of the colour of 
the ruby; its southern, that of the lotus; its western, 
golden and its northern, coral. The Matsya has the 
same colours as the Vayu and both contain this 
line; sata: wafegd:! ‘Four coloured, 
golden, four-comered lofty: but the Vayu compares 
its summit in one place, to a saucer; and observes 
that its circumference must be thrice its diameter: 
faMrarpreanea wre: WAtd:! The Matsya also 
rather incompatibly, says the measurement is that 
of a circular form but it is considered quadrangular: 
gaping 9agte: wifed:! According to the 
Buddhists of Ceylon, Meru is said to be of the same 
diameter throughout. Those of Nepal conceive it to 
be shaped like a drum. A translation of the 
description of Meru and its surrounding mountains, 
contained in the Brahmanda, which is the same 
exactly as that in the Vayu, occurs in the As. 
Researches. Vill. 343. There are some differences 
in Wilford version from that which my MSS. would 
authorize, but they are not in general of much 
importance. Some, no doubt, depend upon variation 
in the readings of the different copies: of others, I 
must question the accuracy. 

3. This diminution is the necessary consequence 
of the diminished radius of the circle of Jambu- 
dvipas. as the mountain ranges recede from the 
centre. 

4. These, being the two outer Varsas, are said to 
take the form of a bow; that is, they are exteriorly 
convex, being segments of the circle. 

5. The whole diameter of Jambu-dvipa has been 
said to be 100,000 Yojanas. This is thus divided 


from north to south: [lavrta, in the centre, extends 
each way 9000, making 18000: Meru itself, at the 
base, is 16000: the six Varsas at 9000 each, are 
equal to 54000 and the six ranges, at 2000 each, are 
12000 and 18+16+54+12=100. From east to west 
the Varsas are of the extent necessary to occupy the 
space of the circle. 

6. The Bhagavata and Padma call these Mandara, 
Merumandara, Sup4rsva, and Kumuda. 

7. Nauclea Kadamba, Eugenia Jambu, Ficus 
religiosa, and F, Indica. The Bhagavata substitutes 
a mango-tree for the Pipal; placing it on Mandara, 
the Jambu on Merumandara. the Kadamba on 
Sup4rsva, and the Vata on Kumuda. 

8. The Bhagavata substitutes Sarvatobhadra for 
the Gandhamadana forest; and calls the lakes, lakes 
of milk, honey, treacle, dad sweet water. 

9. The Vayu gives these names, and many more 
and describes at great length forests, lakes, and 
cities of gods and demi-gods upon these fabulous 
mountains, or in the valleys between them, (As. 
Res. Vill, 354). 

10. The Lokap4las. or eight deities in that 
character, Indra, Yama. Varuna. Kuvera, Vivaswat, 
Soma. Agni. and Vayu. Other cities of the gods are 
placed upon the spurs, or filament mountains, by 
the Vayu; or that of Brahma on Hemagsringa, of 
Sankara on Kalanjara. of Garuda on Vaikanka, and 
of Kuvera on Kailasa. Himavat is also specified by 
the same work as the scene of Siva's penance, and 
marriage with Uma; of his assuming the form of a 
Kirata, or forester; of the birth of Kartikeya, in the 
Sara forest; and of his dividing the mountain 
Krautica with his spear. This latter legend, having 
been somewhat misunderstood by Wilford, is made 
the theme of one of his fanciful verifications. 
“Here, he (the author of the Vayu) says in the forest 
of Sankha. was born Shadanana or K4artikeya, Mars 
with six faces. Here he wished or formed the 
resolution of going to the mountains of Kraufica 
Germany, part of Poland &c. to rest and recreate 
himself after his fatigues in the wars of the gods 
with the giants. There, in the skirts of the 
mountains of Kraufica, he flung his sword; the very 
same which Attila, in the fifth century, asserted he 
had found under a clod of earth. It was placed in his 
tomb, where it is probably to be found.” As. Res. 
VII. 364. The text of which this is in part a 
representation is, d3 FAN AWG Bs Vd; VS: | AT Va 


150 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





pane: eRe whan fagqedosd sae a 
firedet eater: care] aa ufefaqaarmi The 
legend here alluded to if told at length in the 
Vamana Purana. Mahishasura, flying from the 
battle, in which Taraka had been slain by 
Kartikeya, took refuge in a cave in the Kraufica 
mountain. A dispute arising between K4rtikeya and 
Indra, as to their respective prowess, they 
determined to decide the question by 
circumbulating the mountain; the palm to be given 
to him who should first go round it. Disagreeing 
about the result, they appealed to the mountain, 
who untruly decided in favour of Indra Kartikeya, 
to punish his injustice, hurled his lance at the 
mountain Kraufica. and pierced at once it and the 
demon Mahisa. Ta Yard a: (aaa: ) 
sreraepae:) fe wae serast wi ae 
Another division of Kraufica is ascribed to 
Parasuréama. Megha Dita, v. 59. Kraurfica 1s also 
sometimes considered to be the narne of an Asura. 
killed by Kartikeya; but this is pcrhaps some 
misapprehension of the Pauranik legend by the 
grammarians, springing out of the synonyms of 
Kartikeya, Krauficari. Krauficadfrana. &c., 
implying the foe or destroyer of Kraujica. occurring 
in the Amara and other Koshas. 

11. The Bhagavata is more circumstantial. The 
river flowed over the great toe of Visnu’s left foot, 
which had previously, as he lifted it up, made a 
fissure in the shell of the mundane egg, and thus 
gave entrance to the heavenly stream. The Vayu 
merely brings it from the lunar orb and takes no 
notice of Visnu's interposition. In a different 
passage it describes the detention of Ganga amidst 
the tresses of Siva, in order to correct her 
atrogance, until the divinity was moved by the 
penance and prayers of king Bhagiratha to set her 
free. The Mahabharata represents Siva's bearing the 
river for a hundred years on his head, merely to 
prevent its falling too suddenly on the mountains. 

12. Although the Vayu has this account, it 
subsequently inserts another, which is that also of 
the Matsya and Padma. In this the Ganga, after 
escaping from Siva. is Raid to have formed seven 
streams; the Nalini, HIadini and Pavani going to the 
east: the Caksu, Sita, and Sindhu to the wet and the 
Bhagirathi the south. The Mahabharata calls them 
Vasvaukasara, Nalini Pavani. Ganga, Sita, Sindhu 
and Jambunadi. The more usual legend, however, is 


the first, and it offers some trace of actual 
geogcaphy. Faber, indeed, thinks that Meru, with 
the surrounding Varsa of Ilavrta, and its four rivers, 
is a representation of the garden of Eden. (Pagan 
Idolatry, I. 315.). However this may be, it seems 
not unlikely to have originated in some imperfect 
account of four great rivers flowing from the 
Himalaya, and the high lands north of that range, 
towards the cardinal points; the Bhadra, to the 
north, representing the Oby of Siberia; and the 
Sata, the river of China, or Hoangho. The 
Alakananda is well known as a main branch of the 
Ganga, near its source; and the Caksus is very 
possibly, as Wilford supposed, the Oxus. (As. Res. 
VIII. 309.). The printed copy of the Bhagavata, and 
the MS. Padma, read Banksu; but the former is the 
more usual reading. It is said, in the Vayu, of 
Ketumala, through which this river runs, that it is 
peopled by various races of barbarians : SquIci 
Tenet aarerenratsa | 

13. The text applies the latter name so variously 
as to cause confusion: it is given to one of the four 
buttresses of Meru, that on the south; to one of the 
filament mountains, on the west; to a range of 
boundary mountains, on the south; and to the Varsa 
of Ketumala: here another mountain range is 
intended, or a chain running north and south upon 
the east of Ilavrta, connecting the Nila and Nisadha 
ranges. Accordingly the Vayu states it to be 34000 
Yojanas in extent; that is the diameter of Meru 
16000, and the breadth of Ilavrta on each side of it, 
or together 18000. A similar range, that of 
Malyavan, bound-Ilavrta on the vest. It was 
probably to avoid the confusion arising from 
similarity of nomenclature, that the author of the 
Bhagavata substituted different names _ for 
Gandhamadana in the other instances. calling the 
buttress, as we have seen, Merumandara; the 
southern forest, Sarvatobhadra; and the filament 
mountain. Hansa; restricting the term 
Gandhamdadana to the eastern range a correction, it 
may be remarked, corroborative of a subsequent 
date. 

14. These eight mountains are  smilarly 
enumerated the in Bhagavata and Vayu. but no 
mention is made in them of any _ seas 
(sufaraotaftert), and it is clear that the eastern and 
western oceans cannot be intended, as the 
mountains Malyavat and Gandhamdadana intervene. 


BOOK II, CHAP. 3 


151 





‘between the seas means within Malyavat and 
Gandhamadana; MreTaeanreradeaiarirdadapenal | 
The Bhagavata describes these eight mountains as 
circling Meru for 18000 Yojanas in each direction, 
leaving, according to the commentator, an interval 
of a thousand Yojanas between them and the base 
of the central mountain, and being 2000 high, and 
as many broad: thcy may be understood to be the 
exterior bar:!ers of Meru, separating it from [lavrta. 
The names of these mountains, according to the 
Bhagavata, are Jathara and Devakiita on the east, 
Pavana and Paripdtra on the west. Trsringa and 
Makara on the north, and Kailasa and Karavira on 
the south. Without believing it possible to verify 
the position of these different creations of the 
legendary geography of the Hindus, it can scarcely 
admit of doubt that the scheme was suggested by 
imperfect acquaintance with the actual character of 
the country, by the four great ranges, the Altai, 
Muztag or Thian-shan, Ku-en-lun, and Himalaya, 
which traverse central Asia in the direction from 
east to west, with a greater or less inclination from 
north to south, which are connected or divided by 
many lofty transverse ridges, which enclose several 
large lakes, and which give rise to the great rivers 
that water Siberia, China, Tartary, and Hindustan. 
(Humboldt oo the Mountains of Central Asia, and 
Ritter Geogr. Asia.) 

15. More ample details of the Varsas are given in 
the Mahabharata, Bhagavata, Padma, Vayu, Ktrma, 
Liiga. Matsya, and Markandeya Puranas; but they 
are of an entirely fanciful nature. Thus of the 
Ketumala-varsa it is Said, in the Vayu. the men are 
black, the women of the complexion of the lotus; 
the people subsist upon the fruit of the Panasa or 
jack-tree, and live for ten thousand years, exempt 
from sorrow or sickness: seven Kula or main ranges 
of mountains in it are named and a long list of 
countries and rivers is added, none of which can be 
identified with any actually existing, except 
perhaps the great river the Sucaksus the Amu or 
Oxus. According to the Bhagavata, Visnu 1s 
worshipped as Kamadeva id Ketumiala. The Vayu 
says the object of adoration there is Ivara, the son 
of Brahma. Similar circumstances are asserted of 
the other VarSas. See also As. Res. VIII. 352. 

aK 3 2K 


BOOK II, CHAP. 3 151 





CHAPTER 3 
Jtarseara: 
(aTatauta) 


UTM Sarg 


sat aq agree femesa afer 
ae He AIT ATT RT ST afar: Qa 


Tae fais werqy! 
aayfatta cetaceans esa 2 


The country that lies north of the ocean, 
and south of the snowy mountains, is called 
Bharata, for there dwelt the descendants of 
Bharata. Jt is nine thousand leagues in extent,’ 
and is the land of works, in consequence of 
which men go to heaven, or obtain 
emancipation. 


Real Wea: Wal: HAM ATA: | 
farcry UUeY GAA HTT: 13 
The seven main chains of mountains in 

Bharata are Mahendra. Malaya, Sahya, 
Suktimat, Rksa, Vindhya, and Paripatra,’ 

art: eat vert gfe wanker at 

freed THEN ar: Year BAN SI 

Sd: Tartsy Wey TATE TT 

7 Gees aralat at at fader 4 


From this region heaven is obtained, or 
even in some cases, liberation from existence; 
or men pass from hence into the condition of 
brutes, or fall into hell. Heaven, emancipation, 
a state in mid-air, or in the subterraneous 
realms, succeeds to existence here, and the 
world of acts is not the title of any other 
portion of the universe. 


TUR ater qa Vary Frera 
See: ery aga MAPSTArT 
ANTATRAT AAY TTA STSOT: 1G 
seq Tara Ba: ANAT: | 
ant weerg guise afer sn 


152 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





The Varsa of Bharata is divided into nine 
portions, which I will namc to you; they are 
Indra-Dvipa, Kaserumat, Tamravarna. 
Gabhastimat Naga-dvipa, Saumya, Gandharva 
and V4aruna; the last or ninth Dvipa is 
surrounded by the ocean, and is a thousand 
Yojanas from north to south.’ 

yet feat rer ey: UA wet; Fra: | 
SAAT: array Aa WY VST APT NSH 
Sr-qg-auraadad rarer: | 
Pag feracararerray: | 8 
ae-ayfarqareney uftarateat WA 

WHat Graal TaN ferearta eta: 11 Ro 
ATE Tateott- RAST ATATTAT | 
Marae Mle Fearon feeAreqewri g eI! 
AAT HA TT: VPA: UTTTATT: | 
PAATA- ATION AAR: 11 2 I 
PATA HCAT EN TSAI: VPA: | 
mefae-Haraten: YAM ASTAT: 1 23 I 
Sa AYE GM WEAN: | 

On the east of Bharata dwell the Kirdtas 
(the barbarians); on the west, the Yavanas; in 
the centre reside Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, 
VaiSyas, and Stdras, occupied in their 
respective duties of sacrifice, arms, trade, and 
service.’ The Satdru, Candrabhaga, and other 
rivers. How from the foot of Himf@laya: the 
Vedasmriti and others from the Paripatra 
mountains; the Narmada and Surasa from the 
Vindhya hills: the Tapi. Payosni and 
Nirvindhya from the Rksa mountains; the 
Godavari, Bhimarathi, Krishnaveni. and 
others, from the Sahya mountains: the 
Kritamald, Tamraparni and others, from the 
Malaya hills: the Trisama, Rsikulya, etc. from 
the Mahendra: and the Risikulyé, Kumati, and 
others, from the Suktimat mountains. Of such 
as these, and of minor rivers, there is an 
infinite number; and many nations inhabit the 
countries on their borders.” 


AURA FONT RATSMA GAT: LI 
ydemicaia areata: | 


Quast: wferst Wea STOTT TAIT | Bk I 

AMAA: AAT: VAT TTATSET: | 

MISA Mesa Ufcararanhas: 11 V6 I 

Atak: Aart FUT: MIA: PHA eT: | 

AATARAMAST: WTA ATSALAATI 219 11 

arat frafa afeet vata afta wan 

AAA AST CLYTAATHCT: MRS 

The principal nations of Bh&rata are the 

Kurus and Pafcdlas, in the middle districts: the 
people of Kamaripa, in the east: the Pundras, 
Kalingas, Magadhas, and southern nations, are 
in the south: in the extreme west are the 
Saurastras, Siras, Bhiras, Arbudas: the K4arus 
as and Malavas. dwelling along the Paripatra 
mountains: the Sauviras, the Saindhavas, the 
Hunas. the Salwas, the people of Sakala, the 
Madras, the Ramas, the Ambashthas. and the 
Parasikas, and others. These nations drink of 
the water of the rivers above enumerated, and 
inhabit their borders, happy and prosperous.° 


wealt at at FUT AeA 
Sa FAT Bows alesrag +t eaferaii 2 11 


TUE Yaa Wed ay Uist: | 
art art SA UeTAATETHLN 2 0 
yetearyea) Sega warTT 
aaa fae UPA 2 I! 
stay are AS WRIT we 
BA fe HAYLAT TASHA APVTTAT 11 2 2M 
a WATASATUT Vea AAI 
HAST WAGE YOTAS ALN 2 3 
Taha Sat: feret warty 
rang a arayfart 
TAMTSATISTAT NTA 
Mate YA: YHA: FLAT VV 


dae feat wore 
Baral at HTT 
dtateaat BY aMeT: WaT 24 II 


BOOK I, CHAP. 3 


153 





Wa Aa wa ad faci 

Tans efit teary 
WRT TA: TAY T ATE 

a area Afgafanstor Be 0 


In the SBh§arata-varsa it is that the 
succession of four Yugas or ages, the Krta the 
Treta. The Dvapara, and Kali, takes place; that 
plous ascetics engage in rigorous penance; that 
devout men offer sacrifices; and that gifts are 
distributed; all for the sake of another world. 
In Jambu-dvipa, Visnu, consisting of sacrifice, 
is worshipped, as the male of sacrificial rites, 
with sacrificial ceremonies: he is adored under 
other forms elsewhere. Bharata 1s therefore the 
best of the divisions of Jambu-dvipa, because 
it is the land of works: the others are places of 
enjoyment alone. It is only after many 
thousand births, and the aggregation of much 
merit, that living beings are sometimes born in 
Bharata as men. The gods themselves exclaim, 
“Happy are those who are born, even from the 
condition of gods, as men.in Bhdarata-varsa, as 
that is the way to the pleasures of Paradise, or 
the greater blessing of final liberation. Happy 
are they who, consigning all the unheeded 
rewards of their acts to the supreme and 
eternal Visnu, obtain existence in that land of 
works, as their path to him. We know not, 
when the acts that have obtained us heaven 
shall have been fully recompensed,’ where we 
shall renew corporeal confinement; but we 
know that those men are fortunate who are 
born with perfect faculties in Bharata-varsa. 


waad y Aaa! sragiafrd wan 
waaay Vata Hert TaN Vo! 
wagered ager wera: | 
Aaa! aorareart: Fert anveferafe:0 20 
ofa sifamygaey fadiasst gatatseara: | 

I have thus briefly described to you, 
Maitreya, the nine divisions of Jambu-dvipa, 
which is a hundred thousand Yojanas in 
extent, and which is encircled, as if by a 


bracelet, by the ocean of salt water, of similar 


dimensions. 
eK*e* 


NOTES 

j. As Bh&rata-varsa means [ndia, a nearer 
approach to the truth, with. regard to its extent, 
might have been expected: and the Vayu has 
another measurement, which is not much above 
twice the actual extent, or 1000 Yojanas from 
Kumari (Comorin) to the source of the Ganga. 

2. These are called the Kulaparvatas, family 
mountains, or mountain ranges or systems. They 
are similarly enumerated in all the authorities, and 
their situation may be determined with some 
confidence by the rivers which flow from them. 
Mahendra is the chain of hills that extends from 
Orissa and the northern Circars to Gondwana part 
of which, near Ganjam, is still called Mahindra 
Malei. or hills of Mahindra : Malaya is the southern 
portion of the western Ghats: Suktimat is doubtful, 
for none of its streams can be identified with any 
certainty: Sahya is the northern portion of the 
western Ghats, the mountains of the Konkan: Rksa 
is the mountains of Gondwana: Vindhya is the 
general name of the chain that stretches across 
central India, but it is here restricted to the eastern 
division; according to the Vayu it is the part south 
of the Narmada, or the Sathpura range: P4ripatra, as 
frequently written P&ariyatra, is the northern and 
western portion of the Vindhya: the name. indeed, 
is still given to a range of mountains in Guzerat 
(see Tod's Map of Rajasthan), but the Chambal and 
other rivers of Malwa, which are said to flow from 
the P&riyatra mountains,, do not rise in_ that 
province. All these mountains therefore belong to 
one system, and are connected together. The 
classification seems to have been known to 
Ptolemy, as he specifies seven ranges of mountains, 
although his names do not correspond, with the 
exception of the Vindus mons: of the others, the 
Adisathrus and Uxentus agree nearly is position 
with the Pariyatra and Rksa: the Apocopi. 
Sardonix, Bettigo, and Orudi must be left for 
consideration. The Bhagavata, Vayu. Padma, and 
Markandeya add a list of inferior mountains to 
these seven. 

3. This last is similarly left without a name in all 
the works: it is the most southerly, that on the 


154 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





borders of the sea, and no doubt intends India 
proper. Wilford places here a division called 
Kumarika. No description is anywhere attempted of 
the other divisions. To these the Vayu adds six 
minor Dvipas, which are situated beyond sea and 
are islands, Anga-dvipa. Yama- dvipa, Matsya- 
dvipa, Kumuda or Kusa dvipa, Varaha- dvipa, and 
Sankha- dvipa; peopled for the most part by 
Mlechchhas, but who worship Hindu divinities. The 
Bhagavata and Padma name eight such islands. 
Swamaprastha. Candrasukla. Avarttana. Ramanaka. 
Mandahfra. Paficajaya. Sinhala, and Lanka Wilford 
has endeavoured to verify the first series of 
Upadvipas, making Varaha Europe; KuSa, Asia 
Minor, etc., Sankha, Africa; Malaya, Mleccha: 
Yama is undetermined; and by Anga, he says, they 
understand China. How all this may be is more than 
doubtful, for in the three Puranas in which mention 
is made of them, very little more is said upon the 
subject. 

4. By Kuratas, foresters and mountaineers are 
intended, the inhabitants to the present day of the 
mountains east of Hindustan. The Yavanas, on the 
west. may be either the Greeks of Bactria and the 
Punjab— to whom there can be tittle doubt the term 
was applied by the Hindus— or the Mohammedans, 
who succeeded them in a later period, and to whom 
it is now apphed. The Vayu calls them both 
Mlechchhas, and also notices the admixture of 
barbarians with Hindus in India proper: @fafasn 
Aye] areal wrang fier:) The same passage, 
slightly varied occurs in the Mahabharata: it is said 
especiaily of the mountainous districts, and may 
allude therefore to the Gonds and Bhils of central 
India, as well as to the Mohammedans of the north 
west. The specification implies that infidels and 
outcastes had not yet descended on the plains of 
Hindustan. 

5. This is a very meagre list, compared with 
those given in other Puranas. That of the Vayu is 
translated by Wilford, As. Res. vol. VIII: and much 
curious illustration of many of the places by the 
same writer occurs. As. Res. vol. XIV. The lists of 
the Mahabharara, Bhagavata and Padma are given 
without any arrangement: those of the Vayu, 
Matsya, Markandeya, and Kiirma are classed as in 
the text. Their lists are too long for insertion in this 
place. Of the rivers named in the text, most are 
capable of verification. The Satadru, 'the hundred 


channelled’— the Zaradrus of Ptolemy, Hesidrus of 
Pliny-is the Satlej. The Candrabhaga, Sandabalis. 
or Acesnes, is the Chinab. The Vedasmrti in the 
Vayu and Kirma is classed with the Vetravati or 
Betwa, the Carmanvati or Chambal and Sipra and 
Para, rivers of Malwa. and may be the same with 
the Beos of the maps. The Narmada or Narbadda, 
the Namadus of Ptolemy, is well known; according 
to the Vayu it rises, not in the Vindhya, but in the 
Rksa mountains, taking its origin in fact in 
Gondwana. The Suraga is uncertain. The T&pi is the 
Tapti rismg also in Gondwana: the other two are 
not identified. The Godavari preserves its name: in 
the other two we have the Beemah and the Krsna. 
For Krtamala the Kirma reads RtumAla, but neither 
is verified. The Tamraparni is in Tinivelly, and 
rises at the southern extremity of the western Ghats. 
The Risikulya, that rises in the Mahendra mountain, 
is the Rasikulia or Rasikotla. which flows into the 
sea near Ganjam. The Trisama is undetermined. 
The text assigns another Risikulya to the 
Suktimat mountains, but in all the other authorities 
the word is Rishika. The Kum4éri might suggest 
some connexion with Cape Comorin, but that the 
Malaya mountains seem to extend to the extreme 
south. A Rishikulya river is mentioned (Vana P. v. 
3026) as a Tirtha in the Mahabharata. in connexion 
apparently with the hermitage of Vasistha, which in 
another passage (v. 4096) is said to be on mount 
Arbuda or Abu. In that case, and if the reading of 
the text be admitted for the name of the river, the 
Suktimat range would be the mountains of Guzerat; 
but this is doubtful. 

6. The list of nations is as scanty as that of the 
rivers: it is, however, omitted altogether in the 
Bhagavata. The Padma has a long catalogue, but 
without arrangement; so has the Mahabharata. The 
lists of the Vayu, Matsya, and Markandeya class 
the nations as central northern, eastern, southern, 
and western. The names are much the same in all 
and are given in the 8" vol. of the As. Res. from the 
Brahm4anda. or, for it is the same account, the 
Vayu. The Markandeya has a second classification, 
and, comparing Bharata-varsa to a tortoise, with its 
head to the east, enumerates the countries in the 
head, tail, flanks, and feet of the animal. It will be 
sufficient here to attempt an identification of the 
names in text, but some further illustration 1s 
offered at the end of the chapter. The Kurus are the 


BOOK If, CHAP. 3 


155 





people of Kurukasetra, or the upper part of the 
Doab about Delhi. The P§ficalas, it appears from 
the Mahabharata, occupied the lower part of the 
Doab, extending across the Yamuna to the 
Chambal. Kullika Bhatta, in his commentary on 
Manu, II-19, places them at Kanouj. Kamarupa ia 
the north-eastern part of Bengal, and western 
portion of Assam. Pundra is Bengal proper, with 
part of south Behar and the Jungle Mahal. Kalinga 
is the sea-coast west of the mouths of the Ganga, 
with the upper part of the Coronandel coast. 
Magadha is Bihar. The Saurastras are the people of 
Surat. the Surastrene of Ptolemy. The Siras and 
Bhiras, in the same direction. may be the Sun and 
Phauni or Phryni of Strabo. The Arbudas must be 
the people about mount Abu, or the natives of 
Mewar. The K4arusas and Malavas are of course the 
people of Malwa. The Sauviras aud Saindhavas are 
usually conjoined as the Sindhu-Sauviras, and must 
be the nations of Sindh and western Rajputana. By 
the Hinas we are to understand the white Huns or 
Indo-Scythians, who were established in the Punjab 
and along the Indus at the commencement of our 
era, aS we know from Arrian, Strabo, and Ptolemy, 
confirmed by recent discoveries of their coins. The 
§alwas or, as also read S&lyas are placed by the 
Vayu and Matasya amongst the central nations, and 
seen to have occupied part of Rajasthan, a Salwa 
Raja being elsewhere described as engaging in 
hostilities with the people of Dwaraka in Guzerat. 
Sakala. as 1 have elsewhere noticed, is a city in the 
Punjab (As. Res. XV. 108), the Sagala of Ptolemy 
(ibid. 107); the Mahabharata makes it the capital of 
the Madras, the Mardi of the ancients; but they are 
separately named in the text, and were situated 
something more to the south-east. The Ramas and 
Ambashthas are not named in other Puranas, but 
the latter are amongst the western, or more properly 
north-westcrn nations subjugated by Nakula. in his 
Dig-vijaya. Mahabh. Sabha P. Ambas and and 
Ambashthas are included in the list extracted by 
Wilford from the Varaha Samhita and the latter are 
supposed by him to be the Ambasta of Arrian. The 
Parasikas carry us into Persia, or that part of it 
adjoining to the Indus. As far as the enumeration of 
the text extends, it seems applicable to the political 
and geographical divisions of India about the era of 
Christianity. 


7, Enjoyment in Svarga like punishment in 
Naraka, is only for a certain period, according to 
the merit or demerit of the individual. When the 
account is balanced, the man is born again amongst 
mankind. 

8. A crippled or mutilated person, or one whose 
organs are defective cannot at once obtain 
liberation: his merits must first secure his being 
born again perfect and entire. 


TOPOGRAPHICAL LISTS 
From the Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva. II. 342 
MOUNTAINS AND RIVERS! 

Safaya speaks to Dhrtarashtra- Hear me, 
monarch, in reply to your inquiries, detail to you 
the particulars of the country of Bharata. 

Mahendra, Malaya, Sahya,  Suktimat,’ 
Gandhamadana, Vindhya, and Paripatra are the 
seven mountain ranges: as subordinate portions of 
them are thousands of mountains; some unhearc of, 
though lofty, extensive, and abrupt; and others 
better known, though of lesser elevation, and 
inhabited by people of low stature:* there pure and 
degraded tribe, mixed together, drink’ of the 
following streams: the stately Ganga, the Sindhu, 
and the Sarasvati; the Godavari, Narmada, and the 
great river Bahuda:® the Satadru, Candrabhaga, and 
ereat river Yamuna; the Drsadvati,’ Vipasa,” and 
Vipapa, with coarse sands; the Vettavati, the deep 
Krishnaveni, the Iravati,” Vitasta, Payoshnt!! and 
Devika'* the Vedasmrita,”° Vedavati, * Tridiva,> 
Iksumalavi Karithini, Chitrabaha, the deep 
Chitrasena, the Gomati, the Dhitapapa and the 
great river Gandaki;'© the Kausiki, Nigchita,’’ 
Krtya, Nichita Lonatarini, '® Rabasya Satakumbha,'” 
and also. the Sarayi the Carmanvati, 
Candrabhaga,” Hastisoma, Dis, Saravati,”’ 
Payoshni, Para,” and Bhimarathi,’? Kavert,”* 
Chulaka,” Vina,”° Satabala,?’? Nivara, Mahita,”’ 
Suprayoga,”* Pavittd,”” Kundala, Sindhu,”” Rajani,’ 
Purvabhiram4, Vira, Bhima? Oghavati, Palagini,” 
Papahatra, Mahendra, Patalavati,*“ Karisini, Asikni, 
the great river Kuéachira,” the Makari,*° Pravatra, 
Mena,” Hema, and Dhrtavati,”* Puravati,*” 
Anushna,”” Saivy4, Kapi,”' Sadanira. Adhrisy4 the 
great river Kusadhara,” Sadakanta,”? Siva, 
Viravati, Vastu,“ Suvastu,* Gauri, Kampana,” 
Hiranvati, Vara, Virankara, Paficami, Rathachitra, 
Jyotiratha Visvamitra,*’ Kapinijala, Upendra, 


156 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





Bahula, Kuchira,“* Madhuvahini,” Vinadi,*° 
Pinjala, Vena, tungavena,”’ Vidiga,” Krishnavena, 
Tamra, Kapilé,  Selu, Suvama, Vedagva, 


Harisrava, Mahopama,”* Sighra, Pichchhala,” the 
deep Bharadvaji, the Kausiki, the Sona,’ Bahuda, 
and Candrama, Durga, Amtraéila,’’ Brahmabodhya, 
Vrhadvati, Yavaksa,°® Rohi, Jambunadi, Sunasa,”” 
Tamasa,”’ dasi, Vasa, Varana, Asi,°' Nala, 
Dhrtamati, § Pamaga,°? Tamasi,° Vrshabha, 
Brahmamedhya, Vrhadvati. These and many other 
large streams, as the Krishna,” whose waters are 
always salubrious, and the  siow-flowing 
Mandavahini,” the Brahméani,°° Mahdagauri, 
Durga,” Chitropala,” Chitraratha, Manjula,” 
Mandakini,” Vaitarani,’' the great river Kosa,” the 
Muktimati,? Maninga,”* Pushpaveni, Utpalavati, 
Lohitya,”° Karatoya,”® Vrisha-kahva,’ Kumari, 
Risikulya,” Marisha, Sarasvati, Mandakini, 
Punya,” Sarvasangd, all these the universal 
mothers, productive of abundance, besides 
hundreds of inferior note, are the rivers of Bharata, 
according to remembrance. *” 

]. In attempting to verify the places or people 
specified in the text various difficulties are to be 
encountered, which must serve to apologize for but 
partial success. Some are inherent in the subject, 
such as the changes which have taken place in the 
topography of India since the lists were compiled, 
and the imperfectness of the specification itself, 
states and tribes and cities have disappeared, even 
from recollection, and some of the natural features 
of the country, especially the rivers, have 
undergone a total alteration. Buchanan (Description 
of Eastern Hindustani) following Reanell over the 
same ground at an interval of some thirty or forty 
years, remarks that many of the streams laid down 
in the Bengal Atlas (the only series of Maps of 
India yet published, that can be regarded as of 
authority) are no longer to be traced. Then the lists 
which are given are such mere catalogues, that they 
afford no clue to verification beyond names; and 
names have been either changed or so corrupted, as 
to be no longer recognizable. On the other hand, 
much of the difficulty alixes from ourown want of 
knowledge. Scattered through the Puranas and 
other works, the names given in the topographical 
lists recur with circumstances which fix their 
locality; but these means of verification have not 
yet been sufficiently investigated. There are also 


geographical treatises in Sanskrit, which there is 
reason to believe afford much accurate and 
interesting information: they are not common. 
Wilford speaks of having received a number from 
Jaypur, but upon his death they disappeared. After 
a considerable interval some of his MSS were 
purchased for the Calcutta Sanskrit College, but by 
far the larger portion of his collection had been 
dispersed. A few leaves only on geographical 
subjects were found, from which I translated and 
published a chapter on the geography of some of 
the districts of Bengal: (Calcutta Quarterly 
Magazine, Dec. 1824:) the details were accurate 
and valuable though the compilation was modern. 
Notwithstanding these impediments, however, we 
should be able to identify at least mountains and 
rivers to a much greater extent than is now 
practicable, if our maps were not so miserably 
defective in their nomenclature. None of our 
surveyors or geographers have been Oriental 
scholars. It may be doubted if any of them have 
been conversant with the spoken language of the 
country: they have consequently put down names at 
random, according to their own _ inaccurate 
appreciation of sounds carelessly, vulgarly, and 
corruptly uttered; and their maps of India are 
crowded with appellations which bear no similitude 
whatever either to past or present denominations. 
We need not wonder that we cannot discover 
Sanskrit names in English maps, when, in the 
immediate vicinity of Calcutta, Barnagore 
represents | Varahanagar. Daksineswar is 
metamorphosed into Duckinsore. and Uluberia is 
Anglicised into Willoughbury. Going a little fatther 
off, we have Dalkisore for Darikeswari, Midnapore 
for Medinipur, and a most unnecessary 
accumulation of consonants in Caughmahry for 
Kakami§ri. There is scarcely a name in our Indian 
maps that does not afford proof of extreme 
indifference to accuracy in nomenclature, and of an 
incorrectness in estimating sounds, which is in 
some degree, perhaps, a national defect. 

2. The printed edition reads Saktimat, which is 
also found in some MSS., but the more usual 
reading is that of the text. I may here add that a 
Suktimat mountain occurs in Bhima's invasion of 
the eastern region. Mahabh. Sabha P. 
Gandhamadana here takes the place of Rksa. 


BOOK II, CHAP. 3 


157 





3. For additional mountains in the Vayu, see 
Asiatic Researches, VI\I 334. The Bhagavata, 
Padma. and Méarkandeya and the following: 
Mainaka. which it appcars from the Ramayana is at 
the source of the Sone, that river being termed 
Mainadkaprabhava. Kishkindhya Kanda; Trikita, 
called also in Hemachandra's vocabulary Suvela; 
Rsabha. Kitaka, Konva, Devagiri (Deogur or 
Ellora, the mountain of the gods; the Apocopi are 
said by Ptolemy to be also called mountains of the 
gods): Rsyamuka in the Dekhin, where the Pampa 
rises; Sri-Saila or Sri-parvata, near the Krishna (As. 


Res. V. 303); Venkata. the hill’ of 
Tripati.Varidhatra, | Mangala-prastha. Drona, 
Chitrakita | (Chitrakote in Bundelkhand), 


Govarddhana (near Mathura), Raivata, the range 
that branches off from the western portion of the 
Vindhya towards the north, extending nearly to the 
Yamuna: according to Hemachandra it is the 
Girinara range; it is the Aravali of Tod; Kakubha. 
Nila (the blue mountains of Orissa). Gohamukha, 
Indrakila, Ramagiri (Ram-tek, near Nagpur), 
Valakrama, Sudhima, Tungaprastha, Naga (the 
hills east of Rameghur), Bodhana, Pandara, 
Durjayanta, Arbuda (Abu in Guzerat), Gomanta (in 
the western Ghats), KiitaSaila, Kritasmara, and 
Cakora. Many single mountains are named in 
different works. 

4 See Bk. Il., Ch. TII., note 4. 

5 The Sarsuti, or Kaggar or Gaggar, N. W. of 
Tahnesar. See below, note 6. 

6. The Bahuda is elscwhere said to rise in the 
Himalaya. Wilford considcrs it to be the Mahanada, 
which falls into the Gafigai below Malda. The 
Mahabharata has amongst the Tirthas, or places of 
pilgrimage, two rivers of this name, one apparently 
near the Sarasvati one more to the east. 
Hemachandra gives as synonyms Arjuni and 
Saitavahini both implying the white river: a main 
feeder of the Mah4nada is called Dhavali or Dauli, 
which has the same meaning. 

7. The Drsadvati is a river of considerable 
importance in the history of the Hindus, although 
no traces of its ancient name exist. According to 
Manu it is one boundary of the district called 
Brahmavartta in which the institution of castes, and 
their several duties, had for ever existed: implying 
that in other places they were of more recent origin. 
This holy land 'made by the gods,’ was of very 


limited extent. Its other boundary was the Sarasvati 
That the Drsadvati was not far off we learn from 
Manu, as Kuruksetra, Matsya, Paficala, and 
Siirasena, or the upper part of the Doab, and 
country to the east, were not included in 
Brahmavartta; they constituted Brabmarsi-desa, 
contiguous to it; Weaadera:| Kullika Bhatta 
explains Anantara, somcthing less or inferior; 
fefaqa: | but it more probably means ‘not divided 
from’, immediately contiguous. We must look for 
the Drsadvati therefore, west of thc Yamuna. In the 
Tirtha Yatra of the Mahabharata we find it forming 
one of the boundaries of Kuruksetra. It is there said, 
Those who dwell on the south of the Sarasvati and 
north of the Driashvati, or in Kuruksetra, dwell in 
heaven.’ Caer BEAM: Fea Bi ay aay Pear a 
aud fafaexn In the same place, the confluence of 
the Drsadvati with a stream of Kuruksetra, called 
the Kausiki, is said to be of peculiar sanctity. 
Kurukshetra is the country about Tahnesure or 
Sthanesvara, where is spot called Kurukhet still 
exists, and is visited in pilgrimage. The Kuruksetra 
of Manu may be intended for the country of the 
Kurus, in the more immediate vicinity of Delhi. 
According to Wilford the Drsadvati is the Kaggar; 
in which case our maps have taken the liberty of 
transposing the names of the rivers, as the Kaggar 
now is the northern stream, and the Sarsuty the 
southern, both rising in the Himalaya, and uniting 
to form one river, called Gagar or Kaggar in the 
maps, but more correctly Sarsuti or Sarasvati; 
which then runs south-west, and is lost in the 
desert. There have no doubt been considerable 
changes here, both in the nomenclature and in the 
courses of the rivers. 

8. The Beyah, Hyphasis. or Bibasis. 

9. The Ravi or Hydraotes or Adris. 

10. The Jhelum, but still called in Kashmir the 
Vitasta. the Bidaspes or Hydaspes. 

11. This river, according to the Visnu P., rises 
from the Rksa mountains, but the Vayu and Kirma 
bring it from the Vindhya or Sathpura range. There 
are several indications of its position in the 
Mahabh4arata, but none very precise. Its source 
appears to be near that of the Krisna: it flows near 
the beginning of the Dandaka forest, which should 
place it rather near to the sources of the Godavari: it 
passes through Vidarbha or Berar, and, Yudhisthira 
having bathed in it, comes to the Vaidurya 


158 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





mountain and the Narmada river. These 
circumstances make it likely that the Payin Ganga 
is the river in question. 

12. The Deva or Goggra, 

13. Both these are from the Paripatra range. In 
some MSS. the latter is read Vedasini and Vetasini. 
In the Ramayana occur Veda and Vedavainasika, 
which may be the same, as they seem to be in the 
direction of the Sone, One of them may be the Beos 
of eastern Malwa, but it rises in the Rksa mountain. 

14. From Paripatra, Karma; from Mahendra, 
Vayu. 

15, One copy has IksumAlimi; two others, Iksula 
and Krimi: one MS. of the Vayu has an Iksula from 
Mahendra: the Matsya has Iksuda; Wilford's list has 
Draksala. 

16. Of these rivers, the two first are named in the 
Padma P., but not in the Vayu, &c. The Gomati in 
Oude, the Gandak, and the Kosi are well known. 
The Dhutapapa is said to rise in the Himalaya. 

17. In different MSS. read Michité and Nisrta. In 
the Vayu and Matsya. Nischira or Nirvira is said to 
flow from the Himalaya. 

18. Also Lohataérani and Lohacharini. 

19, The Sarayi or Sarju is commonly identified 
with the Deva. Wilford says it is so by the 
Pauraniks, but we have here proof to the contrary. 
They are also distinguished by the people of the 
country. Although identical through great part of 
their course, they rise as different streams, and 
again divide and enter the Ganga by distinct 
branches. 

20 The recurrence of the same name in this, as in 
several similar subsequent instances, is possibly an 
error of the copyist; but it is also sometimes likely 
that one name is applied to different rivers. In one 
MS. we have, in place of this word. Caitravati; and 
in another Vetravati. 

21. Read also Satavari. According to Wilford, 
the Saravati is the Ban-ganga. 

22. The Vayu has Para, which is a river in 
Malwa, the Pirvati MSS. read Vani and Vena. 

23. According to the Vayu, this rises to the 
Sahya ms. and flows towards the south: it is 
therefore the Beema of Aurungabad. 

24, The K4veri is well known, and has always 
borne the same appellation, being the Chaberis of 
Ptolemy. 

25. Read Culuka. 


26. Read also Tapi; the Tapti river of the Dekhin. 

27. Read Ahita and Sahita, 

28. Rises in the Sahya mountain, and flows 
southwards : Vayu. etc. 

29. Read Vichitra. 

30. Several rivers are called by this name, as 
well as the Indus : there is one of some note, the 
Kali Sindh in Malwa. . 

31. Also Vajini. 

32. This agrees best in name with the Beema : it 
is also mentioned as a tirtha in the Mahabharata. 

33. From Suktimat ; Kirma and Vayu. There is a 
Balasan from the eastern portion of the Himalaya, a 
feeder of the Mah&ananda, which may be the 
Palasini, if the mountain be in this direction. 

34. Also Pippalalavati, The Vayu has a Pippala 
from the Rksa mountain. 

35. Also Kusavira. 

36. Also Mahika and Marundaci. 

37 Also Sena. 

38. Read Krtavati and Ghrtavati. 

39. Also Dhusulya. 

40. Also Atikrsna. 

41. In place of both Suvarthaci. 

42 From Paripatra : Vayu and Matsya. 

43 Also Kusandara. 

44 Also Sasikanta. 

45 Also Vastra and Suvastra. 

46. One of the tirthas in the Mahabharata. 

47, According to the Mahabharata, this rises in 
the Vaidurya mountain, part of the southern 


Vindhya or Sathpura range. 

48 Also Kuvira. 

49 Three MSS. agree in reading _ this 
Ambuvahini. 

50 AlsoVainadi. 

51. Also Kuvenda : it is possibly meant for the 


Tungabhadra or Tumbudra. 

52. A river in Malwa. so called from the city of 
the same ndme, which I have elsewhere conjectured 
to be Bhilsa. Megha Dita. 31. There is a ‘Bess’ 
river in the m4ps, which joins the Betwa at Bhilsa, 
and is probably the river of the text. 

53. The Vama or Suvama. 'the beautiful river.' 
Wilford identifies with the Ramaganga. 

54 Also Mahapaga, 'the greal river.' 

55. Also Kuchchila. 

56. The Sona river, rising in Mainaka or 
Amarakantaka and flowing east to the Ganga. 


BOOK II, CHAP. 3 


57. This and the preceding both rise from 
theVindhya mountain : the latter is also read 
Antahsila, ‘the river flowing within or amidst 
rocks.' 

58. Also Paroksa. 

59. We have a Surana in the Vayu and Surasa in 
the Kirma and Matsya, flowing from the Rksa 
mountain. 

60. The Tamasa or Tonse, from Rksa. 

61. This and the preceding scarcely merit a place 
amongst the rivers, being two small streains which 
fall into the Ganga east and west of Benares, which 
is thence denominated Varanasi. 

62. Parnésa or Varnasé from the Paripatra 
mountain. 

63. Also Manavi. 

64. The Krsna of the Dakhin is probably here 
intended, although its more ordinary designation 
seems to be that already specified. Krishnavena or 
Krisnaveni. The meaning is much the same; the one 
being the ‘dark river,’ the other simply the ‘dark’ the 
Niger. 

65. A river from Suktimat; Vayu. 

66. A river in Cuttack, according to Wilford : it 
is one of the Tirthas of the Mahabharata. and 
apparently in a diflerent direction, Buchanan 
(Eastern Hindustan) has a river of this name in 
Dinajpur. . 

67. Both from the Vindhya : Vayu and Karma. 
There is a Goaris in Plolemy in central India. 

68 From Rksa : Vayu. 

69. Also Munja and Makaravahini. 

70. From Rksa : Vayu. According to the 
Mahabharata, it rises in the mountain Chitrakote. 

71. The Vaitarani in Cuttack. It is named in the 
Mahabharata as a river of Kalinga. 

72. Also read Nipa and Koka. 

73. From Rksa, but read also Suktimati. which is 
the reading of the Matsya. Wilford considers it to 
be the Svarnarekha of Cuttack. 

74. Also Anagé and Suranga; perhaps the 
preferable reading should be Sumanga. a river 
flowing from Mainaka. according to the Maha- 
bharata. 

75. Part of the Brahmaputra. 

76. A considerable river in the east, flowing 
between Dinajpur and Rangpur. 


159 


77. Also Vrsasaéhva. 

78. This and the preceding flow from Suktimat, 
according to the Vayu, Matsya and Karma. The last 
occurs also in Rsika. 

79. Also Suparna. The Punya is considered to be 
the Pun-pun of Bihar. but there is also a Parna river 
in the same province. 

80. It is possible that further research will 
identify more than those attempted to be verified in 
the foregoing notes, as well as meet with others 
readily recognizable. In the authorities consulted 
several occur not comprehended in the text: as the 
Kuhu and Iksu. from the Himalaya; Vrtraghni, 
Candana (Chandan of Bhagalpur), Mahi (the Mahy 
of western Malwa), Sipra, and Avanti (rivers near 
Ujjain), from Pdaripatra;s Mahadnada in Orissa, 
Drumaé, Daséma (Dhosaun in Bundelkhand). 
Chitrakita, Sroni or Syend, Pigdchiké, Banjula, 
Baluvahini, and Matkunad, all from  Rksa, 
Nirvindhya, Madra. Nisadha, Sinibahu, Kumudvati 
and Toya, from Vindhya; Banjula from Sahya; 
Krtamala, Tamraparni. Puspajati. and Utpalavati 
from Malaya, Langulini and Vansadhara, from 
Mahendra; and Mandaga and Krpa or Ripa, from 
Suktimat. In the Ramayana we have, besides some 
already specified, the Ruchiré, Pamp4, eastern 
Sarasvati. Vegavati or Vyki of Madura, and Varada 
or Wurda of Berar: and we have many others in the 
Mahabharata and different works, from which the 
Sanskrit appellations of most of the Indian rivers 
might be with some little time and _ trouble, 
collected. 

PEOPLE AND COUNTRIES 

Next hear from me, descendant of Bharata, the 
names of the inhabitants of the different countries. 
They are the Kurus, Paficalas,' Salwas, Madreyas, 
and dwellers in thickets (Jangalas), Siirsenas,’ 
Kalinga,’ Bodhas,’ Malas, Matsyas,° Sukutyas,’ 
Sauvalyas,” Kuntalas,’ Kasikogalas,'° Cedyas,"’ 
Matsyas, 7 Karushas, '° Bhojas, Sindhupulindas,”” 


Uttamas,'° Dasarnas,!? Mekalas,'® Ulkalas’” 
Paficalas,”” Kausijas,”’ Naikaprishthas,” 
Dhutandharas,”” Sodhas,”" Madrabhujingas iy 


Kasis,“° Aparakasis, Jatharas, Kukuras, Dasarnas, 
Kuntis, Avantis,”” Aparakuntis,” Goghnatas,”” 
Mandakas, Shandas,*” Vidarbhas,’' Riipavahikas.”” 
Agwakas,*? Pansurashtras, Goparashtras,* Karitis, °° 
the people of Adhivajya,°°  Kuladya,’’ 


160 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





Mallarashtra,**> and Kerals;*” the Varapasis”” 
Apavahas,"' Cakras,** Vakratapas and Sakas,”? 
Videhas,”“ Magadhas,” Swaksas,”° Malayas,”’” and 
Vajayas;* the Angas,” Vangas,”’ Kalingas’ and 
Yakrillomas, Mallas,” Sudellas,? Prahladas, 
Mahikas,™ and Sagikas,” Bahlikas,° Vatadhanas,”’ 
Abhiras® and  Kalajoshakas’ Apar4ntas, 
Pahnavas,”’ Carmamandalas,” Atavisikharas and 
Merubhitas,” Upavrittas, Anupdavrittas, Swards 
tras," Kekayas,”” Kuttaparantas,” Maheyas,”” Kaks 
as,’* dwellers on the seashore, and the Andhas and 
many tribes residing within and without the hills; 
the Malajas,”° Magadhas,”” Manavarjjakas;’' those 
north of the Mahi (Mahyuttaras), the Pravrseyas, 


Bhargavas,” Pundras,” Bhargas,” Miratas, 
Sudeshtas; and the people on the Yamuna 
(Yamunas), Sakas, Nishaddas,” Nishadhas,” 


Anarttas;’’ and those in the sourth-west (Nairritas), 
the Durgalas, Pratimadsyas,’ Kuntalas, Kusalas,” 
Tiragrahas, Sira-senas, Ijikas,”” Kanyakagunos, 
Tilabhéras, Samiras, Madhumattés, Sukandakas, 
Kasmiras,*!  Sindhusauviras,®* = Gandharas,” 
Dargakas,** Abhisaras,® Utilas,” Saivalas,®” and 
Bahlikas;** the people of Darvi,” the V4anavas, 
Darvas, | Vatajamatathorajas, | Bahub&dhas,”’ 
Kauravyas, Sudamas,”' Sumallis, | Badhnas, 
Karishakas, Kulindapatyakas, Vatayanas, * 
Dasarnas,? Romianas, Kuéavindus, | Kaksas,” 
Gopala-kaksas,  Jangalas,”? | Kuruvarnakas,”* 
Kirdtas,  Barbaras,” | Siddhas, | Vaidehas,'” 
Tamraliptas,'”! Audras, Paundras,'” dwellers in 
sandy tracts (Saisikatas), and in mountains 
(Parvatiyas). Moreover, chief of the sons of 
Bharata, there are the nations of the south, the 
Draviras,\"* Keralas'” Prachyas, °° Mishikas,!”” 
and Vanavasakas;'* the Karnatakas, Mahis 
akas,''° Vikalyas''' and Mishakas,'” Jillikas,'? 
Kuntalas,'” Sauhridas, Nalakananas,''” 
Kaukuttakas,!!° Cholas,''” Kaunkanas,'"* 
Malavanas, |!” Samangas, Karakas, Kukkuras, 
Angaras, '”” Dhwajinyut-savasanketas,'?! 
Trigarttas,?” Salvasenis, Sakas,'” Kokarakas, '”* 
Proshtas, Samavegavasas.’”° There are also the 


102 


Vindhachulukas,'”° Pulindas and Kalkalas,!?’ 
Malavas,'** Mallavas,'?° Aparavallabhas, 
Kulindas,'’*’ Kalavas,?! Kunthakas,” Karatas,'* 
Musakas, Tanabalas, '** Saniyas,'?° 
Ghatasrifijayas,°°  Alindayas,”’ _—Pasivatas, °° 
Tanayas,)*” Sunayas, |”° Dasividarbhas, '*! 


Kantikas,“? Tanganas,’’ Paratanganas, northern 
and other fierce bartarians (Mlechchhas), 
Yavanas, ““ Chinas,'*” Kambojas,'*° ferocious and 
uncivilized races, Sakridgrahas,“’ Kulatthas,'*° 
Hinas, and Parasikas;'*’ also Ramanas,” Chinas, 
Dasamilikas,’”’ those living near the Ksatriyas, and 
Vaigyas and Siidras;’”” also Siidras,' Abhiras,'”* 
Daradas,’> Kasmiras, with Pattis, °° Khasiras,’*’ 
Antacharas or borderers Pahnavas,'° 8 and dwellers 
in mountain caves (Girigahvaras,’’) Atreyas, 


Bharadvajas,' Stanayoshikas,’*' Proshakas,'” 
Kalingas,' and tribes of Karatas, Tomaras, 
Hansamargas, and Karabhanjikas,'“ These and 


many other nations, dwelling in the east and in the 
north, can be only thus briefly noticed.’® 


References 


1. The people of the upper part of the Doab. The 
two words might also be understood as denoting 
the Pancalas of the Kuru country, there being two 
divisions of the tribe: see below, note 20 

2. The Surasenas were the inhabitants of 
Mathura the Suraseni of Arrian. 

3. The people of the upper-part of the 
Coromandel coast, well known in the traditons of 
the eastern Archipelago as Kling. Ptolemy has a 
city in that part called Kaliga; and Pliny, Kalingae 
proximi mari. 

4, One of the tribes of central India, according to 
the Vayu: it is also read Bahyas. 

5. The Malas and Malavarttis are placed, in the 
Vayu and Matsya, amongst the central nations. The 
Markandeya reads Gavavarttis. Wilford considers 
Mala to be the Mal-bhim of Medinipur. As noticed 
in the Meghaditttam, I have supposed it to be 
situated in Chattisgarh. Book I. Ch. II. note. 

6. The people of Dinajpur. Rangpur and Cooch 
Bihar. Calcutta Mag. Dec 1824. 

7. Read KusSandas, KusSalyas, 
Kisidhajas, and placed in central India. 
8. Also Sausalyas and Sausulyas. 

9. Kuntala is in one place one of the central 
countries; in another, one of the southern: the name 
is applied in inscriptions to the province in which 
Kurgode is situated, part of the Adoni district: (As. 
Res. [X. 427:) and consistently with this position it 
is placed amongst the dependant or allied states of 
Vidarbha in the Dasa Kumara. Calcutta Quarterly 
Mag. Sept. 1827. 


Kusadhyas, 


BOOK II, CHAP. 3 


161 





10. A central nation : Vayu. The Ramayana 
places them in the east The combination indicates 
the country between Benares and Oude. 

11. Cedi is usually considered as Chandail, on 
the west of the Jungle Mahals. towards Nagpur. It 
is known, in times subsequent to the Puranas. as 
Ranastambha. 

12. Some copies read Vatsa and the other 
Puranas have such a name amongst th« central 
countries; the people perhaps of Vatsa Raja of 
Kausambi, near the junction of the Yamuna and the 
Ganga. There are, however, two Matsyas, one of 
which, according to the Yantra Samrat, is 
identifiable with Jaipur. In the Dig-vijaya of Nakula 
he subdues the Matsays farther to the west or in 
Gujrat. 

13. Situated on the back of the Vindhy a range: 
Vayu and Matsya. They are generally named with 
the people of Malava, which confirms this locality. 
They are said to be the posterity of Karusa, one of 
the sons of VaivsSvata Manu. 


14. These are also placed along the Vindhya 
chain, but at different times appear to have 
occupied different positions. They were a kindred 
tribe with the Andhakas and Vrsnis and a branch of 
the Yadavas. A Bhoja Raja is amongst the warriors 
of the Mahabharata. At a later period, Bhoja, the 
Raja of Dhar, preserves an indication of this 
people: and from him the Bhojpuris, a tribe still 
living in western Bihar, profess to be descended: 
they are not improbable relics of the older tribe. 
Bhoja is also used sometimes as a synonym of 
Bhojakata, a city near the Narmada, founded by 
Rukmi. brother-in-law of Krsna, and before that, 
prince of Kundina or Kondavir. 


15. Pulinda as applied to any wild or barbarous 
tribe; those here named are some of the people of 
the deserts along the Indus; but Pulindas are met 
with in many other positions, especially in the 
mountains and forests across central India, the 
haunts of the Bhils and Gonds. So Ptolemy places 
the Pulindai along the banks of the Narmada to the 
frontiers of Larice; the Lata or Lar of the Hindus; 
Kandesh and part of Gujarat. 


16. In the other three Puranas we have 
Uttam4rnas. on the Vindhya range. 

i7. The people of the ‘ten forts,’ subsequently 
multiplied to 'thirty-six,' such being the import of 


Chattisgarh, which seems to be in the site of 
Dasarna. - Megha Dita, p. 30, note. 

18. A Vindhya tribe, according to the other 
puranas. The locality 1s confirmed by mythological 
personations; for Mekala is said to be a Rsi, the 
father of the river Narmada; thence called Mekala 
and Mekalakanya: the mountain where it rises is 
also called Mekaladri. The Ramayana places the 
Mekalas amongst the southern tribes. 

19. Utakala is still the native name of Orissa. 

20. These may be the southern Pajficdlas. When 
Drona overcame Drupada, king of Pajicala, as 
related in the Mahabharata, Adi-parva, he retained 
half the country, that north of the Ganga, and 
restored to its former chief the other half, south of 
that river as for as to the Chambal. The capital of 
the latter became Makandi on the Gariga; and the 
country included also Kaémpilya, the Kampil of the 
Mohammedans, but placed by them in the Doab. 
The capital of the northern portion was Ahiksetra, 
name traceable in the Adisathrus of Ptolemy, 
though the position differs; but Ahiksetra or 
Ahichchatra, as it is also written, seems to have 
been applied to more than one city. 

21. Perhaps the people of Tirhut, along the Kosi. 

22. ‘Having more than one back :' probable some 
nickname or term of derision. Thus we have, in the 
Ramayana and other works, enumerated amongst 
tribes, the Karna-pravaranas. ‘those who wrap 
themselves up in their ears;' Asta-karnakas, "the 
eight-eared;" or Ostha-karnakas, “having lips 
extending to their ears;" Kakamukhas, "crow- 
faced"; Eka- padukas.- ‘one-footed,' or rather 'one- 
slippered :' exaggerations of national ugliness, or 
allusions to peculiar customs, which were not 
literally intended, although they may have 
furnished the Mandevilles. of ancient and modern 
times with some of their monsters. The spirit of the 
nomenclature is shown by these tribes being 
associated with Kiratas, ‘barbarians.’ and Yavanas, 
either Greeks or Mohammedans. 

23. A preferable reading seems to be 
Yugandhara : a cily in the Punjab so called is 
mentioned in the Mahabharata, Karna Parva. 

24. Read Bodhas, Godhas. and Saudhas. There is 
a Rajput tribe called Sodha. 

25. This may consist of two names, and is so 
read in MSS. or the latter term occurs Kalingas; 
both terms are repeated. Besides the Madra of the 


162 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





north, a similar word. Madru, is applied to Madura 
in the south. As. Res. 1X. 428. The Ramayana has 
Madras in the east, as well as in the north. 

26. The people of the Benares district, and that 
opposite. 

27. The inhabitants of Ujjayin. 

28. These should be opposite to the Kuntis. but 
where either is situated does not appear. 

29. The best reading is Gomanta. part of the 
Konkan about Goa. 

30. The more usual reading is Khandas; one MS. 
has Parnas. 

31. A country of considerable extent and power 
at various periods. The name remains in Beder, 
which may have been the ancient capital but the 
kingdom seems to have corresponded with the great 
part of Berar and Kandesh. It is mentioned in the 
Ramayana and the Puranas amongst the countries 
of the south. 

32. Also Ripavasikas. There is a Rupa river 
from the Suktimat mountain, the vicinity of which 
may be alluded to. We have Ripasas or Ripapas 
amongst the southern tribes of the Puranas. 

33. Read also ASmalas and Asmakas : the latter 
are enumerated amongst the people of the south in 
the Ramayana. and in the Vayu, Matsya, and 
Markandeya P. There is a prince of the same name 
of the solar dynasty. 

34. Gova or Kuva is an ancient name of the 
southern Konkan, and may be intended in this place 
by the Gopa country; or it may imply 'the district of 
cow-herds.’ that is of Nomadic tribes. 

35. Also read Kulatis and Panitakas. 

36. Read also Adhirajya and Adhirastra, which 
miean the same, ‘the over or superior kingdom.’ 

37. Also Kusadhya, Kusanda, and Mukuntha. 

38. Also Vallirastra. There are Mallas in the east, 
along the foot of the Himdlaya, in Bhima's Dig- 
vijaya; but we should rather look for them in the 
north-west, in the site of the Malli of Arrian. We 
have in the Puranas. Maharastra, the Mahratta 
country, which may be here intended. 

39. Two copies read Kevala; one, Kambala. The 
text is probably wrong, as we have Kerala below. 

40. Also Varay4sis and Varavasis: one copy has, 
what is likely to be most correct, Vanardsyas, ‘the 
monkey-faced people. 

41. Réid Upavaha and Pravaha. 


42. The MSS. agree in reading this Vakra. 

43. The Sakas occur again, more than once, 
which may be possibly unnecessary repetition : but 
these people, the Sakai and Sacae of classical 
writers, the Indo-Scythians of Ptolemy, extended, 
about the commencement of our era, along the west 
of India, from the Hindu Koh to the mouths of the 
Indus. 

44. The inhabitants of Tirhut. 

45. The people of South Behar. 

46. Also read Mahy as and Suhmas : the latter is 
probably correct. The Suhmas and Prasuhmas were 
found in the east by Bhima : and Suhma is 
elsewhere said to be situated east of Bengal, 
towards the sea, the king and the people being 
Mlechchhas, that is not Hindus it would 
correspond therefore with Tiperah and Aracan. 

47. Also read Malajas, but less correctly perhaps. 
The Malayas are the people of the southern Ghats. 

48. We have Pravijayas in the east, according to 
the Puranas. 

49. Anga is the country about Bhagalpur, of 
which Champa was the capital. 

50. Eastern Bengal. 

51. We have had these before, but they are 
repeated perhaps in conformity to the usual 
classification, which connects them with the two 
preceding, being derived in the genealogical lists 
from a common ancestor. 

52. In Bhima's Dig-vijaya we have two people of 
this name, both in the east; one along the foot of the 
Himalaya, and the other more to the south. 

53. Uniformly read in the MSS. Sudesna. 

54. Three copies read Mahisas. We have Mahis 
akas amongst the southern people in the Puranas; 
and a Mahisiki in the Ramayana, also in the South: 
the latter may be connected with M&hismati, which 
Sahadeva visits in his southern invasion, and which 
has been elsewhere conjectured to be in Mysore. 
(Calcutta Annual Register. 1822.) There is also a 
Mahismati on the road to the south (Mahdabh. 
Udyoga P.), which is commonly identified with 
Chuli Mahesvar, on the Narmada. 

55. Also Rsikas; people placed by the Ramayana 
both in the north and in the south. Arjuna visits the 
former, and exacts from them eight horses- Dig- 
vijaya. 


BOOK II, CHAP. 3 


163 





56. Also read Bahikas; which we may here 
prefer, as the Bahlikas are subsequently named : the 
former are described in the Mahabharata, Karna 
Parva, with some detail, and comprehend the 
different nations of the Punjab, from the Sutlej to 
the Indus. 

57. These are Included amongst the northern 
nations; Vayu, ctc.; but in Nakula's Dig-vijaya they 
are in the west. 

58. The Abhiras, according to the Puranas, are 
also in the north : in the Ramayana and Mahabharat 
Sabha P. they are in the west. The fact seems to be, 
that the people along the Indus, from Surat, to the 
Himalaya, are often regarded as either western or 
northern nations, according to the topographical 
position of the writer : in either case the same tribes 
are intended. 

59. The MSS. read Kalatayakas. a people placed 
by the Puranas in the north. 

60. The Vayu reads Aparitas, a northern nation. 
There are Aparytae in Herodotus, classed with a 
people bordering on India, the Gandari. The term in 
the text signifies also "borderers,’’ and is probably 
correct, as opposed to the following word Pardntas : 
the latter signifying those beyond, and the former, 
those not beyond the borders. The latter has for 
Parantas, Paritas; and the Matsya, Paradas. 

61. Also Pahlavas, a northern or north-western 
nation, often mentioned in Hindu writings, in 
Manu. the Ramayana, the Puranas, &c. They were 
not a Hindu people and may have been some of the 
tribes between India and Persia. 

62. Also Carmakhandikas, but the sense is the 
same : those living in the district Mandala or 
Khanda of Charma; they are a northern people : 
Vayu, etc. Pliny mentions a king of a people so 
called, "Charmarum rex." 

63. Read Marubhaumas : more satisfactorily, as 
it means the inhabitants of Marubhimi, ‘the deserrt;' 
the sands of Sindh. 

64. Also Surdstras, which is no doubt more 
correct; the inhabitants of Surat. 

65 The Kekayas or Kaikeyas appear amongst the 
chief nations in the war of the Mahabharata, their 
king being a kinsman of Krsna. The Ramayana, II. 
53. specifies their position beyond, or west of. the 
Vipasa. , 

66. We have in the Puranas Kuttapracharanas 
and Kuttapravarnas amongst the mountain tribes. 


67. These may be people upon the Mahi river : 
they are named amongst the southern nations by the 
Vayu. etc., but the west is evidently intended. 

68. Read also Kachchas : the Puranas have 
Kacchiyas. The form is equally applicable to people 
dwelling in districts contiguous to water and in 
marshy spots, and denotes the province still called 
Cutch. . 

69. Also read Adhya. Antya, and Andhra : the 
latter is the name of Telingana, the Andhri of Pliny. 

70. Three MSS. have Malada, a people of the 
east in Bhima's Dig-vijaya. 

71. Also Manavalakas. 

72. A people of the east. 

73. The western provinces of Bengal, or. as 
sometimes used in a more comprehensive sense, it 
includes the following districts Rajshahi, 
Dinajpur, and Rangpur; Nadiya. Birbhum, 
Burdwan, part of Midnapur. and the Jungle Mahals; 
Ramgarh. Pachete, Palamow, and part of Chunar. 
See an account of Pundra, translated from what is 
said to be part of the Brahmdanda section of the 
Bhavisya Purana. Calcutta Quart. Mag. Dec. 1824. 

74. There is considerable variety in this term, 
Larga, Marja. Samuttara, and Samantara: probably 
neither is correct. Bhargas are amongst the people 
subdued in the east by Bhima. 

75. These are foresters and barbarians in general. 

76. Notwithstanding the celebrity of this country, 
as the kingdom of Nala. it does not appear exactly 
where it was situated : we may conclude it was not 
far from Vidharba (Berar) as that was the country 
of Damayanti. From the directions given by Nala to 
Damayanti, it is near the Vindhya mountain and 
Payoshni river, and roads lead from it across the 
Rksa mountain to Avanti and the south, as well as 
to Vidarbha and to Kosala. Nalopakhyana, sec. 9. 

77. These are always placed in the west : they 
are fabled to be the descendants of Anartta, the son 
of Saryati, who founded the capital KusSasthali, 
afterwards Dvaraka. on the sea-shore in Guzerat. 

78. Also Pratimatsyas those opposite or 
adjacent to the Matsyas. 

79. Also Kusajas and Kosalas; the latter is 
probably correct, as the name does not occur in any 
other form than that of Kasi-kogala above, Kosala 
is a name variously applied. Its earlicst and most 
celebrated application is to the country on the 
banks of the Sarayi, the kingdom of Rama of 


164 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





which Ayodhya was the capital. Ramayana, I. s. 5. 
In the Mahabharata we have one KoSas in the east 
and another in the south, besides the Prak-koSalas 
and Uttara-KoSsalas in the east and north. The 
Puranas place the Kosalas amongst the people ‘on 
the back of Vindhya;' and it would appear from the 
Vayu that Kusa, the son of Rama, transferred his 
kingdom to a more central position; be ruled over 
Kosala at his capital of Kusasthali or Kusavati, built 
upon the Vindhyan: precipices :fataadaerqyi the 
same is alluded to in the Patala Khanda of the 
Padma Purana, and in the Raghu Varh§a, for the 
purpose of explaining the return of Kusa to 
Ayodhya. Certainly in later times the country of 
Kosala lay south of Qude, for in the Ratndvali the 
general of Vatsa surrounds the king of Kosala in 
the Vindhya mountains: (Hindu Theatre, II.305) 
and as noticed in the same work, (p. 267) we have 
in thePuranas, Sapta Kogalas, or seven KoSalas. An 
inscription found at Ratnapur in Chattisgarh,, of 
which I have an unpublished translation, states that 
Sri-deva, the governor of Malahari Mandala, 
having obtained the favour of Prithvideva, king of 
Kosala was enabled to build temples, and dig tanks, 
&c., indicating the extension of the power of 
Kosala across the Gnges in that direction. The 
inscription is dated Samvat 915, or A.D. 858. The 
Kosala of the Puranas and of the dramatic and 
poetic writers was however more to the west, along 
a part of the Vindhya range. Ptolemy has a 
Kontakossula in the south, probably one of he 
KosSalas of the Hindus. 

80. Also Itikas; perhaps the Isikas or Aisikas of 
the Vayu. &c. a people of the south. 

81. The people of Kashmir. 

82. One of the chief tribes engaged in the war of 
the Mahabharata. The Ramayana places them in the 
west; the Puranas in the north. The term Sindhu 
shows their position to have been upon the Indus, 
apparently in the Punjab. 

83. These are also a people of the north-west, 
found both on the west of the Indus and in the 
Punjab, and well known to classical authors as the 
Gandharil and Gandaridae. As. Res, XV. 103; also 
Journal of the R. As. Soc.: Account of the Foe-ktie- 
ki. 

84. From the context this should probably be 
Darvakas, the people of a district usually specified 
in connexion with the succeeding. ° 


85. These are the inhabitants of the country 
bordering on Kashmir, to the south and west; 
known to the Greeks as the kingdom of Abisaras. It 
often occurs in composition with Darva, as 
Darvabhisara. As. Res, XV. 24. 

86. Also read Ulitas and Kulitas: the Ramayana 
has Koldkas or Kaulftas amongst the western 
tribes. 

87. Also with the short vowel, Saivalas. 

88. The V4&hlikas or Babhikas are always 
associated with the people of the north, west, and 
ultra-Indian provinces, and are usually considered 
to represent the Bactrians, or people of Balkh. It 1s 
specified in the Mahabh. Udyoga P. as famous for 
its horses, a reputation the country bordering upon 
it. at least Bokhara and Maimena, still preserves: 
and in Arjuna’s Dig-vijaya it 1s said to be difficult 
of approach. 

89. These are probably intended for the 
neighbours of the Abhisasras: they are found in the 
north by Arjuna. Dig-vijaya. and are there termed 
also Ksatriyas. 

90. Also read Bahabadhya and Bahurada. 

91. The name occurs in the Ramayana as that of 
a mountain in the Punjab or in the Bahika country. 
i. 53; 

92. The MSS. agree in reading this Vanayava or 
Vanayus, a people in the north-west, also’ famous 
for horses. 

93. A better reading is Dasaparsva, as we have 
had Dasarnas before. 94 Also Ropanas: 
qucrc, Romans? 

95. Also Gachchas and Kachchas: the last is the 
best reading, although it has occurred ‘before. 

96. Also Gopala-kachchas: they are amongst the 
eastern tribes in Bhima's Dig-vijaya. 

97. Or Langalas. 

98. Kurujangalas, or the people of the forests in 
the upper part of the Doab: it is also read 
Paravallabhas. 

99. The analogy to ‘barbarians’ is not in sound 
only, but in all the authorities these are classed with 
borderers and foreigners and nations not Hindu. 

100. Also Dahas, in which we should have a 
resemblance to the Scythian Dahae. 

101. Or Tamaliptas or Damaliptas: the people at 
the western mouth of the Ganga in Medinipur and 
Tamluk. Tamralipli was a celebrated sea-port in the 


BOOK II, CHAP. 3 


165 





fourth century. (Account of the Foe-ktie-ki.) and 
retained its character in the ninth and twelfth. Dasa 
Kumara Carita and Brhat Katha; also Jown, Royal 
As. Sac. 

102. The people of Odra or Orissa. 

103. The inhabitants of Pundra: see note 73. 

104, The people of the Coromandal coast, from 
Madras southwards: those by whom the Tamil 
language 1s spoken. 

105. The people of Malabar proper. 

106. Also Prasyas. Pr&cbyas properly means the 
people of the east. the Prasui of the Greeks, east of 
the Ganga. 

107. Mashika is the southernmost part of the 
Malabar coast. Cochin and Travancore. 

108. Also Vdnavadsinas and Va4anavdsikas; the 
inhabitants of Banawasi, the Banavasi of Ptolemy, a 
town the remains of which are still extant in the 
district of Sunda. 

109. The people of the centre of the Peninsula, 
the proper Karnata or Karnatic, 

110. The people of Mysore: see note 54. 

111. Also Vikalpas. 

212. Also Pushkalas. 

113. Also Karnikas. 

114. Read Kuotikas, 

115. Variously read Nalakalaka, NabhakAnana, 
and Tilakanyja. 

116. Kaukundaka and Kaukuntaka. 

117. The mhabitants of the lower part of the 
Coromandel coast; so called after them Chola- 
mandala. 

118. People of the Konkan: according to some 
statements there are seven districts so named. 

119, Malavanara and Silavinaka. 

120. These two words are sometimes 
compounded as kukkuramgara: it is also read 
Kanurajada. 

121. This is a questionable name, though the 
MSS. agree. We have in Arjuna's Dig-vijaya, 
Utsavamanketa; and in Nakidta's, to (he west, 
Utsavasanketa. 

122. These are amongst the warriors of the 
Mahabharata: they are included in all the lists 
amongst the northern tribes, and are mentioned in 
the Rdjatarangini as not far from Kashmir: they are 
considered to be the people of Lahore. 

123. Also Vyukas and Vrkas: the latter are 
specified amongst the central nations: Vayu.etc. 


124. Kokovakas and Kokanakhas. 

125. Sdras and Vegasaras: also Parasaficdrakas. 

126. Vindhyapalakas and- Vindhyamulikas: the 
latter, those at the foot of Vindhya, are named in 
the Pauranik lists amongst the southern tribes. 

127. Balvala and Valkaja. 

128. Also Malaka and Majava. 

129. Also Vallabhas. which from the succeeding 
word may be conjectured to be correct. A city 
named Vallabhi makes a great figure in the 
traditions of Rajputana. See Tod's Rajasthan. 

130. One of the tribes in the west or north-west 
subdued by Arjuna. 

131. Kalada and Dohada. 

132. Kundala. Karantha, and Mandaka: the latter 
occurs in the Ramayana amongst the eastern 
nations. . 

133. Kurata, Kunaka. 

134. Stanabila. 

135. Satirtha, Satiya, Nariya. 

136. TheSrinjayas area people from the north- 
west amongst the warriors of the Mababhrata: the 
reading may be incorrect. It occurs also 
Putisrinjaya. 

137. Also Aninda. 

138. Also Sivata. Sirala, Syuvaka. 

139. Tanapa. Stanapa, Sulapa. 

140. Pallipanjaka and Vidarbha. 

141. Dadhividarbha, but three copies have 
Rishika. Great variety, and no doubt great 
inaccuracy, prevails in the MSS. in several of the 
names here given: they are not found elsewhere. 

142. The reading of three copies is Kékas: there 
is a tribe so called on the banks of the Indus, as it 
leaves the mountains. | 

143. These and the following are mountaineers 
in the north-west. The former are placed by the 
Puranas in the north, and the Vayu includes them 
also amongst the mountain tribes. The Ramayana 
has Tankanas in the north. 

144. The term Yavanas. although in later times 
applied to the Mohammedans, designated formerly 
the Greeks, as observed in the valuable notes on the 
translation of the Birth of Uma, from the Kumara 
Swnbhava. (Journal As. Soc. of Bengal, July 1833.) 
The Greeks were known throughout western Asia 
by the term ty Yavan; or Ion. Imoves : the Yavana, 
aaa, of the Hindus; or as it occurs in its Prakrit 
form, in the very curious inscription deciphered by 


166 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





Prinsep. (J.As. Soc, Beng. Feb. 1838,) Yona: the 
term Yona Raji being there associated with the 
name Antiochus, in all likelihood Antiochus the 
Great, the ally of the Indian prince Sophagasenas, 
about B. C. 210. That the Macedonian or Bactrian 
Greeks were most usually intended is not only 
probable from their position and relations with 
India, but from their being usually named in 
concurrence with the north-western _ tribes, 
Kambojas, Daradas, Paradas, Bahlikas, Sakas. &c. 
in the Ramayana, Mahabharata, Purinas, Manu and 
in various poems and plays. 

145. Chinas or Chinese, or rather the people of 
Chinese Tarlary, are named in the Ramayana and 
Manu, as well as in the Puranas. If the designation 
China was derived from the Tsin dynasty, which 
commenced B, C. 260. this forms a limit of 
antiquity for the works in question. The same word 
however, or Tsin, was the ancient appellation of the 
northern province of Shen-sy, and it may have 
reached the Hindus from thence at an earlier period. 

146. These Wilford regards as the people of 
Arachosia. They are always mentioned together 
with the north-western tribes, Yavanas, Sakas, and 
the like: they are also famous tor their horses: and 
in the Ramayana they are said to be covered with 
golden lotuses : @hr asacanft arate daar 
What is meant is doubtful, probably some ornament 
or embellishment of their dress. We have part of the 
name of Kambi, in the Cambistholi of Arrian: the 
last two syllables, no doubt, represent the Sanskrit 
Sthala, ‘place’ ‘district;' and the word denotes the 
dwellers in the Kamba or Kambis country: so 
Kamboja may be explained those born in Kamba or 
Kambas. 

147. Also Sakridvaha or Sakridguha. 

148. Also Kulachchas and Kuntalas: the Puranas 
have Kupathas amongst the mountain tribes. 

149. Also Parataka: the first is not a common 
form in the Puranas, although it is in poetical 
wiitings, denoting, no doubt, the Persians, or 
people of Pars or Fars: the latter, also read Paradas, 
may imply the same, as beyond (Para) the Indus. 

150. We nave Ramathas in Nakula's Dig-vijaya. 
and in the Vayu and Matsya. 

151. DaSamanas and Desamanikas, in the north: 
Vayu and Matsya. 

152. The passage occurs in the Vayu and 
Markandaya Puranas, as well as in_ the 


Mahabharata; but the purport is not very distinct, 
and the proper reading is doubtful. In three MSS. of 
the latter it occurs afaat ay aan aay pants aI 
the latter pada is the same in all: the former, in a 
fourth copy. is affairs! in two copies of the 
Vayu it is afxarafrasmai None of these are 
intelligible, and the Markandeya furnishes the 
reading followed, afaarfagmai Modern 
geographers have supposed the Cathaei. Cathari 
and Chatriaei of the ancients, in the lower parts of 
the Punjab, to mean a people of Ksatriyas; but no 
such people occur directly named in our lists. 
Considering that the text is speaking of barbarous 
and foreign tribes, perhaps no particular nation is 
here meant, and it may be intended as an epithet of 
those which follow, or of Vaisya (agricultural) and 
Siidra (servile or low) tribes, living either near to or 
after the manlier of Ksatriyas: in that case a better 
reading would be, afanfamt deaggpentt a 
According to Manu various northern tribes, the 
Sakas, Kambojas, Paradas, Pahlavas, Kiratas. 
Daradas and Khasas and even the Chinas and 
Yavanas, are degraded Ksatriyas, in conseqnencc of 
neglecting rcligious rites. X.43,44. According to 
the Pauranik legend they were overcome in war by 
Sagara, and degraded from their original caste, See 
book IV. 

153. Here we have a people called Siidras by all 
the authorities, and placed in the west or north- 
west, towards the Indus. They have _ been 
ingeniously, and with probability, conjectured by 
Lassen to be the Oxydracae; for Siidraka is equally 
correct with Sidra; and in place of Osvdpaxai 
various MSS. of Strabo. as quoted by Siebenkees. 
read Gidpaxaiand Evépaxai: the latter is precisely 
the Sanskrit appellation. Pliny also has Sudraci for 
the people who formed the limit of Alexander's 
eastern conquests, or those hitherto inaccurately 
called Oxydraces. 

154. These are always conjoined with the 
Sudras, as if conterminous. Tncir situation is no 
doubt correctly indicated by Ptolemy by the 
position of Abiria above Pattalene on the Indus. 

155. The Durds are still where they were at the 
date of our text. and in the days of Strabo and 
Ptolemy; not exactly, indeed, at the sources of the 
Indus, but along its course, above the Himalaya, 
just before it descends to India; a position which 
might well be taken for its head. 


BOOK II, CHAP. 4 


167 





156. Also read Pasus, ‘brutes.’ If the term might 
be altered to Palli. it would imply ‘village or 
pastoral tribes ' 

157. Also Khasikas and Khasakas. The first of 
these is probably most correct, being equivalent to 
Khasas. barbarians named along with the Sakas and 
Daradas by Manu, etc., traces of whom may be 
sought amongst the barbarous tribcs on the north- 
east of Bengal, the Kasiyas: or it has been thought 
that they may be referred to the situation of 
Kashgar. Two copies have, in place of this, 
Tukhfras. and the same occurs in the Ram4yana: 
the Vayu has Tushdras. but the Markandeya. 
Tukhdra: these are probably the Tochari. Tachari. 
or Thogari, a tribe of the Sakas, by whom Bactria 
was taken from the Greeks, and from whom 
Tocharestan derives the name it still bears. 

158. Also Pahlavas and Pallavas. The form in the 
text is the more usual. 

159. The Ramayana has Gahvaras. The 
mountains from Kabul to Bamian furnish infinitely 
numerous instance of cavern habitations. 

160. These two, according to the V4yu, are 
amongst the northern nations: but they might be 
thought to be religious fraternities, from the sages 
Atri and Bharadvaja. 

161. The latter member of the compound occurs 
posikas. payikas. and yodhikas, cherishers.’ 
‘drinkers,’ or ‘fighters :’ the first term denotes the 
female breast. 

162. Also Dronakas. ‘people of vallies.' 

163. Also Kajingas, Kalingas would be here out 
of place. 

164. These and the preceding are included by the 
Vayu amongst the mountain tribes of the north. 

165. Many names indeed might be added to the 
catalogue from the lists referred to io the Vayu, 
Matsya, and Markandeya Puranas, as well as 
several capable of verification from the Ramayana, 
and other passages of the Mahabharata. This is not 
the place however to exhaust the subject, and it has 
been prosecuted too far perhaps already. It is 
evident that a very considerable proportion of the 
names recorded can be verified, and that many of 
them may be traced in the geographical notices of 
India left by the historians of Alexander's 
expedition. That more cannot be identified is owing 
in a great measure to incomplete research; and a 
more extensive examination of the authorities 


would no doubt discover passages where 
circumstances, as well as names, are given by 
which the places would be recognised. It is evident, 
however, that much embarrassment also arises from 
the inaccuracy of manuscripts, which vary -widely 
and irreconcilably, 1 have given instances from 
four different copies of the text; one in my own 
possession, three in the library of the East India 
Company; all very excellent copies, but manifestly 
erroneous in many respects in their nomenclature of 
places. and particularly of those which are least 
known. No assistance is to be had from any 
commentary, as the subject is one of little interest 
in native estimation. 


2 2K 2 


BOOK II, CHAP. 4 167 


CHAPTER 4 


UAatseaa : 
(REgITaUTTY, renee) 
WINE SATE 


ened Gar gar wrggshratea: | 
Gaps areata wiardrreten Feara:  eh 
wage faa: yeaa: | 
B Ue faqon gery! wraraty Serea: 1 BM 


In the same manner as Jambu-Dvipa 1s girt 
round about by the ocean of salt water, so that 
ocean is surrounded by the insular continent of 
Plaksa; the extent of which is twice that of 
Jambu-dvipa. 


GA Henfaa: Yar: wrrgtacer ah 
RAS: MATA ANT FeriyreeteeTTA 3 it 
Faawanre: fora: sia va al 

. Fas Varta wees fe Avi 
ya wear ad frie quad cam 
ares fraga aa gata any 
HATHA TATA aT AT: | 
wea sat ares sgoper yr «At 
Tea Usa areal sehen 
area: Gases dunsela TAT: Not! 


168 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





autaey Tay waaay UAT: | 

aata caredafent: Wad WATCH 

ay Guar warrerfercs fired oA: 

Tea Sea aie qaarergea” fe aa eu 
Wai AEG Vda aeons AAR: 
AUTEM: WARN Set: UTE Stet ATI Vol 
ayaa ferat da faroren fafear ay: 
STFA YHA Va HaTAT FETA aU 
Ua Sa Aa: WaT: aise 
ARNT TTA AT ASAT VII 
at: frat der eer wdistrvang a1 
ATAU FT At A a Aareafeuh fe wi 


q Matt rere ay VAT AAT! 
ANGTAA: Bret: Waa TATA XI 
warerafey Tart! yrendiafarag a 
USAC ASATT HAT STATA 11 4 I 
qa: ust ratag austen: | 

amar at uearecary Fate aarti Fn 9g 1 


Medhatithi, who was made sovereign of 
Plaksa, had seven sons, Santabhaya, Sisira, 
Sukhodaya, Ananda, Siva, Ksemaka, and 
Dhruva; and the Dvipa was divided amongst 
them, and each division was named after the 
prince to whom it was subject. The several 
kingdoms were bounded by as many ranges of 
mountains, named severally Gomeda, Candra, 
Narada, Dundubhi, Somaka, Sumanas, and 
Vaibharaja. In these mountains the sinless 
inhabitants ever dwell along with celestial 
spirits and gods: in them are many holy places; 
and the people there live for a long period, 
exempt from care and pain, and enjoying 
uniterrupted felicity. There are also, in the 
seven divisions of Plaksa, seven rivers, 
flowing to the sea, whose names alone are 
sufficient to take away sin: they are the 
Anutapta, Sikhi, Vipasa,- Tridiva, Kramu, 
Amrita and Sukrité. These are the chief rivers 
and mountains of Plaksa-dvipa, which I have 
enumerated to you; but there are thousands of 
othcrs of inferior magnitude. The people who 


drink of the waters of those rivers are always 
contented and hapy, and there is neither 
decrease nor increase amongst them,’ neither 
are the revolutions of the four ages known in 
these Vargas: the character of the time is there 
uniformly that of the Treta (or silver) age. In 
the five Dvipas, worthy Brahmana, from Plaks 
a’ of Saka, the length of life is five thousand 
years, and religious merit is divided amongst 
the several castes and orders'‘of the people. 


ardet: erase fafaen wifes a 

fan-arfra-ayared YsEr APTA Rio I 

HAGAN AAA YASS: | 

ITAA TET FESTA 6 1 

Sad AA WTaedaulreenriahy: | 

AAU WAT Ba: TTT BAT Ve 

THIGUNATOT HATE: WaT: | 

aaagraler Ufa 2 © 1 

Baa da Wara! wergly sated: | 

Sartor war yA: -WreTe A FPA 2 vi 

The castes are called Aryaka, Kuru, Vivadsa 

and Bhavi, corresponding severally with 
Brahmana, Ksatriya, Vaisya and Sidra. In this 
Dvipa is a large fig-tree (F. religiosa), of 
similar size as the Jambu-tree of Jambu- 
dvipa; and this Dvipa is called Plaksa, after the 
name of the tree. Hari, who is all, and the 
creator of all, is worshipped in this continent 
in the form of Soma (the moon). Plaksa-dvipa 
is sorrounded, as by a disc, by the sea of 
molasses, of the same extent as the land. Such, 
Maitreya, is a brief description of Palksa- 
dvipa. 

MITA AY BVTrAgary JT]! 

dary Aaa Ga aatfor aT Se VI 

aise seas siya Tete 

aga MATa YAY WETTAI 23 II 

WHS BAsIsa Berges: | 

faerafequrra ada: daa: Paras evil 

aay udat: we faa wrarra:| 


BOOK II, CHAP. 4 


aaMeiaar YF aa ae a eT Vk 


ayia qatar Tees: | 

iON aa Water: T UqUl WstaT: VE 1 

ae Tea: vet aie: aaTETM 

HHI Vata: ALATA F JOT Vw At 

art ater fagert = war yee fateh 

Praha: Gat arat waren: Urea: tt Ve 

Sia eases ded aad aan 

cigaafed Bar Quran 28 

aaah gy aaifor agardgenhs a1 

Mene IY ANT TAIT WENA 3 oll 

afTensTSon: Wat: POIs yr YAR 

TAT: AAT Agar; Yaa Aad az 

West WA fame 

aT Aa: Apes aerate 3 

sara Wiser Braet 

wena: greraant aren Preface: 3 3h 

UT BT: AYROT YU VATA: | 

PARANTNAAS WAT F ARTA  B vil 
_ The hero Vapusmat was king of the next or 
Salmala-dvipa, whose seven sons also gave 
designations to seven Varsas, or divisions. 
Their names were Sveta, Harita, Jimita, 
Rohita, Vaidyuta, Manasa, and Suprabha. The 
Iksu sea is encompassed by the continent of 
Salmala, which is twice its extent. There are 
seven principal’ mountain ranges, abounding in 
precious gems, and dividing the Varsas from 
each other; and there are also seven chief 
rivers. The mountains are called Kumuda, 
Unnata, Valahaka, Drona, fertile in medicinal 
herbs, Kanka, Mahisa, and Kakkudvat. The 
rivers are Yauni, Toya, Vitrisna, Candra, 
Mahisa, Sukla, Vimochani, and Nivritti; all 
whose waters cleans away sins. The Bramans, 
Ksatriyas, Vaisyas, and Sidras of this Dvipa, 
called severally Kapilas, Arunas, P6tas, and 
Rohitas (or tawny, purple, yellow, and red), 
worship the imprishable soul of all things, Vis 
nu, in the form of Vayu (wind), with pious 


169 


rites, and enjoy frequent association with the 
gods. A large Salmali (silk-cotton) tree grows 
in this Dvipa, and gives it its name. The Dvipa 
is surrounded by the Sur4 sea (sea of wine), of 
the same extent as itself. 


ques: ufige: ayer ada: 
wrereres ¥ fame fears aerta i 34 1 
TAIT: PRET AA Yar: OPT AM 
sfaat aumista deat creat afr: 3g 
waTAsy alrereraray arg ea: | 
afery cafe WAM: We Sraerta si 3190 
ata Ba-rerg- gar fepeearea: | 
CEPR IMC IC ICSE RAL 
afer: gist: eter Weer WET 
SON: afar: Ayer: yawPHAvfeR: tt 3 ett 
AA HH HAA TANTRA A 
WAST A HET Terad TATE 

WR: ARETE GHIA Y ot 
fagat guytets ofrary quate 
ay efa Baal weet: 
aulaenad daa Wa A WATT ¥ et 
TARY AA AAP PTO ATA AT HAT 
qaarar forat wer ufear arafretann x 21 
fagest dt aren wauragateaa: | 
WAT: ARAMAAA SKTACAATACH: tS 3 Il 
PAT PMRTA: AAMT TA AI HITT! 
AAA BT AG Oalesd WATsa vi 


The Sur4 sea is entirely encircled by Kusa- 


 dvipa, which is every way twice the size of the 


preceding continent. The king, Jyotismat, had 
seven sons, Udbhida, Venuman, Svairatha, 
Lavana, Dhriti, Prabhakara, and Kapila, after 
whom the seven portions or Varsas of the 
island were called Udbhida, &c. There reside 
mankind along with Daityas and D4navas, as 
well as with spirits of heaven and gods. The 
four castes, assiduously devoted to their 
respective duties, are termed Damis, Susmis, 
Snehas, and Mandehas, who in order to be 


170 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





relieved of the obligations imposed upon them 
in the discharge of their several functions, 
worship Jandrddana, in the form of Brahma, 
and thus get rid of the unpleasant duties which 
lead to temporal rewards. The seven principal 
mountains in this Dvipa are named Vidruma, 
Hemasaila, Dyutiman, Puspavan, Kusesaya, 
Hari, and Mandara; and the seven rivers are 
Dhitapapa, Siva, Pavitra, Sammati, 
Vidyudambha, Mahavanya, Sarvapdpahara: 
besides these, there are numerous rivers and 
mountains of less importance. KuSsa-dvipa is 
so named from a clump of KuSa grass (Poa) 
growing there. Jt is sorrounded by the Ghrta 
sea (the sea of butter), of the same size as the 
continent. 


Bares Bas a mlseter Waa: 

BANA ASAT! STATS WET XG 
ayatrer fareararg faye wer fara: 
AHN Bla: Yat: AA ASAT YE 
carn at aquifer dat we Testes: Kon 
HMC WANN: GANS ETAT: | 
ahs gofta wld aegat Fuwcn 
ante tarredataan: Gare: | 

autre wera! tat arnt F UNV 
ANT ATA FATT: | 

Sag WSN WI: YostHarql 
Setter verstet fees WATT G oN 
ator stg B ver sar gras F qa ant 
ater wag aur veaty a 

Praata fragt: we Fant: WAT NG VM 
Tear: eR eens WEA 
STEM: arfrar Aya: VATA SAT: 3 
a oa vel tera! ar: fra syoper at: 
TATA VASAT: ISTEP WG YU 
whet ays da wear Uae 
antast yuStiat WM Maa AGM G GH 
aanfa faeophrary yenrelstaet: | 

art waaay Sert aeafatn & 


msee: Bas slant AI 
BGA: Mat: BAAS M AAT 4 VI 
Sferrasieeantt rene Aaa: 
mia frente fae HERP G oN 


The sea of Ghrta is encompassed by 
Kraufica-dvipa, which is twice as large as 
KuSa-dvipa. The king of this Dvipa was 
Dyutiman, whose sons, and the seven Varsas 
named after them, were KusSala, Mallaga, 
Ushna, Pivara, Andhakdraka, Muni, and 
Dundubhi. The seven boundary mountains, 
pleasing to gods and celestial spirits, are 
Kraufica, Vamana, Andhakdraka, Devavrit, 
Pundarikavan, Dundubhi, and Mahasaila; each 
of which is in succession twice as lofty as the 
series that precedes it, in the same manner as 
each Dvipa is twice as extensive as the one 
before it. The inhabitants reside there without 
apprehansion, associating with the bands of 
divinities. The Brahmanas are called Puskaras; 
the Ksatriyas, Puskalas: the Vaisyas are 
termed Dhanyas; and the Sidras, Tisyas. They 
drink of countless streams, of which the 
principal are denominated Gauri, Kumuvati, 
Sandhyé, Réatri, Manojava, Ksdnti, and 
Pundarikd. The divine Visnu, the protctor of 
mankind, is worshiped there by the people, 
with holy rites, in the form of Rudra. Kraurica 
is surrounded by the sea of curds, of a similar 
extent; and that again is encompassed by 
Saka-dvipa. 


MRAM TAT FHSAA: | 
Waa AAMAS Tal AGO Va WN 
WHAT HANA FHA Wihas: | 
HAC Utaten: WAT WEFAN Kol 
aaaraAg Tay wa aatway HAL 
wane waa: We qaferedcanfor: 11g Vt 
qatar earn feetereancetearge: | 

want taqa: yanmar Freer: 11g 20 
stig Ua: wat War: | 
wrens wera: fag-reardafad: 1 € 311 
ara eay areal AAT UT: | 


BOOK I], CHAP. 4 


171 





Wa YUM TATeNGav aa aa: MG YI 

TEA ASTVTAT: AAAI AATNT: | 

GHat Hart ao afer Ayer A AN & I 

Say aura da Tredt wat Aa 

SURAT YSTEN ASNT & & I 

TTA APT MARISA ASAT: | 

at: frat ger aear werarfag & Fray: & 91 

aug a Wauer: rane Afetty 

eat tated A dad: WAN Cl 

Tatereqenny afer Ay Berg VAT 

WMT APS AAT & 8 I 

OM Seuss Ar: aaareaM 

AVI AAAS VERA FRAT: 119 0 1 

Wrae qf dfaay: WANT FA 

aah Mea HATTA: 19 V1 

wrepatarg Aaa! ater Watt: | 

VRAIN THA ABA: il 9 VM 

The sons of Bhavya, the king of Saka- 

dvipa, after whom its Varsas were 
denominated, were Jalada, Kumara, 
Sukumara, Manicaka, Kusumoda, Maudaki, 
and Mahddruma. Ths seven mountains 
separating the countries were Udayagiri, 
Jaladhara, Raivataka, Syama Ambikeya, 
Ramya, and KeSari. There grows a large Saka 
(Teak) tree, frequented by the Siddhas and 
Gandharbas, the wind from which, as 
produced by its fluttering leaves, diffuses 
delight. The sacred lands of this continent are 
peopled by the four castes. Its seven holy 
rivers, that wash away all sin, are the 
Sukumari, Kumari, Nalini, Dhenuka Iksu, 
Venuka and Gabhasti. There are also hundreds 
and thousands of minor streams and mountains 
in this Dvipa: and the inhabitants of Jalada and 
the other divisions drink of those water with 
pleasure, after they have returned to earth from 
Indra's heaven. In those seven districts there is 
no dereliction of virtue; there is no contention; 


there is no diviation from rectitude. The caste 
of Mrga is that of the Brahmana; the Magadha, 


of the Ksatriya; the Manasa, of the Vaisya; 
and the Mandaga of the Stidra: and by these 
Visnu is devoutly worshipped as the sun, with 
appropriate ceremonies. Sdaka-dvipa is 
encircled by the sea of milk, as by an armlet 
and the sea is of the same breadth as the 
continent which it embraces.’ 


efter addl ger! Gere afpa:| 
ater wrengtarg fee WAT: 111931 
qeat qaereane werahiswad Ya: 
Mafeagy dareta F ad arafafadiie xii 
Wea ward aaahavsdiaay 
USA FEMI WMA ATT: WO I 
AMaRAaa A Bera aeraraa: | 
SRAM Weertor Set Wares hepa: 11 9 & I 
Waea u frau: ada: utmost: | 
eaters wart fear o'9 11 
ferdisat a fafeod ond aatengaal 
aera aaa wat PAR it 
amataealr aa staat wera: | 
Fraar fastener wergerfeatsrr: 119 8 
SEMA F Tana F aeaerat FET 
Teale wa Far Slat Aenfear T Ac oll 
Heat afeay aaarauenad: | 
aarerer SaceMeararera c vl 
VAN + Aare BI Yeats 

Twa Ae: Ver at ge agers c 2 
TeIagey AGA SATE SHUT: | 
SUITATENE TMSTOTARsaN ¢ 31 
alaricvSsitegseets A 

atgead aia! atacanisayaa: ic xi 
Wa YEE: Het waMfeatara: | 
MMraausaasa Waar Aa WUNC4M 
NT: YT TET: WATAAA 
afenfaaata gan GR: Bre: & i 
Targeeeferat year: uftafya: 


172 


‘THE VISNU-PURANAM 





The Ksiroda ocean (or sea of milk) is 
encompassed by the seventh Dvipa, or Pus 
kara, which is twice the size of Saka-dvipa. 
Savana, who was made its sovereign, had but 
two sons, Mahavira and DhAatoki, after whom 
the two Varsas of Puskara were so named. 
These are divided by one mighty range of 
mountains, called Manasottara, which runs in 
a circular direction (forming an outer and an 
inner circle). This mountain is fifty thousand 
Yojanas in height, and as many in its breadth; 
dividing the Dvipa in the middle, as if with a 
bracelet, into two divisions, which are also of 
a circular form, like the mountain that 
separates them. Of these two, the Mahdavira- 
varsa is exterior to the circumference of 
Ma4nasottara, and Dhataki lies within the 
circle; and both are frequented by heavenly 
spirits and gods. There are no other mountains 
in Puskara, neither are there any rivers.’ Men 
in this Dvipa live a thousand years, free from 
sickness and sorrow, and unruffled by anger or 
affection. There is neither virtue nor vice, 
killer nor slain: there is no jealousy, envy, 
fear, hatred, covetousness, nor any moral 
defeact: neither is there truth or falshood. Food 
is Spontaneously produced there, and all the 
inhabitants feed upon vainds of every flavour. 
Men there are indeed of the same nature with 
gods, and of the same form and habits. There 
is no distinction of caste or order; there are no 
fixed institutes; nor are rites performed for the 
sake of advantage. The three Vedas, the 
Puranas, ethics, and polity, and the laws of 
service, are Unknown. Puskara is in fact, in 
both its divisions, a terrestrial paradise, where 
time yields ‘happiness to all its inhabitants, 
who are exempt from sickness and decay. A 
Nyagrodha-tree (Ficus indica) grows on this 
Dvipa, which is the especial abode of Brahma, 
and he resides in its, adored by the gods and 
demons .Pushkara is surrounded by the sea of 
fresh water, which is of equal extent with the 
continent it invests.” 


wa yea facauect wa 


Ua got: AAs Wa MAPA: 1c oN 
gra ages wart fat aticcn 
waif wader wd-ayeG wa a1 
=pifafenat vat Herferta SAAC 8H 
wreiemaarmestes ater Fe 
aaaTSl Alero APTA g ot 

7 3p Afton aaa Salat a 
SCAT ST: UAT: YSTHNTA: HS VI 
aerrafer Usa srgerat waht Sh 

stat afegarat Ft ATR ANTAL VU 
Wert YER at Taaareray! 
ward Yad fam! wer: dal: ada fee si 


In this manner the seven island continents 
are encompassed sucessively by the seven 
oceans, and each ocean and continent is 
respectively of twice the extent of that which 
precedes it. In all the oceans the water remains 
at all times the same in quantity, and never 
increases or diminshcs; but like the water in a 
caldron, which in consequence of its 
combination with heat, expands, so the waters 
of the ocean swell with the increase of the 
moon. The waters, although really neither 
more. nor less, dilate or contract as the moon 
increases or wanes in the light and dark 
fortnights. The rise and fall of the waters of 
the different seas is five hundred and ten 
inches.” 


TAGGH Wel Fyadsea area: | 

FON art ya: wadergraatsram evn 
HATATH RAAT Seal Berasafaega: | 
saree aaa ease fF Weal 
aA: WAGE at Met aaa: arz 

Re CC TALS RCI MICCIEGL REAL 
warenatfefararn Vagal wer 
ACAUSHTSA Va ITeASAT 8 9 it 


Beyond the sea of fresh water is a region of 
twice its extent, where the land is of gold, and 
where no living beings reside. Thence extends 


BOOK II, CHAP. 4 


173 





the Lokaloka mountain, which is ten thousand 
Yojanas in breadth, and as many in height; and 
beyond it perpetual ‘darkness invests the 
mountain all around; which darkness is again 
encompassed by the shell of the egg.” 


aa arat fears a weasyearqonferear 
STEM Maat Baa! soa ec 
Sta sifaeaygemy fadtatgr uguiseare: 

Such, Maitreya, is the earth, which with its 
continents, mountains, oceans and exterior 
shell, is fifty crores (five hundred millions) of 
Yojanas in extent.’ It is the mother and nurse 
of all creatures, the fundaton of all worlds, and 
the chief of the elements. 

NOTES 

1. So the commentator explains the terms 
Avasarpini and Utsarpini; saafeh eermen— but 
these words most commonly designate divisions of 
time peculair to the Jainas; during the former of 
which men are supposed to decline from extreme 
felicity to extreme distress; and in the latter, to 
ascend from misery to happiness. The author of the 
text had possibly the Jaina use of these terms in 
veiw; and if so, wrote after their system was 
promulgated. 

2 The Kiirma is the only Purana in which the 
white island, Sveta-Dvipa, the abode of Visnu, is 
included in the geography of the world : an 
incidental description of it is quoted by Wilford 
from the Uttara Khanda of the Padma Purana (As. 
Res. XI. 99); and it is in this and in the Brahma 
Vaivartta that allusions to it are most frequent and 
copious. 

3 A slight alteration has been made here in the 
order of the description. 

4 The description of the Dvipas in the Agni, 
Brahma, Ktirma. and Vayu Puranas agrees with that 
of our text. The Markandeya, Linga, and Matsya 
contain no details. The Bhagavata and Padma 
follow the same order as the Visnu, &c. but alter all 
the names, and many of the measurements. The 
account of the Mahabharata is very irregular and 
confused. The variations throw no additional light 
upon the geographical system of the Puranas. Some 
traces of this appear discoverable in the west; and 
the seven Dvipas, with their surrounding seas, may 
have some connexion with the notion of the seven 


climates, as Wilford has supposed. That learned, 
but fanciful writer bestowed great pains upon the 
Verification of these fictions, and imagined the 
different Dvipas to represent actual divisions of the 
globe : Jambu being India. Kusa the Kus of 
Scripture, or the countries between Mesopotamia 
and India: Plaksa being Asia Minor: Salmali, 
eastern Europe; Kraufica, Germany : [&kfl, the 
British isles; and Pushkara, Iceland. The white or 
silver island, or island of the moon, was also, 
according to him, the island of Great Britain. 
Whatever may be thought of his conclusions, his 
essays on these subjects, particularly in the eighth, 
tenth, and eleventh volumes of the Asiatic 
Researches, contain much curious and interesting 
matter. 

5 Although the Hindus seem to have had a 
notion of the cause of the tides, they were not very 
accurate observers of the effect. The extreme rise of 
the tide ia the Hugli river has never exceeded 
twenty feet. and its average is about fifteen, (As. 
Res. vol. XVUL Kyd on the Tides of the Hugli.) 

6 The Anda Kataéha (Huseele:) The Kataha is 
properly a shallow hemispherical vessel, a saucer; 
but compounded in this form, implies the shell of 
the mundane egg. The Bhagavata thus describes 
these portions of the world : "Beyond the sea of 
fresh water is the mountain belt, called Lokaloka. 
the circular boundary between the world and void 
space. The interval between Meru and Manasottara 
is the land of living beings. Beyond the fresh water 
sea is the region of gold. which shines like the 
bright surface of a mirror, but from which no 
sensible object presented to it is ever reflected, and 
consequently it is avoided by living creatures. The 
mountain range by which it is encircled is termed 
Lokdloka. because the world is separated by it from 
that which is not world (aareira ef aarend 
Tee Sassen sarees); for which 
purpose it was placed by [swara on the limit of the 
three worlds; and its height and breadth are such 
that the rays of the heavenly luminaries, from the 
sun to the polar-star, which spread over the regions 
within the mountain, cannot penetrate beyond it.” 
According to Wilford. however, there is a chasm in 
the belt. and a sea beyond it, where Visnu abides; 
but he has not given his authorities for this. (As. 
Res. XI. 14.) The Mohammedan legends of Koh 
Kaf, the stony girdle that surrounds the world.’ are 


174 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





evidently connected with the Lokaéloka of the 
Hindus. According to the Siva Tantra, the El 
Dorado, at the foot of the Lokaloka mountains, is 
the play-ground of the gods (ead year 
PTS TAN) | 

7. This comprises the planetary spheres : for the 
diameter of the seven zones and oceans— each 
ocean being of the same diameter as the continent it 
encloses, and each successive continent being twice 
the diameter of that which precedes it- amounts to 
but two crores and fifty-four lacs. The golden land 
is twice the diameter of Puskara, or two crores and 
fifty-six lacs; and the Lokdaloka is but ten thousand 
Yojanas. So that the whole is five crores ten lacs 
and ten thousand (5.10.10.000). According to the 
Siva Tantra, the golden land is ten crores of 
Yojanas, making, with the seven continents, one 
fourth of the whole measurement. Other 
calculations occur, the incompatibility of which is 
said by the commentators on our text, and on that 
of the Bhagavata, to arise from reference being 
made to different Kalpas, and they quote the same 
stanza to this effect : tafaq wahaeqmry fated afe 
Meares Hervatetrens sae Akefterd | "Whenever any 
contradictions in different Purinas are observed, 
they are ascribed by the pious to differences of 
Kalpas and the like. 


kK 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





174 
CHAPTER 5 
USsearea: 
(SaUIMeaaUTy, sR ToTaU Ay) 
WUT sara 


faent ua afd: ufgeat wadt Tam 
wafer aeenter falepreste aaa 2 
awaeatend Water YT 

stil fanaa Racer wafer 

Tea TAA Waa SAT 
YS POTS Ga Yh PeTASAT: | 
aay aa Wa! awrarenftsa4: 1 311 
AY SACHA AAT PATA 
Praatet VEAP HEA XI 


ParaSara said— The extent of the surface of 
the earch has been thus described to you, 
Maitreya. Its depth below the surface is said to 
be seventy thousand Yojanas, each of the 
seven regions of Patala extending downwards 
ten thousand. These seven, worthy Muni, are 
called Atala, Vitala, Nitala, Gabhastimat, 
Mahatala, Sutala, and Patala.' Their soil is 
severally white, black, purple, yellow, sandy, 
stony, and of gold. They are embellished with 
magnificent palaces, in which dwell numerous 
Danavas, JDaityas, Yaksas, and_ great 
snakegods. 


Tactaraty wearin wearer Ae: | 
We Career we uraeay Tray Fea & 
SBSH: MT AVY TA FIAT: | 
AMTTMAAONTY WATS A A ATTN EU 
dere PIAA 


Wate Ba a wifafaqw@ente Stadt oi 
feather aa wat aafer aTTIA 
piigraay 7 pitara Fae ears Haren qt cu 


TOAST STATA ere TTT 

Oa A Aaa Sed Tasha eqoTShy: ea 
aaret ent Tearfor aie TATAATT 
Geanaenhreraey Walaa AI go I 


The Muni Narada, after his return from 
those regions to the skies,” declared amongst 
the celestials that Patala was much more 
delightful than Indra's heaven. “What,” 
exclaimed the sage, can be compared to 
Patala, where the Nagas are decorated with 
brilliant and beautiful and pleasure-shedding 
jewels? Who will not delight in Patala, where 
the lovely daughters of the Daityas and 
Danavas wander about, fascinating even the 
most austere; where the rays of the sun diffuse 
light, and not heat, by day; and where the 
moon shines by night for illumination, not for 
cold; where the sons of Danu, happy in the 
enjoyment of delicious vainds and strong 
wines, know not how time passes. 


THOT AAT WAST A | 


BOOK Ii, CHAP. 5 


aorauygesrt wareqaifor a fest gai 
Waa aera aaa: 
SONA PRT UATAPTT TAT: RH 


There are beautiful groves and streams and 
lakes where the lotus blows; and the skies are 
rcsonant with the Koil's song. Spendied 
ornaments, fragrant perfumes, rich unguents, 
the blended music of the lute and pope and 
tabor; these and many other enjoyments are 
the common portion of the Danavas, Daityas, 
and snake-gods, who inhabit the regions of 
Patala.° 

Ure ferenrat aeat Ay: 

VAST ATO Ath A PT SATEAAT: 11 N31 
asta: vsud fade tafrgira: 
DASA SHATTER: 11 YI 
HUTAtTagaN a: @ faataay fey: 

wary wate Fatal feart TeTaISATA ek 
TEQUAAAIS a BI: WeaHHVSet: | 

facet art waifa aie: sar savas: 11 VG 1 
Arerarar wetiean: Serer: | 
AUNTS A Herraneharad: 11 Yo i 
AagaaAhSaN fara AT 


SOA TST BAM At ATHVA AW WMATI VL 
aed Ta aa farrier: | 
agdoneral tat Frementt we ke II 


Below the seven Patalas is the form of Vis 
nu, proceeding from the quality of darkness, 
which is called Sesa*. the excellencies of 
which neither Daityas nor Danavas can fully 
enumerate. This being is called Ananta by the 
spirits of heaven, and is worshipped by sages 
and by gods. He has a thousand heads, which 
are embellished with the pure and visible 
mystic sign’: and the thousand Jewels in his 
crests give light to all the regions. For the 
benefit of the world he deprives the Asuras of 
their strength. He rolls his eyes fiercely, as if 
intoxicated. He wears a single ear-ring, a 
diadem, and wreath upon each brow; and 
shines like the white mountains topped with 


175 


flame. He is clothed in purple raiment, and 
ornamented with a white necklace, and looks 
like another Kailasa, with the heavenly Ganga 
flowing down its precipices. In one hand he 
holds a plough, and in the other a pestle; and 
he is attended by V4runi (the goddess of 
wine), who is his own embodied radiance. 
From his mouths, at the end of the Kalpa, 
proceeds the venomed firc that, impersonated 
as Rudra, who is one with Balarama, devours 
the three worlds. 


a farsatyaayeafravsey| 

SAT WATT: SRS RTT ATA: 11 2 oI 

att yer Fer 2 ot 

ae Std Was tat Baa TT 

a fe auifag wert arg ar fregtefan 2 eu 

TAT Taher Yat Horraforfsrareum 

ae a Aaa Hitate SSSA 2 IAN 

Fer fagersaa Ferg furdeiat: | 

dat aera ster aigarenfararrawii 2 3 1 

Trae: fast: faaorarcon: | 

ard Worst Tet AAAS AAA: 11 VY 

wer Aaa Serer 

Ae: MaTerared Ait feareaTaaTAN 2 & it 

Sesa bears the entire world, like a diadem, 

upon his bead, and he is the foundation on 
which the seven Patalas rest. His power, his 
glory, his form, his nature, cannot be 
described, cannot be comprehended by the 
gods themselves. Who shall recount his might, 
who wears this whole earth, like a garland of 
flowers, tinged of a purple dye by the radiance 
of the jewels of his crests. When Ananta, his 
eyes rolling with intoxication, yawns, then 
earth, with all her woods, and mountains, and 
seas, and rivers, trembles. Gandharvas, 
Apsarasas, Siddhas. Kinnaras, Uragas and 
Charanas are unequal to hymn his praises, and 
therefore he is called the infinite (Ananta), the 


imperishable. The sandal paste, that is ground 
by the wives of the snake-gods, is scattered 


176 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





abroad by his breath, and sheds perfume 
around the skies. 


SATA RTOTfeai Sarah aera: 

Wary daca faftrfod wom 2 1 

ate APTaeat Fervent feryar wet 

fanfa Wet Mrarat MeargqcarqaT Vion 
ofa staan feat wartiseara: | 


The ancient sage Garga,° having propitiated 
Sesa, acquired from him a knowledge of the 
principles of astronomical science of the 
planets, and of the good and evil denoted by 
the aspects of the heavens. The earth, 
sustained upon the head of this sovereign 
serpent, supports in its turn the garland of the 
spheres, along with their inhabitants, men, 
demons and gods. 

NOTES 
1. In the Bhagavata and Padma P. they are 


named Atala. Vitala, Sutala. Talatata, Mahatala,. 


Rasatala and Patala. The Vayu has Rasatala, 
Sutala,. Vitala, Gabhastala, Mahatala, Sritala, and 
Patala. There are other varieties. 

2. Allusion is here made, perhaps, to the 
description given in the Mahabharata. Udyoga 
Parva, p. 218. of Niarada's and Mé§tali's visit to 
Patala. Several of the particulars there given are not 
noticed in the Puranas. 


3. There is no very copious description of Patala- 


in any of the Puranas. The most circumstantial are 
those of the Vayu and Bhagavata; the latter has 
been repeated, with some additions, in the first 
chapters of the Patata Khanda of the Padma Purana. 
The Mahabharata and these two Puranas assign 
different divisions to the Danavas, Daityas, and 
Nagas, placing Vasuki and the other Naga chiefs in 
the lowest : but the Vayu has the cities of the 
principle Daityas and Nagas in each; as in the first 
those of the Daitya Namuchi, and serpent Kaliya : 
in the second, of Hayagriva and Taksaka : in the 
third, of Prahlada and Hemaka; in the fourth, of 
Kalanemi and Vainateya : in the fifth, of Hiranyaks 
a and Kirmira : and in the sixth, of Pulomdn and 
Vasuki; besides others. Bali the Daitya is the 
sovereign of Patala, according to this authority. The 
Mahabharata places Vasuki in Rasatala, and calls 
bis capital Bhogavati. The regions of Patala, and 
their inhabitants, are oftener the subjects of 


profane, than of sacred fiction, in consequence of 
the frequent intercourse between mortal heroes and 
the Naga-kanyas, or  serpent-nymphs. A 
considerable section of the Brhat Katha, the 
Stryaprabha lambaka, consists of adventures and 
events in this subter-raneous world. 

4. Sesa is commonly described as being in this 
situation : he is the great serpent on which Visnu 
sleeps during the intervals of creation, and upon 
whose numerous heads the world is supported. The 
Puranas, making him one with Balarama or Sankars 
ana, who is an impersonation or incarnation of Ses 
a, blend the attributes of the serpent and the 
demigod in their description, 

5. With the Svastika, a particular diagram used 
in mystical ceremonies. 

6. One of the oldest writers on astronomy 
amongst the Hindus. According to Bentley, his 
Samhita dates 548 B. C. (Ancient Astron. of the 
Hindus, p. 59.) 


KKK 


176 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





CHAPTER 6 
UBISeara: 
(Crmaulay, efter wanna) 
UUM Bare 
aaa acary far! yatse: afer a 
Unfaat Vy werd ay YOST WaT 2H 


Parasara said— O great Muni, listen, I will 
now, give you an account of the hells which 
are situated beneath the earth and beneath the 
waters’, and into which sinners are finally 
sent. 


tha: Wat TRA FATA 
TERA: TAS TAA VI 
efarret dace faite: Geter: 
sifaasad HON MMT STHUT: 11 31 
TM YataS: UT afesarent wer: ferea: | 
Wee: Hea Mawalfeata aM vil 
TAMAS ATMS ET AAT: | 
SAAAAIY ALT FRTETHUTT 1 
amy fara at: srenteraerfar: | 


BOOK II, CHAP. 6 


7 





Water Ay Tear: Trae A I 


(The names of the different Narakas are as 
follows:) Raurava, Stkara, Rodha, Tala, 
Visasana, Mahajvala, Taptakumbha, Lavana, 
Vimohana, Rudhirdndha, Vaitarani, Krimisa, 
Krmibhojana, Asipatravana, Krsna, Lalabhaks 
a. Déaruna, Puyavaha, Papa, Vahntjvala, 
Adhosiras, Sandamsa. KéAlasiitra, Tamas, 
Avichi, Svabhojana, Apratistha, and another 
Avichi.” These and many other tearful hells 
are the awful provinces of the kingdom of 
Yama, terrible with instruments of torture and 
with fire; into which are hurled all those who 
are addicted when alive to sinful practices.’ 


HEMAT TM AIH VATMTAT At AR 
artedd afte oad aa wagon 
Ut eat a wesw Ula! 

Tit tate ea asraparahers: 16 
Guat galet at Yaurer a yeti 
Warfa Ares aay dt: Mages an ei 
UAAAVIT Tey TAT THATCH: | 
TARUS TATU Slat WMT Ail Poll 


The man who bear false witness through 
partiality, or who utters any falsehood, is 
condemned to the Raurava (dreadful) hell.-He 
who causes abortion, plunders a town, kills a 
cow, or strangles a man, goes to the Rodha 
hell (or that of obstruciion). The murderer of a 
Brahmana, stealer of gold, or drinker of wine, 
goes to the Stkara (swine) hell; as does any 
one who associates with them. The murderer 
of a man of the second or third caste, and one 
who is guilty of adultery with the wife of his 
spiritual teacher, 1s sentenced to the Tala 
(padlock) hell: and one who holds incestuous 
intercourse with a sister, or murders an 
ambassador, to Taptakumbha (or the hell of 
heated caldrons). 


areifamapag Geet: aeftierat 
AAAS UAT BT Uh UAT Vel 
Sat Tarsie wat waar Fares 
TSM TROT AT AAG AMAT LAA 


aaqufrn ay defanfrenay a) 
SUT Ua aT AY Akar tay Fest 23 


The seller of his wife, a gaoler, a 
horsedealer, and one who. deserts his 
adherents, falls into the Taptaloha (red-hot 
iron) hell. He who commits incest with a 
daughter-in-law or a daughter is cast into the 
Mahajv4la hell (or that of great flame): and he 
who is disrespeccful to his spiritual guide, who 
is abusive to his betters, who reviles the 
Vedas, or who sells them, who associates with 
women in a prohibited degree, into the Lavana 
(salt) hell. 


ant fame vata waterranerean 
SateaaGEaT Wagar A As 

a afd fafa & fait a efteana exit 
fagearfeetty aay wetgarier aera: 
CUMS HATH Vea A ATH LGN 
atte aor ser aay GEmaaat: | 
Waa fara ATH WATS VE 11 


A thief and a contemner of prescribed 
observances falls into Vimohana (the place of 
bewildering). He who hates his father, the 
Brahmanas, and the gods, or who spoils 
precious gems, iS punished in the Krmibhaksa 
hell (where worms are his food): and he who 
practises magic rites for the harm of others, in 
the hell called Krmisa (that of insects). The 
vile wretch who eats his meal before offering 
food to the gods, to the manes, or to guests, 
falls into the hell called Lalabhaksa (where 
saliva is given for food). The maker of arrows 
is sentenced to the Vedhaka (piercing) hell: 
and the maker of lances, swords, and other 
weapons, to the dreadful hell called Visasana 
(murderous). 


HAA J AC ATTA 
PORTIA GHS FM AVATAS: 1 VII 
fatrqaaescat ata farsrays AT: 
MaN-Aa-Tars art caureyq al 
fashet araron aif aaa Aes fest Vel 


178 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





WMa-HaHeart-J-are-faesarT| 
Weta afer ae fETATA Ve 
Tria seat: Hose Ween 

wet mfefrasta oder a at fit: 201 
ammeret faret: yrenfraranra : | 
Sherry wae ae fasetord a A 2 gH 
WSIS I At AaTUiy az: | 
Ya:urnfanat walefeat fe a 

T POY AKAMA Henrsiteaas Ai 2 I 


He who takes unlawful gifts goes to the 
Adhomukha (or head inverted) hell; as does 
one who offers sacrifices to improper objects, 
and an observer of the stars (for the prediction 
of events). He who eats by himself sweetmeats 
mixed with his rice,’ and a Brahmana who 
vends Lac, flesh, liquors, sesamum, or salt, or 
one who commits violence, fall into the hell 
(whcre mattcr nows, or; Pityavaha; as do they 
who rear cats. cocks, goats, dogs, hogs, or 
birds. Public performers,’ fishcrmen, the 
follower of one born in adultery, a poisoner, 
an informer, one who lives by his wife's 
prostitution’ one who attends to secular affairs 
on the days of the Parvas (or full and new 
moon. etc.),* an incendiary, a treacherous 
friend, a soothsayer, one who _ performs 
religious ceremonies for rustics, and those 
who sell the acid Asclepias, used in sacrifices, 


Penta FT UAT TART Bu Mt 


He who want only cuts down trees goes to 
the Asipatravana hell (the leaves of whose 
trees are swords): and a tender on sheep, and 
hunter of deer, to the hell termed Vahnijvala 
(or fiery name); as do those who apply fire to 
unbaked vessels (potters) . The violator of a 
vow, and one who breaks the rules of his 
order, falls into the Sandansga (or heli of 
pincers): and the religious student who sleeps 
in the day, and is, though unconsciously, 
defiled; and they who, though mature, are 
instructed in sacred literature by their children, 
receive punishment in the hell called 
Svabhojana (where they feed upon dogs). 


Wea UY BACH: PAST VAT: 


AY FPA: TET ATTA: | 2 
BAT TAT AM AAT 


RIT AA YR THPAT TAL 219 
anitemiaegar at pater a aT 
adn Arar ater Fray water A etl 


These hells, and hundreds and thousands of 
others, are the places in which sinners pay the 
penalty of their crimes. As numerous as are 
the offences that men commit, so many are the 
hells in which they are punished : and all who 
deviate from the duties imposed upon them by 
their caste and condition, whether in thought, 
word, or deed, are sentenced to punishment in 


go to the Rudhirandha hell (whose wells are of the regions of the damned.’ 


blood). He who destroys a _ bee-hive, or 
pillages a hamler, is condemned to the 
Vaitarani hell. He who causes impotence, 
trespasses on others' lands, is impure, or who 
lives by fraud, is punished in the hell called 
(black, or) Krsna. 

sifauaadt ala aqaatel gate a: 

sitchen yeaa afesaret wafer an 2311 

area fat! ada & aroreay afger: 

Sart clave Bay carrera faeqeey a: Vwi 

PETA WTR 

feanant a trad Y aT serait: 


ar: forifieeerd Aadfeta gaat: | 
SAAT Aart: Tahar AAT 221 
wa: faratsener wer: weal AT: 
eT ae IEA AMTHATN 3 01 
Aer: ween fatraryararetaM 
aa Ma Waraet! Araya: 113 eH 
Maat Hata: Tat Mera AHA! | 
WIS Ales ATH WATTS SE: 11 3 21 
The gods in heaven are beheld by the 


inhabitants of hell, as they move with their 
heads inverted; whilst the gods, as they cast 


BOOK IT, CHAP. 6 


179 





their eyes downwards, behold the sufferings of 
those in hell.'” The various stages of existence, 
Maitreya, are inanimate things, fish. birds, ani- 
mals, men, holy men, gods, and liberated 
spirits; each in succession a thousand degrees 
superior to that which precedes it: and through 
these stages the beings that are either in 
heaven or in hell are destined to proceed, until 
final emancipation be obtained.'' That sinner 
goes to Naraka who negtects the due expiation 
of his guilt. 

TORTTRaaT wraERns Az Au 

AMT ay TET Wreath waa: 13 3 

Ure Taft WR eI Ft aE: 

waar Waa! Sy: TARTSTaTET: 113 Yl 

Warrant qantas a 

OT TTA HOTT STAT ATTN 3 4 I 

aa Wasqaa SF eT Ta: WTA 

WaBrrg Tas ela erot ATTN BE 

Wrafatet dear Taner ey WaT 

ATO ae Bal: Waa AT 39 

famyearcon etrorereraererasaa: | 

its warfa cantfereren faetsyataran 3 cu 

arged Wal aes TTA 

Tea Bat! Sagara WETTI 3 el 

Sq ARISTA Pag reararg | 

aq WOT argeafa ginahrayrryi x o II 

Tecate fant dey yest WA! 

4 alfa Ate At: Paton: v ai 


For, Maitreya, suitable acts of explation 
have been enjoined by the great sages for 
evcrykind of crime.’? Arduous penances for 
ercat sins, trifling ones for minor offences, 
have been propounded by Svayambhuva and 
others: but reliance upon Krsna is far better 
than any such expiatory acts, as religious 
austerity, or the like. Let any one who repents 
of the sin of which he may have been culpable 
have recourse to this best of all expiations, 
rcmembrance of Hari:'? by admidday, a man 


shall be quickly cleaned from all guilt: the 
while heap of worldly sorrows is dispersed by 
meditating on Hari; and his worshipper, 
looking upon heavenly fruition as an 
impediment to felicity, obtains final 
emancipation. He whose mind is devoted to 
Hari in silent prayer, burnt-offering, or 
adoration, is impatient even of the glory of the 
king of th gods, Of what avail is ascent to the 
summit of heaven, if it is necessary to return 
from thence to earth? How different is the 
meditation on Vasudeva, which is the seed of 
eternal freedom! Hence, Muni, the man who 
thinks of Visnn, day and night, goes not to 
Naraka after death, for all his sins are atoned 
for. 


Ta wiftent: want acHeaigaaa: | 

Ae TaR SF uragee fee v 211 
ardent ¢:4M yareteare a 

RTT WT VARTA AY AKA HAZ 3 
aes Waa yal YAS TaT BTA 

aes ATT AT: WATeTA A AAA ¥ vil 
aqeNe Sales Ae A a far Garay! 
Waa: Ufoass eager: 4 I 
WA Ut Tal A TANT VET 
arereatad fad a wre faaed aH 
faenfaafa Aaa! arAaaraacai ¥ «II 


Heaven (or Svarga) is that which delights 
the mind; hel (or Naraka) is that which gives it 
pain: hence vice is called hell; virtue is called 
heaven.’ The selfsame thing is applicable to 
the production of pleasue or pain, of malice or 
of anger. Whence then can it be considered as 
essentialy the same with either? That which at 
one time is a source of enjoyment, becomes at 
another the cause of suffering; and the same 
thing may at diferent seasons excite wrath, or 
conciliate favour. It follows, then, that nothing 
is in itself either pleasurable or painful; and 
pleasure and pain, and the like, are merely 
definitions of various statcs of mind. That 
which alone is tiuth is wisdom; but wisdom 


180 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





may be the cause of confinement to existance; 
for all this universe is wisdom, there is nothing 
different from it; and consequently, Maitreya, 
you are to conclude that both knowledge and 
ignorance are comprised in wisdom.” 


VaRATN Gat Wat West Yar: 
Waren at Valier ater acart fen von 
aya: Waasta greaatior Fem: 
peu Warned fer ya: safest xc 
gfe sitfaegaer fedratst wetsera: | 
I have thus described to you the orb of the 
earth; the regions below its surface, or Patalas; 
and the Narakas, or hells; and have briefly 
cnumerated its oceans, mountains, continents, 


regions and rivers: what else do you wish to 
heat? 


NOTES 


]. The Bhagavata places the Narakas above the 
waters. The commentator on our text endeavours to 
reconcile the difference, by explaining the text to 
imply a dark cavity in which the waters are 
rcceived, not the original abysses where they were 
collected at first, and above which Tartarus lies: 
TAMVST MAT GyAA | 

2. Some of these names are the same that are 
given by Manu; b. IV. V. 88-90. Kullika Bhtta 
refers to the Markandeya P. for a description of the 
twenty-one divisions of hell; but the account there 
given is not more ample than that of ur text. The 
Bhagavata enumerates twenty-eight, but many of 
the names differ from the above. In the last instance 
the term Avichi is either inaccurately repeated, or 
the adjuctive Apara (atdifeqerat: ) is intended to 
distinguish it from the previous Avichi. In Many, 
MahAvichi occurs. 

3. The Padma P. (Kriya Yoga Sara) and the Siva 
Dharma, which appears to be a section of the 
Skanda Purana, contain a number of interesting 
circumstances previous to the infliction of 
punishment. It apears also from them that Yama 
fulfils the office of judge of the dead, as well as 
sovereign of the damend; all that die appearing 
before him, and being confronted with Chitragupra, 
the recorder, by whom their actions actions have 


been registered. The virtuous are thence conveyed 
to Svarga, or Elysium, whilst the wicked are driven 
to the different regions of Naraka, or Tartarus. 

4. Who teaches the Veda for hire. This notion 
still prevails, and renders the few Pandits who are 
acquainted with the Vedas very unwilling to teach 
them for a gratuity. 

5. Tereby, observes the commentator, defrauding 
or disappointing children. 

6. Rangopajivina (tEIshfaA: ) :the commentator 
explain it wrestlers and boxers, but Ranga applies 
to any stage or arena. 

7. The term in the text is Mahishika, which 
might mean a feeder of buffaloes; but the 
commentator quotes a text from the Smrti, 
authorizing the sanse above followed. 

8. This is the interpretation of Parvak4ri; it is 
also read Parvagami, he who cohabits with his wife 
on prohibited days. 

9. An account of Naraka is found in only a few 
of the Puranas, and in less detail than in the text. 
The Bhagavata and Vayu have similar descriptions 
of them. The Markandeya enters into detail in some 
of the instances only. A short account is found in 
the Siva, Garuda, and Brahma Vaivartta Purana and 
in the Kasi Khanda of the Skanda Purana. The 
fullest descriptions, however, are those mentioned 
in a previous note as being in the Siva Dharma of 
the Skanda, and Kriya Yoga Sara of the Padma; 
works of a somewhat equivocal character, and 
belonging rather to Tantra than Puranik literature. 

10. The commentator observes that the sight of 
heavenly bliss is given to the damend in order to 
exacerbate their torments; whilst the inflications of 
hell are exhibited to the gods to teach them 
disregard of even heavenly enjoyments, as they are 
but of temporary durations. 

11. That is, when punishment or reward in hell 
or heaven, proportioned to the sin or virtue of the 
individual, has been received, he must be born 
again as a Stone or plant, and gradually mgrate 
through the several inferior conditions, until he is 
once more born a man; his future state is then in his 
own power. 

12. Manu is here especially intended, as the 
commentator observes. 

13. Tis remcmbrance (GAM) of Visnu is the 
frequent reiteration of any or all of his names: 
hence the lower orders of Hindus procure a starling 


BOOK IH, CHAP. 7 181 





or patrot, that, in the act of teaching it to cry Rama 
or Krsna or Radha, they may themselves repeat 
these appelatons; the simple recitation of which, 
even if accidentally, irreverently, or reluctantly 
performed, is meritorious. Thus according to the 
Visnu Dharma Tantra : Vara aay Aer Weds 
aaa arian aa fered aan eda woh 
eerraty ya: | aresats eget cocoa fe was: 'Let 
a man ever and every where repeat the names of the 
discus-armed (Visnu); for its repetition, even by 
one who is impure, is a means of purification. Hari 
removes all sins, even when invoked by evil- 
minded persons, as fire burns one by whom it is 
unwillingly approached.’ 


14. The object of the text, according to the 
commentator is to show that the common notions 
of heaven and hell are erroneous; that they are only 
temporal pleasure and temporal pain; and virtue 
and vice, being the origion of transient, and 
therefore unreal effects, are themselves unrealities: 
there is nothing real but faith in Visnu. 


15 Text and comment are here somewhat 
obscure; but the purport of the former seems to be 
the explanation of the existence of Jnan, wisdom, 
both as a genus and a species : in the former case it 
is all that is; and in the latter, it may be either true 
or false wisdom : the latter being influenced by 
notions of self or individuality, and therefore the 
cause of confinement to existence; the former 
dissipating the belief of self, and being therefore 
the cause of liberation from bodily being : 
TITAS Welt SM Saad aed A 
AaTaeTe | 


2K 2K 2K 


BOOK I, CHAP. 7 


181 





CHAPTER 7 


AAAS: 
(qaifexennt we- oars WIT) 
axa sara 
aid Yat Tar Addehaet wan 
Vactlenigenry rary AG eTTAS FAM kU 
qa We Wao Bea AAT 
Aarea VEIT Wet wa UCTS VI 


Maitreya said—-The sphere of the whole 
earth has been described to me by you, 
excellent Brahmana, and I am now desirous to 
hear an account of the other spheres above the 
world, the Bhuvar-loka and the rest, and the 
situation and the dimensions of the celestial 
luminaries. 


TU Sata 


Va- aerate aaa 

wayxahasen areadt yfadt ya 3 

aaron yrrar faxacatausend| 

Wear & earanuseay FA SII 

Was J At Aq! quserq 

meng fearacenta nuset yiferr: Fer 4 

qo yaaee F ari Fryer 

TAOS PATUTA Wega & I 

% we waft ger gal AaTVSTA 

AANA F GTM PAT: 1 91 

STeTeRIShA Yea TSA Sater: | 

cere vires Raat saguifeds i cil 

tide Reet werner: | 

Bafenvsst Wane FRAT eH 

wire USA Mags AAT: | 

Tie: ares Sifter SF Gazi! Poll 

deleted aferqere war! 

SATA YLT STI AT SATS! 22K 

Parasara said—The sphere of the earth (or 

Bhir-loka), comprehending its oceans, 
mountains, and rivers, extends as far as it is 
illuminated by the rays of the sun and moon, 
and to the same extent, both in diameter and 
circumference, the sphere of the sky (Bhuvar- 
loka) spreads above it (as far upwards as to the 
planetary sphere, or Svar-loka).' The solar orb 
is situated a hundred thousand leagues from 
the earth; and that of the moon an equal 
distance from the sun. At the same interval 
above the moon occurs the orbit of all the 


lunar constellations. The planet Budha 
(Mercury) is two hundred thousand leagues 


182 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





above the lunar mansions. Sukra (Venus) is at 
the same distance from Mercury. Angdraka 
(Mars) is as far above Venus; and the priest of 
the gods (Brhaspati, or Jupiter) as far from 
Mars: whilst Saturn (Sani) is two hundred and 
fifty thousand leagues beyond Jupiter. The 
sphere of the seven Rsis (Ursa Major) is a 
hundred thousand leagues above Saturn: and at 
a similar height above the seven Rsis is 
Dhruva (the pole-star), the pivot or axis of the 
whole planetary circle. Such, Maitreya, is the 
elevation of the three spheres (Bhir, Bhuvar, 
Svar) which form the region of the 
consequences of works. The region of works is 
here (or in the land of Bharata).’ 


qalag Wectent aa a accents: | 
Uaaraterd aa t Heart: 20 
BRE o Wal wal wa 7 FET: Ga: | 
SSA: afar AAAS: 1 3 1 
UTR Ue Weta aT: FAT 
aust aa a sar: frat arefarafarat: 11 Vv 


USO wretany waar fare 
STAT a Tere fs A PAI AGI 


Above Dhruva, at the distance of ten 
million leagues, lies the sphere of saints, or 
Mahar-loka, the inhabitants of which dwell in 
it throughout a Kalpa, or day of Brahma. At 
twice that distance is situated Jana-loka, where 
Sanandana and other pure-minded sons of 
Brahma reside. At four times the distance, 
between the two last, lies the Tapo-loka (the 
sphere of penance), inhabited by the deities 
called Vaibhrajas, who are unconsumable by 
fire. At six times the distance (or twelve 
Crores, a hundred and twenty millions of 
leagues) is situated Satya-loka, the sphere of 
truth, the inhabitants of which never again 
know death.’ 


weTerg aq fafa seater piace 

a Yee: Waneaat fareraser ware: 1 9g 1 
afryarat ay frafegrrafaay 

qaciarg disarm fara gfraan gol 


qaqardt wa fant ager 

Tarte: Bshe Wed ceneearfadas il Ve tl 
Aeleatad Aah Aer! ufraeat 

TART AAA HAH TAT VII 
Sanaa eee sft ya: 

War vate Heard atseat 7 farvafn 2 ott 
Ua Ga Har cheat Waa! wlerareal 

Walenta I Waa Teresa faxazt: 11 2 vi 


Wherever earthy substance exists, which 
may be traversed by the feet, that constitutes 
the sphere of the earth, the dimensions of 
which I have already recounted to you. The 
region that extends from the earth to the sun, 
in which the Siddhas and other celestial beings 
move, is the atmospheric sphere, which also I 
have described. The intervai between the sun 
and Dhruva, extending fourteen hundred 
thousand leagues, is called by those who are 
acquainted with thc system of the universe the 
heavenly sphere. These three spheres are 
termed transitory: the thrce highest, Jana, 
Tapa, and Satya are styled durable:* Mahar- 
loka, as situated between the two, has also a 
mixed character; for although it is descrted at 
the end of the Kalpa, it is not destroyed. These 
seven spheres, together with the P4talas, 
forming the extent of the whole world, I have 
thus, Maitreya, explained to you. 


WaauSHee freee Vlganercan 
Heras BM Ast Waal A AMAIA 2 21 
SRT WIA AAAS, Te FAA 
Ralsrquherisa afeat afear ae: 230 
alas agar arguaar! seat aa: 
aenfeat wt: ashe wear urate Ve 
SMTA AAA BA aI 

Tera AAS Wa AAT 4 II 
SAA A TIT: Tease faa 
TEP ASTANATUT SIT A AAT WEI 
SHITANTT TA: AT wT FA! 
RUSTY Asa Agawagats a 


BOOK II, CHAP. 7 


183 





Seat aa aa atfeantfesratt A 211 
arevataaar det fret req ara 

Wa saeray SATA AAAS ST 1 VA 
WIS Wide wdyaenpan 

fame verge! qdt daraafiait 2¢11 
Wa: VT VINTAHI WNT A 
ATO A Wl ARTA 3 0 I 


The world is encompassed on every side 
and above and below by the shell of the egg of 
Brahma, in the same manner as the seed of the 
wood-apple’ is invested by its rind. Around 
the outer surface of the shell flows water, for a 
Space equal to ten times the diameter of the 
world. The waters, again, are encompassed 
exteriorly by fire; fire by air; and air by Mind; 
Mind by the origin of the elements 
(Ahamk4ra); and that by Intellect: each of 
these extends ten times the breadth of that 
which it encloses; and the last is encircled by 
the chief Principle, Pradhana,° which is 
infinite, and its extent cannot be enumerated: 
it is therefore called the boundless and 
illimitable cause of all existing things, 
supreme nature, or Prakrti; the cause of all 
mundane eggs, of which there are thousands 
and tens of thousands, and millions and 
thousands of millions, such as has been 
described.’ Within Pradhana resides Soul, 
diffusive, conscious, and self-irradiating, as 
fire is inherent in flint,” or sesamum oil in its 
seed. Nature (Pradhana) and soul (Pum§4n) are 
both of the character of dependents, and are 
encompassed by the energy of Visnu, which is 
one with the soul of the world, and which is 
the cause of the separation of those two (soul 
and nature) at the period of dissolution; of 
their aggregation in the continuance of things; 
and of their combination at the season of 
creation.’ 


BN Beat Het aay fafa aforenrerery 
Trea feHedan fat: WATT SATTATI 3 8H 
BM MT UEU TereaHeanaaye: | 


snfedharg safe dearer ft aa 3 2 

Wrafat AANA: WaT FAT: | 

AS ACHAT TAT FTI 3 3 At 

TWanearpar ya Sea WeeTes: | 

FANART: AAT ATA TET: | 3 XI 

AT YATRA YAO Yar: | 

SATE FAME AAMT ATTA: | 

AAT AUT TATA ATTA 3 I 

AERA, TATA: ATLUT TAT: | 

wa ufos faut wary eft: 3&1 

In the same manner as the wind ruffles the 

surface of the water in a hundred bubbles, 
which of themselves are inert, so the energy of 
Visnu influences the world, consisting of inert 
nature and soul. Again, as a tree, consisting of 
root, stem, and branches, springs from a 
primitive seed, and produces other seeds, 
whence grow other trees analogous to the first 
in species, product, and origin, so from the 
first unexpended germ (of nature, or Pradhana) 
spring Mahat (Intellect) and the other 
rudiments of things; from them proceed the 
grosser elements; and from them men and 
gods, who are succeeded by sons and the sons 
of sons. In the growth of a tree from the seed, 
no detriment occurs to the parent plant, neither 
is there any waste of beings by the generation 
of others. In like manner as space and time and 
the rest are the cause of the tree (through the 
materiality of the seed), so the divine Hari is 
the cause of all things by successive 
developments (through the materiality of 
nature). ” | 

feaa ser Yt Aret wary Ta 

BOS BTA FST att Aga VME: 1 FVII 

ga: Boy wat & arenfaatanrers: | 

WET AAA ATA AAATTI 3 CU 

TO SAR AY aE: WALA: | 

faye MATa weSeA TAT A 3 V1 


As all the parts of the future plant, existing 
in the seed of rice, or thé root, the culm, the 


184 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





leaf, the shoot, the stem, the bud, the fruit, the 
milk, the grain, the chaff, the ear, 
spontaneously evolve when they are in 
approximation with the subsidiary means of 
growth (or earth and water), so gods, men, and 
other beings, involved in many actions (or 
necessarily existing in those states which are 
the consequences of good or evil acts), 
become manifested only in their full growth, 
through the influence of the energy of Visnu. 


au fay: wt gel aa: Wafae TAI 
Wel at at ad afeaey waver volt 
qe Ta Ad Wl ay Bead wey wari 
TA TAA TATA TATU ¥ git 

a Ua yomplternant WT A: 
derma aa wd ofa aa a fastens ei 
oat Grarott wt Set HAT: 

FU WHAHATT TA AAI 

ate aerrernergradt— 

SU fate cafafenatet Su x30 

ote sifacoygaray fxirarsy erasers: | 


This Visnu is the supreme spirit (Brahma), 
from whence all this world proceeds, who is 
the world, by whom the world subsists, and in 
whom it will be resolved. That spirit (or 
Brahma) is the supreme state of Visnu, which 
is the essence of all that is visible or invisible; 
with which all that is, is identical; and whence 
all animate and inanimate existence is derived. 
He is primary nature: he, in a perceptible form, 
is the world: and in him all finally melts; 
through him all things endure. He is the 
performer of the rites of devotion; he is the 
rite: he is the fruit which it bestows: he is the 
implements by which it is performed. There is 
nothing besides the illimitable Hari. 


NOTES 


1. Bhir-loka, the terrestrial sphere, is earth and 
the lower regions; from thence to the sun is the 
Bhuvar-loka, or atmospheric sphere; and from the 
sun to dhruva is the Svar-loka, or heaven; as 


subsequently explained in the text, and in other 
Puranas. 

2. A similar account of the situations and 
distances of the planets occurs in the Padma, 
Ktrma, and Vayu Puranas. The Bhagavata has one 
or two varieties, but they are of no great 
importance. 

3. An account of these Lokas is met with only in 
a few of the Puranas, and is not much more 
detailed in them than in our text. The Vayu is most 
circumstantial. According to that authority, Mahar, 
which is so called from a mystical term Maha, is 
the abode of the Ganadevas, the Yamas and others, 
who are the regents or rulers of the Kalpa, the 
Kalpadhikaris: they are so designated also in the 
Kirma. The Kasi Khanda refers the name to 
Mahas, light, the sphere being invested with 
radiance (Heatad). Its inhabitants are also called 
lords of the Kalpa: but the commentator explains 
this to denote Bhrgu and the other patriarchs, 
whose lives endure for a day of Brahma. The 
different accounts agree in stating, that when the 
three lower spheres are consumed by fire, Mahar- 
loka is deserted by its tenants, who repair to the 
next sphere, or Jana-loka. Jana-loka, according to 
the Vayu, is the residence of the Rsis and demigods 
during the night of Brahma, and is termed Jana 
because the patriarchs are the progenitors of 
mankind. The Kasi Khanda agrees with the Visnu 
in peopling it with Sanandana and the other ascetic 
sons of Brahma, and with Yogis like themselves. 
These are placed by the Vayu in the Tapo-loka, and 
they and the other sages, and the demigods, after 
repeated appearances in the world, become at last 
Vairajas in the Brahma or Satya-loka. After many 
devine ages of residence there with Brahma, they 
are, along with him, absorbed, at the end of his 
existence, into the indiscrete: sera deta wafer 
was q wed aaah md The commentator on the 
Kasi Khanda explains Vairaja to mean relating to, 
or derived from, Brahma or Viraj: fecrantonenica 
amm:! The Vairajas are there, as in the Visnu 
Purana, placed in the Tapo-loka, and are explained 
to be ascetics, mendicants, anchorets, and penitents, 
who have completed a course of rigorous 
austerities: wafeqaa: fareamiot 8 aoe 
Tages gq sacaatv It may by doubted, 
however, if the Pauraniks have very precise notions 
regarding these spheres and their inhabitants. The 


BOOK Ii, CHAP. 8 


185 





Puranas of a decidedly sectarial character add other 
and higher worlds to the series. Thus the Kiirma 
identifies Brahma-loka with Visnu-loka, and has a 
Rudra-loka above it. The Siva places Visnu-loka 
above Brahm-loka, and Rudra-loka above that. In 
the Kasi Khanda we have, instead of those two, 
Vaikuntha and Kailasa, as the lofty worlds of Visnu 
and Siva; whilst the Brahma Vaivartta has above all 
a Go-loka, a world or heaven of cows and Krsna. 
These are all evidently additions to the original 
system of seven worlds, in which we have probably 
some relation to the seven climates of the ancients, 
the seven stages or degrees of the earth of the 
Arabs, and the seven heavens of _ the 
Mohammedans, if not to the seven Amshaspends of 
the Parsis. Seven, suggested originally perhaps by 
the seven planets, seems to have been a favourite 
number with various nations of antiquity. Amongst 
the Hindus it was applied to a variety of sacred or 
mythological objects, which are enumerated in a 
verse in the Hanuman Nataka. Rama is described 
there as piercing seven palm-trees with an arrow, 
on which other groups of seven take fright, as the 
seven steeds of the sun, the seven spheres, Munis, 
seas, continents, and mothers of the gods. #yat. aq 
wT Ta Wa: Aa: Bam! at wa Ww AM 
TA ITTASTATMANSS 

4. Kritika and Akritika; literally “made and 
unmade': the former being renewed every Kalpa, 
the latter perishing only at the end of Brahmi's life. 

5. Of the Kapittha (Feronia Elephantum). 

6. See before the order in which the elements are 
evolved (Bk. J, ch. II). 

7, The followers of Anaximander and 
Democritus taught “an ‘an infinity of worlds,’ and 
that not only successive in that space which this 
world of ours is conceived now to occupy, in 
respect of the infinity of past and future time, but 
also a contemporary infinity of coexistent worlds, 
at all times, throughout endless and unbounded 
space.” Intellect, system, I. 303. 

8. Literally ‘in wood,’ the attrition of two pieces 
of which does not create, but developes, their latent 
heat and flame. 

9. This is Scipio’s dream the divinity 1s made 
the cxternal limit of the universe: “Novem tibi 
orbibus vel potius globis connexa sunt omnia, 
quorum unus est caelestis externus qui reliquos 
omnes complectitur, summus ipse deus arcens et 


continens ceteros:” which Macrobius explains as to 
be understood of the Supreme First Cause of all 
things, only in respect of his supremacy over all, 
and from his comprehending as well as creating all 
things, and being regarded as the soul of the world: 
“Quod et virtutes omnes, quae illam _ primae 
omnipotentiam summitates sequuntur, aut ipse 
faciat aut ipse contineat: ipsam denique Jovem 
veteres vocaverunt, et apud theologos Jupiter est 
mundi anima.” In somn. Scip. c. XVII. 

10. The two passages in parentheses are the 
additions of the commentator, intendcd to explain 
how the deity is the material cause of the world. He 
is not so of his own essence, not so immediately, 
but through the interposition of Pradhana serascaahs 
ai: wefderda a caetute wat ‘As however he is the 
source of Prakrti, he must be considered the 
material as well as immaterial cause of being.’ 


kR* 


BOOK Ii, CHAP. 8 185 





CHAPTER 8 
STEUTSeaeT: 


(eaaarnigart, Herat Faery, 
TETa safer) 
UUs Sara 
AeA TMV Ta Yat! 
ad: HATO Waray syoyet FH eH 
ParaSara said—- Having thus described to 
you the system of the world in general, I will 


now explain to you the dimensions and 
situations of the sun and other luminaries. 


UAT AAO sATAT WY FAI 
sorevseane fan yeraTan 21 
Uaacan wa gaara a1 
QRAMTY Tener we wae 3 
forfirafa wart qourtraeraraat 
aararTay Heel ares wafer vi 
creanherdeartar fettaiset faced: | 
USM F ASI BATT WTA GI 
TATA: TUNG TSA: | 


186 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





SeASMAAY MST FAN WT Al 
fadtaset g vers afer aerareeti gu 


ea WA asaita dat aah A yo 
Treat wT gag sant fayda a 
BIST UahepHscihs eat Tas9t 


The chariot of the sun is nine thousand 
leagues in length, and the pole is of twice that 
longitude;' the axle is fifteen millions and 
seven hundred thousand leagues long;’ on 
which is fixed a wheel with three naves, five 
spokes, and six peripheries, consisting of the 
ever-during year; the whole constituting the 
circle or wheel of time.’ The chariot has 
another axle, which is forty-five hundred 
leagues long.* The two halves of the yoke are 
of the same length respectively as the two 
axles (the longer and the shorter). The short 
axle, with the short yoke, is supported by the 
pole-star: the end of longer axle, to which the 
wheel of the car is attached, moves on the 
M4nasa mountain.” The seven horses of the 
sun’s car are the metres of the Vedas, Gayatri, 
Brhati, Usnih, Jagati, Tristubh, Anustubh, and 
Pankti. 

UMA F Ysat ara Fat 

cau WAN wiles THT TT 
SAT BT GT aa ATTA B sg cH 
THAT VR ANAT Hat aa 


aa yen were are a farang 


The city of Indra is situated on the eastern 
side of the Mdanasottara mountain; that of 
Yama on the southern face; that of Varuna on 
the west; and that of Soma on the north; 
named severally Vasvokasaré, Sarhyamani, 
Mukhya (or Sukha) and Vibhavari.° 


cSt Tat aferora: feregira ater 

Aaa! spray srqeatiaal wardgqa:u got 
VENTAAAUMATT way TES: t 
SAMA: UL: WT Bihar sergraaran Veit 
ferns vatet adaret aah: 
adaiag Aaa! Frerger a ATS 


Wagty da Wdarerg Aaya 

fafegng rasrerg wat gery! fayrg an e3n 
aaa ayaa Mary W WaTyea: WA: | 
frags data aarerat Ta: eve 


The glorious sun, Maitreya, darts like an 
arrow on his southern course, attended by the 
constellations of the Zodiac. He causes the 
difference between day and night, and is the 
divine vehicle and path of the sages who have 
overcome the inflictions of the world. Whilst 
the sun, who 1s the discriminator of all hours, 
shines in one continent in midday, in the 
opposite Dvipas, Maitreya, it will be midnight: 
rising and setting are at all seasons, and are 
always (relatively) opposed in the different 
cardinal and intermediate points of the 
horizon. When the sun becomes visible to any 
people, to them he is said to rise; when he 
disappears from their view, that is called his 
setting. There is in truth neither rising nor 
setting of the sun, for he is always, and these 
terms merely imply his presence and his 
disappearance. 


TSTMS WET: WART TA: | 

SeaTRAOTSH fe Veet Ta AGU 

WRT Wt ET MAT YTATT 

facut gt faavreesty BOs Ft FAT gg It 

Saat aaurair weTEr AT Ta: 

Wa: Ut Badiiaret Fase gon 

SCAMS Ta Tatar feyit 

Ua FTE Aah Aa YS TT UPA 

MASHUP ST TANT; BAT 

aa aiketsder wast ger: War! 

a & facereraren wetoquanter a 93 

aeuergqaiea & feanna: aca fe 

Raat FiaTaalot WHsAal Ads Bot! 

When the sun (at midday) passes over 

either of the cities of the gods, on M4nasottara 
mountain (at the cardinal points), his light 


extends to three cities and two intermediate 
points: when situated in an intermediate point, 


BOOK II, CHAP. 8 


187 





he illuminates two of the cities and three 
intermediate points (in either case one 
hemisphere). From the period of his rise the 
sun moves with increasing rays until noon, 
when he proceeds towards his setting with rays 
diminishing (that is, his heat increases or 
diminishes in proportion as he advances to, or 
recedes from, the meridian of any place). The 
east and west quarters are so called from the 
sun’s rising and setting there.’ As far as the 
sun shines in front, so far ne shines behind and 
on either hand, illuminating all places except 
the summit of Meru, the mountain of the 
immortals; for when his rays reach the court of 
Brahma&, which is there situated, they are 
repelled and driven back by the overpowering 
radiance which there prevails: consequently 
there is always the alternation of day and 
night, according as the divisions of the 
continent lie in the northern (or southern) 
quarter, or inasmuch as they are situated north 
(or south) of Meru.® 


ww facta taraed west arent 
fasreaferrat wat afedarg wearer 2 Bl 
afaqieatat ard ferenfasria fist! 

sia afadatmed: Gat: Waa 2 2 
eat WTA varnoraefaon 
UTA Maes Fear ETTN 2 3 
efauinneyag Vafrstt wet 

BEN PATTIE: WAT PASTA 2 XI 
ara fe waaay feat awayrATA! 

fet fasifa caret arentserytaien 
AAMT AAT MATT 2 4 


The radiance of the solar orb, when the sun 
has set, is accumulated in fire, and hence fire 
is visible at a greater distance by night than by 
day: during the latter a fourth of the rays of 
fire blend with those of the sun, and from their 
union the sun shines with greater intensity by 
day. Elemental light, and heat derived from 
the sun or from fire, blending with each other, 
mutually prevail in various proportions, both 
by day and night. When the sun is present 


either in the southern or the northern 
hemisphere, day or night retires into the 
waters, according as they are invaded by 
darkness or light: it is from this cause that the 
waters look dark by day, because night is 
within them, and they look white by night, 
because at the setting of the sun the light of 
day takes refuge in their bosom.’ 


Us YT F sel Ait arat: 

fararrd Aferaretar alefdent TAT RE 

Heard wars fearnt: | 

ate uit faqaatedt fru Von 

TATRA TAL AT THT: | 

aa: HS AT UST WATT FET ICU 

fasta yay dat ayadt wafer 

Walt Alan Haas AA: AAAI 

ant Ufa: aa aia agasafed fern el 

Tas Pa TTHTSTUTTA: | 

Wet HHH WT Het SAVTTATN 3 oll 

When the sun has travelled in the centre of 

Puskara a thirtieth part of the circumference of 
the globe, his course is equal in time to one 
Muhirtta;’° and whirling round like the 
circumference of the wheel of a potter, he 
distributes day and night upon the earth. In the 
commencement of his northern course, the sun 
passes to Capricornus, thence to Aquarius, 
thence to Pisces, going successively from one 
sign of the Zodiac to another. After he has 
passed through these, the sun attains his 
equinoctial movement (the vernal equinox), 
when he makes the day and night of equal 
duration. Thenceforward the length of the 
night decreases, and the day becomes longer, 
until the sun reaches the end of Gemini, when 
he pursues a different direction, and entering 
Cancer, beings his declension to the south. 


SAHA BM PTT Wari 

aferat wae eee Bile weit 3 el 
afeatiean aret argeracteaery! 
TaTsHS Yfirg areraeds Tafa 3 211 


188 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





qat erage: sherry gerdtarorrertt 
Taepreggaroneel g atte fer! 
Yer RATaSATOT AHABTS MT TT I 3 3 Ut 
PUTRI MT HS TATU 
Baer at: WU Wea: 3 Vit 
wane seu atest afracarg wosha 
MPIAITEd ACHAT 
aevafe waft ara wear 3 kit 
ASMA J MATT At a: 
Ged eragentor wat BreeieeyTq 3 
BAN Weal avai wR wats a ae 
giaus sa were gal vats SF aa 3 91 


HATH MAEY AM AIA Teal 
gan fe axa! ara afta 3 cit 


As the circumference of a potter’s wheel 
revolves most rapidly, so the sun travels 
rapidly on his southern journey: he flies along 
his path with the velocity of wind, and 
traverses a great distance in a short time. In 
twelve Muhirttas he passes through thirteen 
lunar asterisms and a half during the day; and 
during the night he passes through the same 
distance, only in eighteen Muhirttas. As the 
centre of the potter’s wheel revolves more 
slowly than the circumference, so the sun in 
his northern path again revolves with less 
rapidity, and moves over a less space of the 
earth in a longer time, until, at the end of his 
northern route, the day is again eighteen 
Muhitrttas, and the night twelve; the sun 
passing through half the lunar mansions by 
day and by night in those periods respectively. 
As the lump of clay on the centre of the 
potter’s wheel moves most slowly, so the 
polar-star, which is in the centre of the 
zodiacal wheel, revolves very tardily, and ever 
remains in the centre, as the clay continues in 
the centre of the wheel of the potter. 


Sat: HAHA wa Wosenfs A 
feat THs WS WHT vitor a Ss aT seu 


Wale aA SAAT Ath Wer AlAs 

vitor Fist Ger Urest Tat Wet feat AAs ott 
Tama ant ata fearat:! 

SETA AT eH AACA TeTAy FEST x vit 
Wee TAN Yeh Uatatig we fear 
Tfermrormaa delgearenar fet 

ar Ma Weta WAToteTTS THAT w 2 Ut 
fantdhigerd aatra area 

Tat HY vite fer er afafean 

cant way wa faut faaraa y at 


The relative length of the day or night 
depends upon the greater or less velocity with 
which the sun revolves through the degrees 
between the two points of the horizon. In the 
solstitial period, in which his diurnal path is 
quickest, his nocturnal is slowest; and in that 
in which he moves quick by night, he travels 
slowly by day. The extent of his journey is in 
either case the same; for in the course of the 
day and night he passes through all the signs 
of the Zodiac, or six by night, and the same 
number by day: the length and shortness of the 
day are measured by the extent of the signs; 
and the duration of day and night by the period 
which the sun takes to pass through them.'! In 
his northern declination the sun moves 
quickest by night, and slowest by day, in his 
southern declination the reverse is the case. 


sar Ufa: wane afsargead ferq) 
Was UVa AAA Bar-SPM SATA YI 
TRATHTA F ATA VS weAVSraUt 

AVE TAA BT: Tatras VT Y 4 tt 
warafiaa: weet Ae! war 

serad writtront wore fer fer wt 

aa: Wee aes WaTIRTTETHUTA 

dat fatrraredta aq ferafat wargti vio 
Nena Ae aba 

oF Galher F ora aaeypet arftarri wc 


siaat gad a wea wermgeia: | 


BOOK I, CHAF8 


189 





Fal Sa aeargreran Sees AAT: Ye I 
ag war fafa aarat oft: 
Ageconred | PATE Aa TATA 4 ol 
auratsy: wt wat asavatfrrerayl 
SMT ATR TSH: TTI 4 VI 

at wate Snferigrone fer 
SRAM TTSTET ATT Si & 2H 
Aaa sare TeAaTHAATT: | 

U Bhat we wearer Arf Her F TG 3H 
aa: Warf WTA Treat fers: 
AACS TTT: UTA & VI 


The night is called Usa, and the day is 
denominated Vyusta. and the interval between 
them is called Sandhya. On the occurrence of 
the awful Sandhya, the terrific fiends termed 
Mandehas attempt to devour the sun; for 
Brahma denounced this curse upon them, that, 
without the power to perish, they should die 
every day (and revive by night), and therefore 
a fierce contest occurs daily between them and 
the sun.” At this season pious Brahmanas 
scatter water, purified by the mystical Omkara, 
and consecrated by the Gayatri;'* and by this 
water, as by a thunderbolt, the foul fiends are 
consumed. When the first oblation is offered 
with solemn invocations in the morning rite,’ 
the thousand-rayed deity shincs forth with 
unclouded splendour. Omkdra is Visnu the 
mighty, the substance of the three Vedas, the 
lord of speech; and by its enunciation those 
Raksasas are destroyed. The sun is principal 
part of Visnu, and light is his immutable 
essence, the active manifestation of which is 
excited by the mystic syllable Om. Light 
effused by the utterance of Omkara becomes 
radiant, and burns up entirely the Raksasas 
called Mandehas. The performance of the 
Sandhya (the morning) sacrifice must never 
therefore be delayed, for he who neglects it is 
suilty of the murder of the sun. Protected thus 
by the Brahmanas and the pigmy sages called 
Balakhilyas, the sun goes on his course to give 
light to the world. 


carat frtat eer way deat 
FAST BIST WOT, BETS 
far wena waaqe- 
SURAT THT AAT GG I 
sage weulifaart wrany 
TRA YEA A BATS VAT VATING GI 
ear wees Ha J aI 
Wa; WAT: ey AMBIT: AW USN GH 
aa: WRAY Brey AYE AeA: | 
TEMAaede TA BIT FT AAMT <I 
TATA STATS ST VT: | 
TI Ua YR ROTI: Vat Fea: | 
BITS Alt J Be: BANE Va ANGI 
SMI Ee FEU Vs A 
aMuagEed + sedgad Bar & oll 
agasel Badan afer 
sae wad Tis Uberatt areca s eu 
gaa faqaeg fairer 
qemend wat wrafatery aq g 21 
aaa ary seme 
TAU WATS feast & 31 
Fifteen twinklings of the eye (Nimesas) 
make a Kastha; thirty Kasthds, a Kala; thirty 
Kaldas, a Muhirtta (forty-eight minutes); and 
thirty Muhirttas, a day and night: the portions 
of the day are longer or shorter, as has been 
explained; but the Sandhya is always the same 
in increase, or decrease, being only one 
Muhirtta.'? From the period that a line may be 
drawn across the sun (or that half his orb is 
visible) to the expiration of three Muhirttas 
(two hours and twenty-four minutes), that 
interval is called Pratar (morning), forming a 
fifth oration of the day. The next portion, or 
three Muhirttas from morning, is termed 
Sangava (forenoon): the three next Muhairttas 
constitute mid-day: the afternoon comprises 


the next three Muhirttas: he three Muharttas 
following are considered as the evening: and 


190 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





the fifteen Muhfirttas of the day are thus 
classed in five portions of three each. But the 
day consists of fifteen Muhirttas only at the 
equinoxes, increasing or diminishing in 
number in the northern and _ southern 
declinations of the sun, when the day 
encroaches on the night, or the night upon the 
day, The equinoxes occur in the seasons of 
spring and autumn, when the sun enters the 
signs of Aries and Libra. When the sun enters 
Capricorn (the winter solstice), his northern 
progress commences; and his southern when 
he enters Cancer (the summer solstice). 

ferret afaaneriay ara 

af Uses Tart! wer seafeeitadn & vu 

We: Uae Bt Aa aT: | 

ROTI FSAI aaa HAT § & I 

daated: we aqurafacievar: | 

Faya: denver anftrerferettardn & & 1 

Haare waar fet: aaa: | 

SHAT A AGUA: | 

A: USAUENT Hrensst WaT E Ol 

Fifteen days of thirty Muhirttas each are 

called a Paksa (a lunar fortnight); two of these 
make a month; and two months, a solar 
season; three seasons a northern or southern 
declination (Ayana); and those two compose a 
year. Years, made up of four kinds of 
months,'* are distinguished into five kinds; 
and an aggregate of all the varieties of time is 
termed a Yuga, or cycle..The years are 
severally called Samvatsara, Parivatsara, 
Idvtasara, Anuvatsara, and Vatsara. This is the 
time called a Yuga.” 


a: STAI: Wea: ssa faa: 

aftr cer g serio Arat year PT UG SM 
causa wet gad aT 

WaT TAT: hero & 1 

taal w qenal a Waa! fagaq faa: 

dat qeaneraa sath fefaag: | 
amused A AASAa BAAN Voll 


WIN HAH Bay MTA Veit 
fapmart agassr yt! frsrrdsraqiis 
fagirartt aet Yaarwetet Tatra! 

vat Us farrier ahraferta Farag 21 
dea fagaren & aret: quarsfreraa 

ar aaa Say Sa: WATT 9 3 
srenna: fis pata y ary 
anergy faya Hanes rari» vii 


The mountain range that lies most to the 
north (in Bharata-varsa) is called Sringavan 
(the horned), from its having three principal 
elevations (horns or peaks), one to the north, 
one to the south, and one in the centre; the last 
is called the equinoctial, for the sun arrives 
there in the middle of the two seasons of 
spring and autumn, entering the equinoctial 
points in the first degree of Aries and of Libra, 
and making day and night of equal duration, or 
fifteen Muhirttas each. When the sun, most 
excellent sage, is in the first degree of the 
lunar mansion, Krttika and the moon is in the 
fourth of Visakha4; or when the sun is in the 
third degree of Visakha, and the moon. is in the 
head of Krttika (these positions being 
contemporary with the equinoxes), that 
equinoctial season is holy (and is styled the 
Mahavisnubha, or the great equinox).’* At this 
time offerings are to be presented to the gods 
and to the manes, and gifts are to be made to 
the Brahmanas by serious persons; for such 


donations are productive of happiness. 
Liberality at the equinoxes is always 
advantageous to the donor: and day and night; 
seconds, minutes, and hours; intercalary 


months; the day of full moon (Paurnam§si); 
the day of conjunction (Amavasya), when the 
moon rises invisible; the day when it is first 
seen (Sinivali); the day when it first disappears 
(Kuh); the day when the moon is quite round 


BOOK II, CHAP. 8 


19] 





(Raka); and the day when one digit is deficient 
(Anumati), are all seasons when gifts are 
meritorious. 


area EMEA a 
Wa: Yrasrerqat Sd 
TH Wasa seer WE: 
We: WeeMatt Sat CATT & i 


The sun is in his northern declination in 
the months Tapas, Tapasya, Madhu, Madhava, 
Sukra, and Suci; and in his southern in those 
of Nabhas, Nabhasya, Isa, Urja, Sahas, 
Sahasya.”” 


aeaNey FT: Set: AH Waa WaT 
RTA Tea TAT ASA FAA: 199 it 
GAA MATa HENTAI FET 
feat dard: agar yc 


On the Lokaloka mountain, which I have 
formerly described to you, reside the four holy 
protectors of the world, or Sudhaman and 
Sankhapada, the two sons of Kardama, and 
Hiranyaroman, arid Ketumat.”” Unaffected by 
the contrasts of existence, void of selfishness, 
active, and unencumbered by dependents, they 
take charge of the spheres, themselves abiding 
on the four cardinal points of the Lokdaloka 
mountain. } 


fda farfiarr frerar Freaftrar: | 
cage: Peat sat Areas UPlegrq oe 
Sat ANT Stata eferaTT | 
fagar: Fa war tarrcengissiic oll 
dared Were saa ashe: | 
TACT Te AT FelceryErAy: | ¢ Vl 
Werd Fa eared war: a afer: 
afer & yaa waraara at ate Iu 
BAT AAT sa wate: yet a 
aaa vas a UBM Wey ae BN 
Urata yaar aad Prete 
Tanradarn fasta Praca: | 
Bfagefarnt ant fara MERA THAI ¢ 


On the north of Agastya, and south of the 
line of the Goat, exterior to the Vaisvanara 
path, lies the road of the Pitrs.~’ There dwell 
the great Rsis, the offerers of oblations with 
fire, reverencing the Vedas, after whose 
injunctions creation commenced, and who 
wcre discharging the duties of ministrant 
priests: for as the worlds are destroyed and 
renewed, they institute new rules of conduct, 
and reestablish the interrupted ritual of the 
Vedas. Mutually descending from each other, 
progenitor springing from descendant, and 
descendant from progenitor, in the alternating 
succession of births, they repeatedly appear in 
different houses and races along with their 
posterity, devout practices and_ instituted 
observances, residing to the south of the solar 
orb, as long as the moon and stars endure.” 


anata Tafa afer 

FH: Wag: TA CAIT A BANC I 
aa t afer: fay fener sernttor: | 
Beate F yeah Tass a2 Fl 
Serer PATA TANT 
SVR, ara MMA HATH col 
ASTIN AAT W AAR 
PSU ChE RCC CCE UI RAAL 
Gaarenradanresearea regia 

sate: aru: yerasgaa fe Aire ei 
seas ware fe wT 

Feira rearersMGTA SAA eo Nl 
Teeravanar goaarapar feaer: | 
ayers WH wera TATE eB 
aaa wat YF Wraraheat qa: 

ATMA TAT F TAMTAASTTN F Vl 


The path of the gods lies to the north of the 
solar sphere, north of the Nagavithi,”” and 
south of the ‘seven Rsis. There dwell the 
Siddhas, of subdued senses, continent and 
pure, undesirous of progeny, and therefore 
victorious over death: eighty-eight thousand of 
these chaste beings tenant the regions of the 


192 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





sky, north of the sun, until the destruction of 
the universe: they enjoy immortality, for that 
they are holy; exempt from covetousness and 
concupiscence, love and hatred; taking no part 
in the procreation of living beings, and 
detecting the unreality of the properties of 
elementary matter. By immortality is meant 
existence to the end of the Kalpa: life as long 
as the three regions (earth, sky, and heaven) 
last is called exemption from (reiterated) 
death.* The consequences of acts of iniquity 
or piety, such as Brahmanicide or an 
ASsvamedha, endure for a similar period, or 
until the end of a Kalpa,”° when all within the 
interval between Dhruva and the earth 1s 
destroyed. 


sarang gat aa ora: 

Wag famed fost yaa cafe waTTN S31 

Pefadtangrt wai ) 

Tar wa UTS fan yoouraftern ev 

aTguagoaary aftorgranaara:) 

OA TAT T Brat ae fat: Get TaN SGN 

qMgarenaera at at AAT: | 

AM AAMTAM IS TRS: UT WANS eM 

Aaa Wis ted Tera! 

qog fad tara aq fawn: wet veqn eon 

fadta warcad airat cree 

fadagers ae faut: we waqnecn 

afar wfafeat sreary Beet: tat gars) 

ga wu dasaniife Safaeriger fim een 

Tay WAM FEwarasa Weary 

MAI Aaa FATaAi WETAAN Yo ot 

TADISATS ASIA utr Bae: 

Ae arcurat artet AT Feared GA 11 Qo Vt 

The space between the seven Rsis and 

Dhruva,” the third region of the sky, is the 
splendid celestial path of Visnu (Visnupada), 
and the abode of those sanctified ascetics who 


are cleansed from every soil, and in whom 
virtue and vice are annihilated. This is that 


excellent place of Visnu to which those repair 
in whom all sources of pain are extinct, in 
consequence of the cessation of the 
consequences of piety or iniquity, and where 
they never sorrow more. There abide Dharma, 
Dhruva, and other spectators of the world, 
radiant with the superhuman faculties of Vis 
nu, acquired through religious meditation; and 
there are fastened and inwoven to all that is, 
and all that shall ever be, animate or 
inanimate. The seat of Visnu is contemplated 
by the wisdom of the Yogis, identified with 
supreme light, as the radiant eye of heaven. In 
this portion of the heavens of splendid Dhruva 
is stationed, and serves for the pivot of the 
atmosphere. On Dhruva rest the seven great 
planets, and on them depend the clouds. The 
rains are suspended in the clouds, and from the 
rains come the water which is the nutriment 
and delight of all, the gods and the rest; and 
they, the gods, who are the receivers of 
oblations, being nourished by burnt offsprings, 
cause the rain to fall for the support of created 
beings. This sacred station of Visnu, therefore, 
is the support of the three worlds, as it is the 
source of rain. 


wana ue fanaa 
STAT AHA TAroTt FATHTOTAN Yo 2 
ad: Ward Tay Waaaen afer 

TAT CaTTAMAATATN Fo 3 


angus errata aa 

faunfentia at racer forcarsefayt gan go xn 
Aa: AAA SAT: WOT: | 

fasta athararentireerarstet Fern 20 4 N 
ara: Wade: wafad ify) 
TASHA Sift TRAATGUATATTN Ro 
eyes waElrearn wiyrausenag 

WT: Waa at wala UGE goon 

Tet wear a wapign a afer 

Tea Bt daar farprantaeaann ro 211 


Years wear: watste aero 


BOOK I, CHAP. 8 


193 





ere force ster aatarraferss Bre 2081 
wreasteracna fares: | 
wrafacat feat Fret WUT WTATATA 220 11 
STAT Aeret TaN: TT: WT worgafe 
STG Vaa Way HAT ATTA 22H 
aa: faged ward: seearad: | 
anraa weresher ofa Aaa ser eH 
TENT MeTIATa NT FRAT 
faye: werpfagrargfefe te an ee3n 
Sea BAT TTA 
HAIMA: AAT Faron geil 
TASHA FHT WT Uawsamtesdn 
UH Ursa wary athe we far fern eeu 
Tet Teta Sate serra presi a 
feateattt er ard serrate 226 11 
Ad: AT UTA TAT SH TATA 
AYA UL TT Fete erTaeTSNTN Be! 

eter sitferngeror feeraigr areuiseara:t 


From that third region of the atmosphere, 
or seat of Visnu, proceeds the stream that 
washes away all sin, the river Ganga, 
embrowned with the unguents of the nymphs 
of heaven, who have sported in her waters. 
Having her source in the nail of the great toe 
of Visnu's left foot, Dhruva’ reccives her, and 
sustains her day and mght devoutly on his 
head; and thence the seven Rsis practise the 
exercises of austerity in her waters, wreathing 
their braided locks with her waves. The orb of 
the moon, cncompassed by her accumulated 
current, derives augmented lustre from her 
contact. Falling from on high, as she issues 
from the moon, she alights on the summit of 
Meru, and thence flows to the four quarters of 
the earth, for its purification. The  sira, 
Alakanandaé, Caksu, and Bhadraé are four 
branchcs of but one river, divided according to 
the regions towards which it proceeds. The 
branch that is known as the Alakananda was 
borne affcctionately by Mahadeva, upon his 
head, for more than a hundred years, and was 


the river which raised to heaven the sinful sons 
of Sagara, by washing their ashes.** The 
offences of any man who bathes in this river 
are immediately expiated, and unprecedented 
virtue is engendered. Its waters, offered by 
sons to their ancestors in faith for three years, 
yield to the latter rarely attainable 
gratification. Men of the twice-born orders, 
who offer-sacrifice in this river to the lord of 
sacrifice, Purusottama, obtain whatever they 
desire, either here or in heaven. Saints who are 
purified from all soil by bathing in its waters, 
and whose minds are intent on Kesava, acquire 
thereby final liberation. This sacred stream, 
heard of, desired, seen, touched, bathed in, or 
hymncd, day by day, sanctifies all beings; and 
those who, even at a distance of a hundred 
leagues, exclaim “Ganga, Ganga,” atone for 
the sins committed during three previous lives. 
The place whence this river proceeds, for the 
purification of the three worlds, is the third 
division of the celestial regions, the seat of 


Visnu.”” 
Rew 


NOTES 


1, The sun’s case is 10,000 Yojanas broad, and 
as many deep, according to the Vayu and Matsya. 
The Bhagavata makes it thirty-six hundred 
thousand long, and one fourth that broad. The 
Linga agrees with the text. 

2. There is no great difference in this number in 
other accounts. The length of this axle, which 
extends from Meru to Manasa, is nearly equal to 
the semi-diameter of the earth, which, according to 
the Matsya P., is 18,95,000 Yojanas. 

3. The three naves are the three divistons of the 
day, moming, noon, and night; the five spokes are 
the five cyclic years; and the six peripherics are the 
six seasons. The Bhagavata explains the three naves 
to be three periods of the year, of four months each, 
and gives twelve spokes as types of the twelve 
months. The Vayu, Matsya, and Bhavisya Puranas 
enter into much more detail. According to them, the 
parts of the wheel are the same as above described :« 
the body of the car is the year; its upper and lower 
half are the two solstices; Dharma is its flag; Artha 
and Kama the pins of the yoke and axle: night is its 


194 


fender; Nimeshas form its floor; a moment is the 
axle-tree; an instant the pole; minutes are its 
attendants; and hours its harness. 

4. This-shorter axle is, according to the 
Bhagavata, one fourth of the longer. 

5. We are to understand here, both in the axle 
and yoke, two levers, one horizontal, the other 
perpendicular. The horizontal arm of the axle has a 
wheel at one end; the other extremity is connected 
with the perpendicular arm. To the horizontal arm 
of the yoke are harnessed the horses; and its inner 
or right extremity is secured to the perpendicular. 
The upper ends of both perpendiculars are 
supposed to be attached to Dhruva, the pole-star, by 
two aerial cords, which are lengthened in the sun’s 
southern course, and shortened in his norther; and 
retained by which to Dhruva, as to a pivot, the 
wheel of the car traverses the summit of the 
Manasottara mountain on Puskara-dvipa, which 
runs like a ring round the several continents and 
oceans. The contrivance is commonly compared to 
an oil mill, and was probably suggested by that 
machine as constructed in India. As_ the 
Manasottara mountain is but 50,000 leagues high, 
and Meru 84,000, whilst Dhruva is 1500,000, both 
levers are inclined at obtuse angles to the nave of 
the wheel and each other. In images of the sun, two 
equal and semicircular axles connect a central 
wheel with the sides of the car. 

6. In the Linga the city of Indra is called 
Amaravati; and in it and the Vayu that of Varuna 1s 
termed Sukha. 

7. The terms Pirva and Apara mean properly 
‘before and behind’; but ‘before’ naturally denotes 
the east, either because men, according to a text of 
the Vedas, spontaneously face, as if to welcome the 
rising sun, or because they are enjoined by the laws 
so to do. When they face the rising sun, the west is 
of course behind them. The same circumstance 
determines the application of the term Daksina, 
properly ‘right’, or ‘dexterum’, to the south. Uttara, 
‘other’ or ‘last’, necessarily implies the north. 

8. This is rather obscure, but it is made out 
clearly enough in the commentary, and in the 
patrallel passages in the Vayu, Matsya, Linga, 
Kiirma, and Bhagavata. The sun travels round the 
world, keeping Meru always on his right : to the 
spectator who fronts him therefore, as he rises, 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


Meru must be always on the north; and as the sun’s 
rays do not penetrate beyond the centre of the 
mountain, the regions beyond, or to the north of it, 
must be in darkness; whilst those on the south of it 
must be in light: north and south being relative, not 
absolute terms, depending upon the position of the 
spectator with regard to the sun and to Meru. So the 
commentator Aé wetgetdt gel 4am waht wm 4 
ani wet dai a amar) feu: wae wed Aeea! 
qeraen fefin wer ute: <font a Tet fet! It was 
probably through some misapprehension of this 
doctrine that Wilford asserted, “by Meru the 
Pauraniks understand in general the north pole, but 
the context of the Puranas is against this 
supposition”. As. Res. VIII. 286. There is no 
inconsistency, however, in Meru’s being absolutely 
in the centre of the world, and relatively north to 
ihe inhabitants of the several protions, to all of 
whom the east is that quarter where the sun first 
appears, and the other quarters are thereby 
regulated. 

9. Similar notions are contained in the Vayu. 

10. The sun travels at the rate of one-thirtieth of 
the earth’s circumference in a Muhirtta, or 
31,50,000 Yojanas; making the total 9 crores and 
45 lakhs, or 9,45,00,000; according to the Vayu, 
Linga, and Matsya Puranas. 

11. This passage, which is somewhat at 
variance with the general doctrine, that the length 
of the day depends upon the velocity of the sun’s 
course, and which has not been noticed in any other 
Paurdnik text, is defended by the commentator, 
upon the authority of the Jyotis-Sastra, or 
astronomical writings. According to them, he 
asserts, the signs of the Zodiac are of different 
extent. Aquarius, Pisces, and Aries are the shortest; 
Taurus, Capricornus, and Gemini are something 
longer, Leo and Scorpio longer still; and the 
remaining four the longest of all. According to the 
six which the sun traverses, the day or night will be 
the longer or shorter. The text 1s, TTA Ta 
aiigearea fai cet ferat ueital waretetyettari The 
apparent contradiction may however be reconciled 
by understanding the sun’s slow motion, and the 
length of a sign, to be equivalent terms. 

12. The same story occurs in the Vayu, with the 
addition that the Mandehas are three crores in 
number. It seems to be an ancient legend, 
imperfectlyl preserved in some of the Puranas. 


BOOK II, CHAP. 8 


195 





13, The sacred syllable Om has been already 
described (Bk. I. ch. In. I). The Gayatni, or holiest 
verse of the Vedas, not to be uttered to ears 
profane, is a short prayer to the sun, identified as 
the supreme, and occurs in the tenth hymn of the 
fourth section of the third Astaka of the Sarmhita of 
the Rig-veda : dq Ufaqatwa wnt cacy einfe fiat a 
4: Waleard! ‘We meditate on that excellent light of 
the divine sun: may he illuminate our minds.” Such 
is the fear entertained of profaning this text, that 
copyists of the Vedas not infrequently efrain from 
transcribing it, both in the Samhité and Bhasya. 

14. Or, in the text, with the prayer that 
commences with the words Sirya, jyotir, ‘That 
which is in the sun (or light) is adorable’, &c. The 
whole prayer is given in Colebrooke’s account of 
the religious ceremonies of the Hindus. As. Res. V. 
S512 

15. But this comprehends the two Sandhyas, 
‘morning and evening twilight.’ Two Naris, or half 
a Muhitrtta before sunrise, constitute the morning 
Sandhya; and the same interval after sunset the 
evening. Sandhya, meaning ‘junction’, is so termed 
as it is the juncture or interval between darkness 
and light; as in the Vayu and Matsya: ciate wed 
ear wea: Ulery, Teas TARAS 

16. The four months are named in the Vayu and 
are, I the Saura, or solarsydereal, consisting of the 
sun’s passage through a sign of the Zodiac: 2. the 
Saumya or Chandra or lunar’ month, 
comprehending thirty lunations or Tithis, and 
reckoned most usually from new moon to new 
moon, though sometimes from full moon to full 
moon: 3. the Savana or solar month, containing 
thirty days of sunrise and sunset: and 4. the Naks 
atra or lunar asterismal month, which is the moon’s 
revolution, through the twenty-eight lunar 
mansions. 

17. The five years forming this Yuga, or cycle, 
differ only in denomination, being composed of the 
months above described, with such Malamasas, or 
intercalary months, as may be necessary to 
complete the period, according to Vriddha Garga. 
The cycle comprehends, therefore, sixty 
sojarsydereal months of 1800 days; sixty-one solar 
months, or 1830 days; sixty-two lunar months, or 
1860 lunations; and sixty-seven lunar-asterismal 
months, or 1809 such days. Warren, in his Kala 
Sankalité, considers these years to be severally 


cycles. “In the cycle of sixty’, he observes, “are 
contained five cycles of twelve years, each 
supposed equal to one year of the planet (Jupiter). J 
only mention this cycle because I found it 
mentioned in some books; but { know of no nation 
nor tribe that reckons time after that account. The 
names of the five cycles or Yugas are lI. 
Samvatsara, 2. Parivatsara, 3. Idvatsara, 4. 
Anuvatsara, 5. Udravatsara. The name of each year 
is determined from the Naksatra, in which 
Vrhaspati sets and rises heliacally and they follow 
in the order of the lunar months.” K. §. 212. It may 
be reasonably doubted, however, if this view be 
correct; and the only connexion between the cycle 
of five years and that of Vrhaspati may be the 
multiplication of the former by the latter (5x12), so 
as to form the cycle of sixty years: a cycle based, 
the commentator remarks, upon the conjunction 
(Yuga) of the sun and moon in every sixtieth year. 
The original and properly Indian cycle, however, is 
that of five years, as Bentley remarks. “The 
astronomers of this period (1181 B.C.) framed a 
cycle of tfive years for civil and _ religious 
ceremonies”. Ancient and Modern Hindu 
Astronomy. It is in fact, as Colebrooke states, the 
cycle of the Vedas, described in the jyotisa, or 
astronomical sections, and specified in the institutes 
of PardsSara as the basis of calculation for larger 
cycles. As. Res. VIII. 470. 

18. Reference is here made apparently, though 
indistincly, to those positions of the planets which 
indicate, according to Bentley, the formation of the 
lunar mansions by Hindu astronomers about 1424 
B.C. Hindu Astronomy, p. 3 and 4. The Vayu and 
Linga Puranas specify the positions of the other 
planets at the same time, or the end, according to 
the former, of the Chaksusa Manvantara. At that 
time the sun was in Visakha, the moon in Krittika, 
Venus in Pusy4, Jupiter in Pérvaphalguni, Mars in 
Asadha, Budha in Dhanistha, Sani in Revati, Ketu 
in Aslesi, and Rahu in Bharani. There arc 
differences between some of these and the positions 
cited by Bentley, but most of them are the same. He 
considers them to have been observations of the 
occulations of the moon by the planets, in the 
respective lunar mansions, 1424—5 B.C. According 
to the Vayu, these positions or origins of the planets 
are from the Vedas: svaeteftaryaaty waar sfa 
tyd:1 The Linga, less accurately perhaps, reads =f 
afd) referring it to the works of law. 


196 





19. These are the names of the months which 
occur in the Vedas, and belong to a system now 
obsolete, as was noticed by Jones. As. Res. III. 258. 
According to the classification of the text, they 
correspond severally with the lunar months Magha, 
Phalguna, Caitra, Vaisdkha. Jyestha, Asardha, or 
from December to June; and with Sravana Bhadra, 
Agvina, Kartika, Agrahayana, and Pausa, from July 
to December. From this order of the two series of 
the months, as occurring in the Vedas, Colebrooke 
infers, upon astronomical computations, their date 
to be about fourteen centuries prior to the Christian 
era. As. Res. VII. 283. 

20. The Vayu has the same names, but ascribes a 
different descent to the first, making Sudhaman the 
son of Viraja, Sankhapad is the son of Kardama: 
the other two are the sons of Parjanya and Rajas, 
consistently with the origin ascribed to these 
Lokapalas in the patriarchal genealogies of that 
Purana (see Bk. I. ch. X). 

21. Allusion ts hcre made to some divissions of 
the celestial sphere which are not described in may 
other part of the text. The fullest, but still in some 
respects a confused and partly inaccurate account Is 
given in the Matsya Purana; but a more satisfactory 
description occurs in the comment on_ the 
Bhagavata, therc cited from the Vayu, but not 
found in the copics consulted on the present 
occasion. According to those details, the path 
(Marga) of the sun and other planets amongst the 
lunar asterisms is divided into three portions or 
Avasthanas, northern, southern, and central, called 
severally Airavata, Jaradgava (Ajagava, Matsya P.), 
and Vaisvadnara. Each of these, again, is divided 
into thrce parts or Vithis : those of the northern 
portion are termed Nagavithi, Gajavithi, and 
Airavati; those of the centre are Arsabhi, Govithi 
and Jaradgavi; and those of the south are named 
Ajavithi, Mrigavith!, and Vaisvanari. Each of these 
Vithis comprises three asterisms. 


Nagavithi : Asvini, Bharaii, Krittika. 

Gajavithi : Rohini, Mrigasiras, Ardra. 

Atravati : Punarvasu, Pusyd, Aslesha. 

Arshabhi : Magha, Pirvaphalguni, 
Uttaraphalguni. 

Govithi : Hasta, Chitra, Svati. 

Jaradgava : Visakha, Anuradha, Jyestha. 

Ajavithi : Mula, Purvashadha, 
Uttardshadha. 


Mrigavithi : Sravana, Dhanistha, Satabhisha. 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





: Parva Bhadrapadé, Uttara 
Bhadrapada, Revati. 

See also As. Res. IX, table of Naksatras, 346. 
Agastya is Canopus; and the line of the goat, or 
Ajavithi, comprises asterisms which contain stars in 
Scorpio and Sagittarius. 

22. A marginal note in one MS. explains the 
phrase of the text, APPRAH, to signify as far as to 
the moon and stars; FRAPS AAPA) but the Pitri 
yana, or path of the Pitrs, lies amongst the 
asterisms; and, according to the Pauranik system of 
the heavens, it is not clear what could be meant by 
its being bounded by the moon and stars. The path 
south of the solar orb Is, according to the Vedas, 
that of smoke or darkness. 

23. The stars of the Nagavithi are those of Aries 
and Taurus; and by the seven Rsis we are here to 
understand Ursa Major. 

24. This, according to the Vedas, is all that is to 
be understood of the immortality of the gods: they 
perish at the period of universal dissolution. 

25. That is, generally as effecting created beings, 
not individuals, whose acts influence their sevcral 
successive births. 

26. From Ursa Major to the polar star. 

27. The popular notion is, that Siva or Mahadeva 
receives the Ganga on his head; but this, an 
subsequently explained, is referred, by the Vais 
navas at least, to the descent of the Alakananda, or 
Ganga of India, not to the celestial Ganga. 

28. Or, in other words, ‘flows into the sea.’ The 
legend here alluded to is more fully detailed in a 
subsequent book. 

29. The situation of the source of the Ganga of 
heaven identifies it with the milky way. 


wks 


Vaisvanari 


196 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


CHAPTER 9 


TARTS: 


(snared erat Tarot sire) 
WU sara 
ara waa: Tergparcrafe wars 
fefa we etdy ae ged feat ga: i a 
ae way werafa warfare, er) 


BOOK II, CHAP. 9 


197 





WTA TF abet AaraTiUr a eHATATH 2! 

qategaat ara vernfit we: Wel 

marie wart aft a3 

foranranfa sikh aed satfaat fefar 

ANTI: UT eT ARATE: Tae Sw 

TATA TaTTEN arafary! 

a args ga: Gad cpa Git 

arent: fergarey Waterent ses: | 

gae frgyres ga wraqetateaa: i & i 

aa Ws TeATYTATA! 

aa faa! faa wartanet: su ott 

The form of the mighty Hari which is 

present in heaven, consisting of the 
constellations, is that of a porpoise, with 
Dhruva situated in the tail. As Dhruva 
revolves, it causes the moon, sun and stars to 
turn round also; and the lunar asterisms follow 
in its circular path; for all the celestial 
luminaries are in fact bound to the polar-star 
by aerial cords. The porpoise-like figure of the 
celestial sphere is upheld by N4arfyana, who 
himself in planetary radiance, is seated in its 
heart; whilst the son of Uttanapada, Dhruva, in 
consequence of his adoration of the lord of the 
world, shines in the tail of the stellar 
porpoise’. The upholder of the porpoise- 
shaped sphere is the sovereign of all, 
Janarddana. This sphere is the supporter of 
Dhruva; and by Dhruva the sun is upstayed. 
Upon the sun depends this world, with its 
gods, demons, and men. Jn what manner the 
world depends upon the sun, be attentive, and 
you shall hear. 


facrarrehrateareraat Tarerat: | 

SU TAMAS ATT 2 
faararightrefantrers ara ery 

ae yereger arprstraferan 3 it 
Trefaferaasay ararengiey| 

qT vaha VaTeay HereawoT AeA Volt 
SMM: MUAY aA BAA TAT: 


Tam aremtrt tara Feet: 1 ee 

iene vara: wiforasrar:| 

UG WANT warmed Aaa Wan VW! 

STaIMTSTatete AaTaTST TMT 

sruTanareat wer: farafa weafirsn e3u 

er teasifeeroraagy fase! 

a aie aes weal feererd fe we By evi 

oq fe aaht warnifern fea: 

STAINS Teer ae TN: fered Ta Vu Ht 

ahrenfey say faaterg afga:) 

Seth watt Ha AE Ms eraere et 

quay a wala warayfandt fea: 

wer Yaeea: wa: wAraTT FrTeTAH got 

Sue Yours yor ward fea! 

sTraterTgrateret fecaert TEMP ket 

During eight months of the year the sun 

attracts the waters, which are the essence of all 
fluids, and then pours them upon earth (during 
the other four month) as rain’: from rain grows 
corn; and by corn the whole world subsists. 
The sun with his scorching rays absorbs the 
moisture of the earth, and with them nourishes 
the moon. The moon communicates, through 
tubes of air, its dews to the clouds, which, 
being composed of smoke, fire, and wind (or 
Vapour), can retain the waters with which they 
are charged: they are therefore called Abhras, 
because their contents are not dispersed’. 
When however they are broken to pieces by 
the wind, then watery stores descend, bland, 
and freed from every impurity by the 
sweetening process of time. The sun, 
Maitreya, exhales watery fluids from four 
sources, — seas, rivers, the earth, and living 
creatures. The water that the sun has drawn up 
from the Ganga of the skies he quickly pours 
down with his rays, and without a cloud; and 
men who are touched by this pure rain are 
cleansed from the soil of sin, and never see 
hell: this is termed celestial ablution. That rain 
which falls whilst’ the sun is shining, and 


198 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





without a cloud in the sky, is the water of the 
heavenly Ganga, shed by the solar rays. If, 
however, rain falls from a bright and cloudless 
sky whilst the sun is in the mansion of Krttika 
and the other asterisms counted by odd 
numbers, as the third, fifth etc., the water, 
although that of the Ganga of the sky, is 
scattered by the elephants of the quarters, not 
by the rays of the sun: it is only when such 
rain falls, and the sun is in the even asterisms, 
that it is distributed by his beams. 


aq Wed: Mage aft aq wforat fiat! 
qr: wat saaraga fF aT Ve 
a4 ofa Wt Aa: afererateeiaar: | 
Was: HIART: Wert feat! Saat 2 ott 
OF AFL VAM AAT: SITET: | 
FACET SAAT AT Til 2 Vit 
wad aay aay auitey feerydanr: 
Wa Sahrenraey TYP ITET {it 22 
gem gare wana Freredt wen 
aife Fred fs: afaar qfrerari 2 3 tt 
stand: Uaagar yfrawr! 
gaea forgurdisat atsfr arcreroresrr: ti 2 tt 
afe anranreree forgarcer tiftaa: 
Farrel were: MATT: Ht 4 Ut 

sta stfarnrgerey fedreist zantseara: 


The water which the clouds shed upon 
earth is in truth the ambrosia of living beings, 
for it gives fertility to the plants which are the 
support of their existence. By this all 
vegetables grow and are matured, and become 
the means of maintaining life. With them, 
again, those men who take the law for their 
light perform daily sacrifices, and through 
them give nourishment to the gods. And thus 
sacrifices, the Vedas, the four castes, with the 
Brahmanas at their head, all the residences of 
the gods, all the tribes of animals, the whole 
world, all are supported by the rains by which 
food is produced. But the rain is evolved by 
the sun; the sun is sustained by Dhruva; and 


Dhruva is supported by the celestial porpoise- 
shaped sphere, which is one with N&rayana. 
Narayana, the primeval existent, and eternally 
enduring, seated in the heart of stellar sphere, 
is the supporter of beings. 


NOTES 


1. A more particular description of this porpoise 
occurs farther on. 

2. Consequently, the Linga P. observes, there is 
no waste of water in the universe, as it is in 
constant circulation ; Was ae @ arreta aad 

3. The theory of the clouds is more fully detailed 
in the Vayu, Linga, and Matsya Puranas : it is the 
same in its general tenor, but comprises additional 
circumstances. Clouds, according to _ those 
authorities, are of three classes : 1. Agneya, 
originating from fire or heat, or in other words, 
evaporation : they are charged with wind and rain, 
and are of various orders, amongst which are those 
called Jimtta, from their supporting life : 
aq sirasqat:! 2. Brahmaja, born from the breath 
of BrahmA : these are the clouds whence thunder 
and lightning proceed : and 3. Paksaja, or clouds 
which were originally the wings of the mountains, 
and which were cut off by Indra : these are also 
termed Puskéravarttakas, from their including water 
in their vortices : they are the largest and most 
formidable of all, and are those which, at the end of 
the Yugas and Kalpas, pour down the waters of the 
deluge. The shell of the egg of Brahma, or of the 
universe, is formed of the primitive clouds : 

: NL 
wax 


198 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


CHAPTER 10 


SOTA Seay: 
(qerenfesrt garérat faacorqi) 
WIM Sara 

AMANSA HBA FAY: | 
ANIMATE VAT WATT AT AT 
a whisfatear eauferdsefrerem 
TATA TATTST ANT A TATA HH 2 
TA AAT Ua Yorea argfaran 


BOOK IU, CHAP. 10 


WPA AP STA AAT: 1 3 

We aaha a ast naa usa fe 

RAT SA ara: GA ATarfeeatfeT: x 
srt Yoasa wit: yfrarerem 
Weft: HeoAey aAey WW: 

mad Fae yfedy fate tne 
fraisfareterant wat: Uratalser tram 
areal tara tarda aaa ang i 
ae afyrst TSN WAM Fa: | 
TATRA YER SATA SATA 9 UI 
Sa faaragq: alt wearer: | 
wera a wraed wana safer duc 
FRAT AAT JUSTO 

APA VFA SATE MRIS AMT gt 
WaT a Yaraatar wWeaalsa east: 
FANS Far UV TAM Tati Vol 
faragarent wiehradt Fan 
ferrredl-aafsedatl after anferentfeor: 11 ee 
Yay ATA HeraRrETa ag 
ferrarenn fagprrtytatferenttor: 1 82 
TAA: Cat: HHH TAT! 
afisafasyaran qafataercet: 1 e3 i 
NA FEA AA UHTIVSE 
Crean fararatfiranttor: i ex 
wap satay aeacisa fretrran 
ARIAS ATE FATS VT VGH 
WTAATS aa WA TT! area 
ATA We wey Fray An eet 
fang Tat qaaata aad 
faanftarcaan tet BaTeAaT WEryA Vol 


Parasara said— Between the extreme 
northern and southern points the sun has to 
traverse in a year one hundred and eighty 
degrees, ascending and descending.’ His car is 
presided over by divine Adityas, Rsis, 
heavenly singers and nymphs, Yaksas, 
serpents, and Raksasas (one of each being 


199 


placed in it in every month). The Aditya 
Dhatri, the sage Pulastya, the Gandharva 
Tumburu, the gymph Kratusthala, the Yaksa 
Rathakrit, the serpent Vasuki, and the Raksasa 
Heti, always reside in the sun’s car, in the 
month of Madhu or Caitra, as its seven 
guardians. In Vaisakh or Madhava the seven 
are Aryamat, Pulaha, Narada, Punjikasthali, 
Rathaujas, Kacanira and Praheti. In Suchi or 
Syestha they are Mitra, Atri, Hahd, Mena, 
Rathasvana, Taksaka, and Pauruseya. In the 
month Sukra or Asadha they are Varuna, Vasis 
tha, Huhu, Sahajanya, Rathachitra, Naga, and 
Budha. In the month Nabhas (or Sravana) they 
are Indra, Angiras, Visvavasu, Pramlocha, 
Srotas, and Elapatra (the name of both serpent 
and R4ksasa). In the month Bhddrapada, they 
are Vivasvat, Bhreu, Ugrasena, Anumloca, 
Aptrana, Sankhapala, and Vydghara. In the 
month of Asvin they are Pasan, Gautama, 


‘Suruchi, Ghrtachi, Susena, Dhanafijaya, and 


Vata. In the month of Kartik they are Parjanya, 
Bharadvaja, (another) Visvdvasu, Visvachi, 
Senajit, Airdvata, and Chapa. In Agrahayana 
or Méargasirsha they are Ansu, Kasyapa, 
Chitrasena, Urvasi, Tarksya, Mahapadma, and 
Vidyut. In the month of Pusha, Bhaga Kratu, 
Urna yu, Purvachitti, Aristanemi, Karkotaka, 
and Sphirja are the seven who abide in the orb 
of the sun, the glorious spirits who scatter light 
throughout the universe. In the month of 
Magha the seven who are in the sun are Twast 
ri, Jamadagni, Dhrtarastra, Tilottama, Ratijit, 
Kambala, and Brahmapeta. Those who abide 
in the sun in the month Phalguna are Visnu, 
Visvamitra, Stryavarchchas, Rambha, 
Satyajit, A¢vatara, and Yajn Upeta. 

qraeag Waa! eaead y Wea: 

afagieses war! fawprarqudize: teen 

wart Gra: wt Were Wt 

TRAST aaa Wee FyerenT: 1 e8 

aera wart aa: Pradsiigags: | 

areihacmnadad ufard Parag 201 


ist Wann: Wins yr! 


200 THE VISNU-PURANAM 


ferton-anfigerat Faced AAT Wes 11 2 VM 
ofa sifaenrgerat fgdtarst egratseara:| 


In this manner, Maitreya, a troop of sexen 
celestial beings, supported by the energy of 
Visnu, occupies during the several months the 
orb of the sun. The sages celebrates his praise, 
and the Gandharba sings, and the nymph 
dances before him : the R4ksasa attends upon 
his steps, the serpent harnesses his steeds, and 
the Yaksa trims the reins : the numerous 
pigmy sages, the Balakhilyas, ever surround 
his chariot. The whole troop of seven, attached 
to the sun’s car, are the agents in the 
distribution of cold, heat, and rain, at their 
respective seasons.” 

NOTES 

1. It might be doubted whether the text meant 
180 in each hemisphere or in both, but the sense is 
sufficiently clear in the Vayu, &c., and the number 
of Mandalas, travelled in the year is 360 : the 
Mandalas, ‘circles’ or ‘degrees’, being in fact the 
sun’s diurnal revolutions, and their numbers 
corresponding with the days of the solar year : as in 
the Bhavisya Purina : @ifuvsamateetr 3 
Sa: Meds da ved feaawary! ‘The horses 
of the sun travel twice 180 degrees in a eyar, 
internal and external (to the equator), in the order 
of the days.’ 

2. A similar enumeration of the attendants upon 
the sun’s car occurs in the Vayu, &c. For Yaksas, 
the generic term their employed 1s Gra,anis, but the 
individuals are the same. The Ktrma and Bhavisya 
refer the twelve Adityasa to different months : 





Visnu. Kirma.  Bhavisya. 
Dhatri  Caitra Vaiséakha Kartika 
Aryamat Vaisakha Caitra Vaisakha 
Mitra Jyestha Margasirsa Margasirsha 
Varunna Asadha Magha Bhadra 
Indra Sravana Jyestha Aégvina 
Vivasvat Bhadra Sravana  Jyestha 
Pisan Aésvina Phalguna Pausa 
Parjanya Kartika ASvina Sravana 
Ansu Margasirsha Asadha § Asddha 
Bhaga  Pausa Bhadra Magha 
Tvastri Magha Kartika § Phalguna 


Visnu = Phalguna Pausa Caitra. 


200 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





CHAPTER 11 


WHEN SETA: 


(edwards fereopyrenfaarcury) 
AIT Sara 


SAAANAAE Tor: Mata Ta: 

HOS fEn-aUTa: BO AATAT HAAN vit 

Sante alee wWeratranerant 

met Meaaeart aarcarar Wan 

AUS W uMtfanprfayeery! 

farcnfaere went Tah aT FAN aN 

ate aenmat anft fergut a ada 

aq fans wae ofp: qaifedraan wi 

faaaryfadt neat orerafata fas sats) 

Waa WA Hr ale BATT AN 

Maitreya said—You have related to me, 

holy preceptor, the seven classes of beings 
who are ever present in the solar orb, and are 
the causes of heat and cold : you have also 
described to me their individual functions, 
sustained by the energy of Visnu : but you 
have not told me the duty of the sun himself; 
for if, as you say, the seven beings in his 
sphere are the causes of heat, cold, and rain, 
how can it be also true, as you have before 
mentioned, that rain proceeds from the sun? or 
how can it be asserted that the sun rises, 
reaches the meridian, or seta, if these 
situations be the act of the collective seven? 


UUM Sa : 
Ma! sqaatae agar wigs 
aa Mansa: warrant at: 11 Gt 
wal ifs: aw faonkrag arraieea 
Bar zat aaial arreey eater aro 
aa faoq: fer: fer aa: Werte: 
RAZ UMMA: Aaqren! fasta cu 
wife wife veal waar aa fe at we 
wireh fanart aia au ei 


BOOK II, CHAP. 11 


201 





moat Tale wearesa wife a 
FEU ATATAS aA Tall Roll 
sTenET Tat fanciers: ara 
fanart verfert aft ari een 


Paradsara replied— I will explain to you, 
Maitreya, the subject of your inguiry. The sun, 
though identified with the seven being in his 
orb, is distinct from them as their chief. The 
entire and mighty energy of Visnu, which is 
called the tree Vedas, or Rk, Yajush, and 
Saman, is that which enlightens the world, and 
destroys its iniquity. It is that also which, 
during the continuance of things, is present as 
Visnu, actively engaged in the preservation of 
the universe, and abiding as the three Vedas 
within the sun. The solar lumuinatry, that 
appears in every month, is nothing else than 
that very supreme energy of Visnu which is 
composed of the three Vedas, influencing the 
motions of the planet; for the Rks (the hymns 
of the Rig-veda) shine in the morning, the 
prayers of the Yajus at noon, and the 
Brhadrathantara and other portions of the 
SAman in the afternoon. This _ triple 
impersonation of Visnu, distinguished by the 
titles of the three Vedas, is the energy of Vis 
nu, which influences the positions of the sun’. 


4 Haet tat yifeaetendt ar sarah 


Tans Yeat Sata TATA L2H 
ara yA Se Frat Ferwpeayya 

GR: AUN SAT TAL THAT PERAAT: 1 83 1 
Ua WH Aaa wiftadenal a wath 
MASAO FT ATTRA 1 


But this triple energy of Visnu is not 
limited to the sun alone, for Brahma, Purusha 
(Visnu), and Rudra are also made up of the 
same triform essence. In creation it is Brahma, 
consisting of the Rg-Veda; in preservation it is 
Visnu, composed of the Yajur-veda; and in 
destruction Rudra, formed of the SAma-veda, 
the utterance of which is consequently 
inauspicious.” 


aa wfateea: sist amas cacfoaht: | 


TA: AMAA aot TAT VAST 84 

waka F a yaa wees YT 

FRSC aa eT ey rer: 1 2g 

aera wan aa: faatsyage: | 

mehararadtad uta Bara Vo 

TAM AAA A Helferskpaays 

facnfeont: yaa TET TOT: AAAS ETAT 2611 

RINT Asa ga WA: 

DATA TAAT AT WICH IMATE Ve 

Ua OT aural vifmaariia aay feat! 

TATA ASAT TT APTA 2 0M 

faeg-Sa- TYE TF META TY 

Thus the energy of Visnu, made up of the 

three Vedas, and derived from the property of 
goodness, presides in the sun, along with the 
seven beings belonging to it; and through the 
presence of this power the planet shines with 
intense radiance, dispersing with his beams the 
darkness that spreads over the whole world : 
and hence the Munis praise him, the quiristers 
and nymphs of heaven sing and dance before 
him, and fierce spirits and holy sages attend 
upon his path. Visnu, in the form of his active 
energy, never either rises or sets, and is at 
once the sevenfold sun and distinct from it. In 
the same manner as a man approaching a 
mirror, placed upon a stand, beholds in it his 
own image, so the energy (or reflection) of Vis 
nu is never disjoined (from the sun’s car, 
which is the stand of the mirror), but remains 


month by month in the sun (as in the mirror), 
which is there stationed. 


uftarierentaenreat afar Test 2 8H 
qaier: Bywnt wafers Bear: | 
FOTIASHL: Peay Wad SF Yarra VW 
Wd wafemet art qerraerere fest! 

foafa faat: yet arena ator aa 2311 
aren Uatwey fafrdet ve wa: 
ayegaa Yast Yat rea 2M 
at Worrersrearior yarha serary Tar: 


202 THE VISNU-PURANAM 


fag-ta- AEN aaa Qui Arvavasu, and Svaraj, supplying heat severally to 


the moon, the stars, and to Mercury, Venus, Mars, 


reg © : ! oa uf u Jupiter and Saturn. 
verges Reatt Taras: weesher 261 eke 


eter fampgarer faery warregitseara: 

The sovereign sun, oh Brahman, the cause 
of day and night, perpetually revolves, 
affording delight to the gods, to the 
progenitors, and to mankind. Cherished by the 
Susumna ray of the sun,’ the moon is fed to 
the full in the fortnight of its growth; and in 
the fortnight of its wane the ambrosia of its 
substance is perpetually drunk by the 
immortals, unit] the last day of the half month, 
when the two remaining digits are drunk by 
the progenitors : hence these two orders of 
beings are nourished by the sun. The moisture 
of the earth, which the sun attracts by his rays, 
he again parts with for the fertilization of the 
grain, and the nutriment of all terrestrial 
creatures; and consequently the sun is the 
source of subsistence to every class of living 
things, to gods, progenitors, mankind, and the 
rest. The sun, Maitreya, satisfies the wants of 
the gods for a fortnight (at a time); those of the 
progenitors once a month; and those of men 
and other animals daily. 





KEK 


NOTES 

1, This mysticism originates in part apparently 
from a misapprehension of metaphorical texts of 
the Vedas, such as 0 wea faer ania ‘that triple 
knowledge (the Vedas) shines;’ and aetgFdi ‘the 
hymns of the Rk shine;’ and in part from the 
symbolization of the light of religious truth by the 
light of the sun, as in the Gayatri ch. VIII. n. 13. To 
these are to be added the sectaria! notions of the 
Vaisnavas. 

2. The formul of the Sima-veda are not to be 
used along with those of the Rk and Yajush, at 
sactifices in general. 

3. The Vayu, Linga, and Matsya Purana specify 
several of the rays of the sun from amongst the 
many thousands which they say proceed from him. 
Of these, seven are principal, termed Susumna, 
Harikesa, ViSvakarman, ViSvakarya, Sampadvasu. 


202 THE VISNU-PURANAM 


CHAPTER 12 
Brevi sears: 


(agian wret, wag-arel: sifaenatereret 
WU GaAq!) 

UUM SATA 
WS: ATT Fae TR: | 
ara-aferoray Bet SH AT ATTA VI 
aeasraniiy wenfir garartor afr 
eragigareaes walt afaqaenn 2 
shea fe Te: WHEAT aera 
wounds Bers! arth: 13 
aftr Wa at: aararaate afrarq 
Teena wet Uae seats etl 
mao ay Uatsat saers Frovrany 
STMT TST ATT STATA HG 
OPAMTSATAA MAT YNTAA! 
fray tar eer! qereny aasaeT: 1 HI 
Tafsragartin zafasraantst a 
safer aat tat: frata aqvreracqiol 
SUEMTAVTY Was: YaST! 
ATA Tala SAATEAT Ad: VAI ct 


Parasara replied—The chariot of the moon 
has three wheels, and is drawn by ten horses, 
of the whiteness of the Jasmine, five on the 
right half (of the yoke), five on the left. It 
moves along the asterisms, divided into 
ranges, as before described; and, in like 
manner as the sun, is upheld by Dhruva; the 
cords that fasten it being tightened or relaxed 
in the same way, as it proceeds on its course. 
The horses of the moon, sprung from the 
bosom of the waters,’ drag the car for a whole 
Kalpa, as do the coursers of the sun. The 


BOOK Hl, CHAP. 12 


203 





radiant sun supplies the moon, when reduced 
by the draughts of the gods to a single Kala, 
with a single ray; and in the same proportion 
as the ruler of the night was exhausted by the 
celestials, it is replenished by the sun, the 
plunderer of the waters: for the gods, 
Maitreya, drink the nectar and ambrosia 
accumulated in the moon during half the 
month, and from this being their food they are 
immortal. Thirty-six thousand three hundred 
and thirth-three divinities drink the lunar 
ambrosia. When two digits remain, the moon 
enters the orbit of the sun, and abides in the 
ray called Ama; whence the period is termed 
Amiavasya. 


arog afaraerae oat aah wT: 

wat Srey safe wareIs Ad: ATTN eH 
forte dret aq dren Fromant 

Ut at waa gelecat a arate gon 
BY Uses unt fafafess aera 
sae ferron set wefurat 

fra facet forer wer wer y ar 
Barger quay afacat: fret Fan een 
fagd demracat mare: erzqT 
ard ofeaararrn frat: afer Freer: 
anan aferasya afters & fran 23 n 
wet tary fat wat Fora mar fay 
ARMTZTAAA: YTATOTATOPAT: 1 et 
Seafarer WyT- wy Rea 
STATA PUY: WATPTRTSAT FH GN 


In that orbit the moon is immersed for a 
day and night in the water; thence it enters the 
branches and shoots of the trees; and thence 
goes to the sun. Consequently any one who 
cuts off a branch, or casts down a leaf, when 
the moon is in the trees (the day of its rising 
invisible), is guilty of Brahmanicide. When the 
remaining portion of the moon consists of but 
a fifteenth part, the progenitors approach it in 
the afternoon, and drink the last portion, that 
sacred Kala which is composed of ambrosia, 


and contained in the two digits of the form of 
the moon.” Having drunk the nectar effused by 
the lunar rays on the day of conjunction, the 
progenitors are satisfied, and remain tranquil 
for the ensuing month. These progenitors (or 
Pitrs) are of three classes, termed Saumyas, 
Varhisuadas, and Agnisvattas.’ In this manner 
the moon, with its cooling rays, nourishes the 
gods in the light fortnight, the Pitrs in the dark 
fortnight; vegetables, with the cool nectary 
aqueous atoms it sheds upon them; and 
through their development it sustains men, 
animals, and insects; at the same time 
gratifying them by its radiance. 


RATTRAY WAITS UI 

farsegeiym: aiswrrargarntz: ug u 

Baer: Mya PH yaad: 

MUTA YEHANT WT Tarn gon 

Spfa: aS: ste, dents wi WEry 

TSUTTRU: WAH AA ATA Ve 

arerft: usta arfahit: aareat Tan 

afenfeasta aaiet welt weit geet eet 

AAMAS: Hae: BST FAA! 

ATE Saft AAT ATT Ro Ut 

UA Wel WATT Yat wT 

apg Aa! agreed Wen 2 VU 

onigenta:- gat Ug: art Wests weary 

anfeernfa ara YA: Pike VN 

TUT HYAT STIS aTasa: 

UMRAO ATAU: tt 2 3 Hl 

The chariot of the son of Candra, Budha or 

Mercury, is composed of the elementary 
substances air and fire, and is drawn by eight 
bay horses of the speed of the wind. The vast 
car of Sukra (Venus) is drawn by earth-born 
horses,’ is equipped with a protecting fender 
and a floor, armed with arrows, and decorated 
by a banner. The splendid car of Bhauma 
(Mars) is of an octagonal shape, drawn by 


eight horses, of a ruby red, sprung from fire 
Vrihaspati (Jupiter), in a golden car drawn by 


204 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





eight pale-coloured horses, travels from sign 
to sign in the period of a year : and the tardy- 
paced Sani (Saturn) moves slowly along in a 
car drawn by piebald steeds. Eight black 
horses draw the dusky chariot of Rahu, and 
once harnessed are attached to it for ever. On 
the Parvas (the nodes, or lunar and solar 
eclipses), Rahu directs his course from the sun 
to the moon, and back again from the moon to 
the sun.” The eight horses of the chariot of 
Ketu are of the dusky red colour of Lac, or the 
smoke of burning straw. 


Ua WA Wet A qarenat WH 7a 

wad ge wera! waregt araTieaher: nee 
Teatro ga TEANGA: | 
Teaco Asranhrereea hr: 24 


MAAS AAA ATATPAT: | 

Bes Ga PARA WA ITT AN VEU 
AeNaST BMT wT eA waht A 

aon wats saraife aaah aes Von 
setahag Ute araaaftatsy Fh 


TONTAAT Bel TASAT WT VIAN VN 

I have thus described to you, Maitreya, the 
chariots of the nine planets, all which are 
fastened to Dhruva by aerial cords. The orbs of 
all the planets, asterisms, and stars are 
attached to Dhruva, and travel accordingly in 
their proper orbits, being kept in their places 
by their respective bands of air. AS many as 
are the stars, so many are the chains of air that 
secure them to Dhruva; and as they turn round, 
they cause the pole-star also to revolve. In the 
same manner as the oil-man himself, going 
round, causes the spindle to revolve, so the 
planets travel round, suspended by cords of 
air, which are circling round a (whirling) 
centre. The air, which ts called Pravaha, is so 
termed because it bears along the planets, 
which turn round, like a disc of fire, driven by 
the aerial wheel.® 


forgqareeg a: wren: a gay aa frat 
afrarrs vente sop yr 2 en 


Geet Hed Ud t ger fafer yeaah 
qraeasa anne: fergarafira feta 
waata J avifin vilacraferanh a 3 01 


sarareeteny fayaregyay eq: 
aqiserey fagat eat wabrnrfirr: 13 gu 
fe areraueyred srfarat qerareat: 
aeuredar da wit ver Usain 3 20 
fora: darrcenes faatsurt afar: 
yedsfraar vesa avanise wat Ta) 
CART ATA ATA 3 3 


The celestial porpoise, in which Dhruva is 
fixed, has been mentioned, but you shall hear 
its constituent parts in more detail, as it 1s of 
great efficacy; for the view of it at night 
expiates whatever sin has been committed 
during the day; and those who behold it live as 
many years as there are stars in it, in the sky, 
or even more. Uttanapada is to be considered 
as its upper jaw; Sacrifice as its lower. 
Dharma is situated on its brow; Narayana in its 
heart. The Asvins are its two fore feet; and 
Varuna and Aryamat its two hinder legs. 
Samvatsara is its sexual organ; Mitra its organ 
of excretion. Agni, Mahendra, KaSyapa, and 
Dhruva, in succession are placed in its tail; 
which four stars in this constellation never 
set.’ 

sare ainasisa yfser satfaet ae 
urrgqedits wars atta: 3 xn 
aati aah & a ay aaa a 

aa eeu GAT: AAT FAB KU 

I have now described to you the disposition 
of the earth and of the stars; of the insular 
zones, with their oceans and mountains, their 
Varsuas or regions, and their nhabitants; their 
nature has also been explained, but it may be 
briefly recapitulated. 


wag aera: arereaa far! agen 
UTS UA Weare aayAT 3 GM 
aa faontireeat fasten 


BOOK Hi, CHAP. 12 


Ta: Uy FT va Ud 

aefta water a favadiia ott 
WAY WTA BAIS a- 

apraniat I ATT: | 
aat fe vlonferrnfevery 

aMife faarafagterntr 3 cu 
aa q Wa forehead 

BAIA AATATUTASTT! 
dat fe agra: we 

Waa AT AAT ARPVET 13 
avater fe qafearfane- 

eae MATH ST 
warrant feat! aft walt 

TAM SHI Het fF RAT vot 
Wel ers Wear: Harferar 

HUTT YOt-THACAATSTY : | 
wt: Taanifeafiareafara- 

Treat gfe fart sags ei 
dana faaryaste faeq 

qatar cetag fa! aque 
fear fran. 

fafirafaaagarseyeari X 2 it 

PMLEMIC HCE Cer af 
Ua Uda UT: WT: 

A Aaa FT Aats~AaeTH w 311 
Wala Wal Waal Waly 

WA Tat BearTaAd | 
WAY Aq Waa 

cat ar yard Tu yx 
aa: Upstate waleaep 

ara: QU: ay BIA: 
seigaanitrranigs 

fener went FATTY & 
agar AA Tah 

waa aufa fe at adage: 





a Heatfenta fe Vt arqeaqu vei 
Ste siferenpgarat Fectrargt graytisearea:t 


From the watcrs, which are thc body of Vis 
nu, was produced the lotus-shaped earth, with 
its seas and mountains. The stars are Visnu; 
the worlds are Visnu; forests, mountains, 
regions, rivers, oceans are Visnu : he is all that 
is, all that is not. He, the lord, is identical with 
knowledge, through which he is all forms, but 
is not a substance. You must conccive 
therefore mountains, oceans, and all the 
diversities of earh and the rest, are the 
illusions of the apprehension. When 
knowledge is pure, real, universal, 
independent of works, and exempt from 
defect, then the varietics of substancc, which 
are the fruit of the tree of desire, cease to exist 
in matter. For what is substance? Where is the 
thing that is devoid of beginning, middle, and 
end, of one uniform nature? How can reality 
be predicated of that which is subject to 
change, and reassumes no more its original 
character? Earth is fabricated into a jar; the jar 
is divided into two halves; the halves are 
broken to pieces; the pieces become dust; the 
dust becomes atoms. Say, is this reality? 
Though it be so understood by man, whose 
self-knowledge is impeded by his own acts. 
Hence, Brahmana, except discriminative 
knowledge, there is nothing anywhere, or at 
any time, that is real. Such knowledge is but 
one, although it appears manifold, as 
diversified by the various consequences of our 
own acts. Knowledge perfect, pure, free from 
pain, and detaching the affections from all that 
causes affliction; knowledge singlc and cternal 
~ is the supreme Vasudeva, besides whom 
there is nothing. The truth has been thus 
communicated to you by me; that knowledge 
which is truth; from which all that differs is 
false. That information, howcver, which is of a 
temporal and worldly nature has also been 
imparted to you; the sacrificc, the victim. the 
fire, the priests, the acid juice, the gods, the 


206 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





desire for heaven, the path pursued by acts of 
devotion and the rest, and the worlds that are 
their consequences, have been displayed to 
you. In that universe which I have described, 
he for ever migrates who is subject to the 
influence of works; but he who knows 
Vasudeva to be eternal, immutable, and of one 
unchanging, universal form, may continue to 
perform them,” as thereby he enters into the 
deity. 


NOTES 

1. So is the car, according to the Vayu : 37 
msaTeGa WZ: The orb of the moon, according to 
the Linga, is only congealed water; Hadaras da 
HS WA: Syai as that of the sun is concentrated 
BTHAy AA HUSH WHT Ut 

2. There 1s some Indistinctness in this account, 
{from a confusion between the division of the 
moon’s surface into sixteen Kalas or phases, and its 
apportionment, as a receptacle of nectar, into 
fifteen Kalas or digits, corresponding to the fifteen 
lunations, on the fourteen of which, during the 
wane, the gods drink the amrita, and on the 
fifteenth of which the Pitrs exhaust the remaining 
portion, The correspondence of the two distinctions 
appcars to be intended by the text, which terms the 
remaining digit or Kala, composed of Amrta, the 
form or superficies of the two Kalas : fencrarkret 
ae a gaara a fafa! This, the commentator 
observes, is the fifteenth not the sixteenth : aay 
wen a at feat: faata ay Met! The commentator 
on our text observes, also, that the passage 1s 
sometimes read fgqaren! Lava meaning ‘a 
moment’, ‘a short period,’ The Matsya and Vayu 
express the parallel passage so as to aviod all 
perplexity, by specifying the two Kalas as referring 
io time, and living the number of nectareous Kalas 
undefined : feat fgea ate frererea Hare ai 
‘They, the Pitrs, drink the remaining Kalas in two 
Kalas to time,’ Warren explains Kala, or, as he 
writes it, Cala, in one of its acceptations, ‘the 
phases of the moon, of which the Hindus count 
sixteen,’ Kala Sankalita, 359. So the Bhagavata the 
moon @ Vy Wes: Gest wari and the Vayu, 
aftcr noticing the exhaustion of the fifteenth portion 
on the day of conjunction, states the recurrence of 
increase or wane to take place in the sixteenth 


phase at the beginning of each fortnight : gfsagrnt a 
Tare} fr: Spat 

3. The Vayu and Matsya add a fourth class, the 
kavyas; identifying them with the cyclic years; the 
Saumyas and Agnisvattas with the seasons; and the 
Varhisads with the months. 

4. The Vayu makes the horses ten in number, 
each of a different colour. 

5. The Matsya, Linga, and V&ayu add the 
circumstance of R&hu’s taking up, on _ these 
occasions, the circular shadow of the earth : Sg@ 
aay ora fafetat noseraiet 

6. The different bands of air attached to Dhruva 
are, according to the commentator, varieties of the 
Pravaha wind; but the Kirma and Linga enumerate 
seven principal winds which perform this function 
of which the Pravaha is one. 

7. The four last are therefore stars in the circle of 
perpetual appariation. One of these is the pole-star; 
and in Kasyapa we have a verbal affinity to 
Cassiopeia. The Sisumara, or porpoise, is rather a 
singular symbol for the celestial sphere; but it is not 
more preposterous than many of the constellations 
of classical fiction. The component parts of it are 
much more fully detailed in the Bhagavata, whence 
it has been translated by Jones, As. Res. II. 402. 
The Bhagavata, however, mystifies the description, 
and says it is nothing more than the Dharana, or 
symbol, by which Visnu, identified with the starry 
firmament, is to be impressed upon the mind in 
meditation. The account of the planetary system is, 
as usual, fullest in the Vayu, with which the Linga 
and Matsaya nearly agree. The Bhavisya 1s nearly, 
also the same. They all contain many passages 
common to them and to our text. In the Agni, 
Padma, Kirma, Brahma, Garuda, and Vamana 
descriptions occur which enter into less detail than 
the Visnu, and often use its words, or passages 
found in other Puranas. Many intimations of a 
similar system occur in the Vedas, but whether the 
whole is to be found in those works is yet to be 
ascertained. It must not be considered as a correct 
representation of the philosophical astronomy of 
the Hindus, being mixed up with, and deformed by, 
mythological and symbolical fiction. 

8. Only, however, as far as they are intended to 
propitiate Visnu, and not for any other purpose. 

de tee 


BOOK II, CHAP. 13 


CHAPTER 13 


FATENISEATA: 
(ASAI, Bart wert wht were 
CIM CATESD 
sayy sara 


Wray! AATEMd at WeIsha wathaery 
TATA Met Wear ea eM 
famarent dart dad Acted aaah 
aearedeg Aaray Aa WITT ZU 
WATCHMAN WUT TET: | 
eee atte AAT TELA 3 tt 
Wt: BT Mele: MreaMsaad fact 
Sat: WMT Aged Wat AAI 
YUae AMAT ATTA Wal BATA 
werd Wanted T fat: TUG 
fara U Hd a TEA: Tea 
ae Wee! aq wa apaetan gi 


Maitreya said—Reverned sir,’ all that I 
asked of you has been thoroughly explained; 
namely, the situation of the earth, oceans, 
mountains, rivers, and planetary bodies; the 
system of the three worlds, of which Visnu is 
the stay. The great end of life has also been 
expounded by you, and the pre-eminence of 
holy knowledge. It now remains that you fulfil 
the promise you made some time since,’ of 
relating to me the story of king Bharata, and 
how it happened that a monarch like him, 
residing constantly at the sacred place 
Salagrama, and engaged in devotion, with his 
mind ever applied to Vasudeva, should have 
failed, through the sanctity of the shrine, and 
the efficacy of his abstractions, to obtain final 
emancipation; how it was that he was born 
again as a Brahmana; and what was done by 
the magnanimous Bharata in that capacity : all 
this it is fit that you inform me. 


WU Sara 
Wey AEN WaSTAAAG: | 


207 


a sare fat aret Aaa! vfadtafa: en 
afgateageg ory yforat at: 

SAT WUT HBT AATaANT aA c 
TAMA Wes Wear sya! 

Her fae EwTAATS TT A ATTN 8 I 
aR Baa! far carratsht a 
Warat weds fast areata go 1 
Aiad-Ta-aMErt ws sahara 

ART aa aeaiftr Fast APTA: eek 


ParaSara said—The illustrious monarch of 
the earth resided, Maitreya, for a considerable 
period at Salagrama, his thoughts being 
wholly dedicated to god, and his conduct 
distinguished by kindness and every virtue, 
until he had effccted, in the highest degree, the 
entire control over his mind. The Raja was 
ever repeating the names, Yajnesa, Achyuta, 
Govinda, Madhava, Ananta, KeSava, Krsna, 
Visnu, Hrshikesa; nothing else did he uttcr, 
even in his dreams; nor upon anything but 
those names, and their import, did he cver 
meditate. He accepted fuel, flowers, and holy 
grass, for the worship of the deity, but 
performed no other religious rites, being 
engrossed by disinterested, abstract devotion. 


wd Ushwandyae I NEAT 

Wel Tt Aa TA ATTA 1 

SIT TAS Tet Ug frafaan 

SHAAN TEAS Scot SAI 23 11 

Wad: AAAI Wawa Ber Wan 

fagea We: Ter WaMOTAST: tl VS 

Wd: OM Asal ararerepat FeTMdNt 

On one occasion he went to the Mahanadi,’ 

for the purpose of ablution : he bathed there, 
and performed the ceremonies usual aftcr 
bathing. Whilst thus occupied, there came to 
the same place a doe big with young, who had 
come out of the forest to drink of the stream. 
Whilst quenching her thirst, there was heard 
on a sudden the loud and fearful roaring of a 
lion; on which the doe, being excessively 


208 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





alarmed, jumpcd out of the water upon the 
bank. 


STA USUATAT AEM T: TATA A VG I 
aaa a afarrenaiteyr 

BME WTA Ng Ofer yTaATATN 26 I 
TMeASur Mae TOT TT 

Raa! aft efor wort @ aA TI gol 
eft at factraata faust yoarre: | 
rad Paes FRAT BCI 
WHAM WMA F FTI 

Ugur Gero FT aT aq WAN LI 
cana TON TAT A: 

Si WAT BT MECATAT SAR WAI ot 
wreeanitasy arena ars 

TA ATA ANTSTAT TATA 2 Vit 


In consequence of this great leap, her fawn 
was suddenly brought forth, and fell into the 
river; and the king, seeing it carricd away by 
the eurrent, caught hold of the young animal, 
and saved it from being drowned. The injury 
reeeived by the decr, by her violent cxertion, 
proved fatal, and she lay down, and died; 
which being observed by the royal ascetie, he 
took the fawn in his arms, and returned with it 
to his hermitage : there he fed it and tended it 
everyday, and it throve and grew up under his 
care. It frolicked about the cell, and grazed 
upon the grass in its vicinity; and whenever it 
strayed to a distanee, and was alarmed at a 
wild beast, it ran back thither for safety. Every 
morning it sallied forth from home, and every 
evening returned to the thatched shelter of the 
leafy bower of Bharata. 


wer aeryt at-adiqaftatar 

area: Cases A aaa fea 2 2 
faq: sifssrarerrarra | 

Ward W aaeledtery eforarcteal 2 3 1 
fas genifardt cae: fas fags Prova: 
farreaot Feard Taree AAT 2 YI 
Ua ayaa TT GTI BAT 


ICC REESILIMUECC RCC CIGCHIRL 


faq agenogearat fe a: 

aoMamaswarea at qaraeata 2&1 

Ua Calferareret aerate: | 

HM: Ge famed aca: ATT Sa VI 

Whilst the deer was thus the inmate of his 

hermitage,.the mind of the king was ever 
anxious about the animal, now, wandering 
away, and now returning to his side, and he 
was unable to think of anything else. He had 
relinquished his kingdom, his children, all his 
friends, and now indulged in selfish affection 
for a fawn. When absent for a longer time than 
ordinary, he would fancy that it had been 
earried off by wolves, devoured by a tiger, or 
slain by a lion. “The earth,” he would exelaim, 
“is embrowned by the impressions of its hoofs. 
What has become of the young deer, that was 
born for my delight? How happy I should be if 
he had returned from the thieket, and I felt his 
budding antlers rubbing against my arm. 
These tufts of sacred grass, of whieh the heads 
have been nibbled by his new teeth, look like 
pious lads ehanting the Sama-veda.”” 

sea face afer a aa Ae PT: 

Wifirawaat: WA AMAT FAN VC 

WANTS RAAT a AAA ATA: | 

PAU ATTA ITT 1 VAI 

ae wel ae eet FUTAR 

BIAS Hater WATT YA 3 0M 

Thus the Muni meditated whenever the 

deer was long absent from him; and 
contemplated him with a _ countenance 
animated with pleasure as he stood by his side. 
His abstraction was interrupted, the spirit of 
the king being engrossed by the fawn, even 
though he had abandoned family, wealth, and 
dominion. The firmness of the prince’s mind 
beeame unsteady, and wandered with the 
wanderings of the young decr. 


Ie Wesat BIST Hes ASA: | 
Fora Ara WATT TATA SAA 3 eI 


BOOK Ii, CHAP. 13 


209 





ga weed Mary worrarata 
caret Waa! arr feafreferraqin 3 21 


In the course of time the king became 
subject to its infiuence. He died, watched by 
the deer, with tears in its eyes, like a son 
mourning for his father; and he himself, as he 
expired, cast his eyes upon the animal, and 
thought of nothing else, being wholly occupied 
with one idea. 

AY TATA A Maa WET ASV 
SU Tees Sat VATS WAT 3 3 
Wires: wares fei! 

faara Ut A: EITM HI 3 XU 
Wenwuaran wf: a Helarararaurg 
Uraegyresy AMON Prep es wat 3 4M 
aa MegEealsa AR afar fet: 


In consequence of this predominant feeling 
at such a season, he was born again, in the 
Jambumarga forest,’ as a deer, with the faculty 
of recollecting his former life; which 
recollection inspiring a distaste for the world, 
he left his mother, and again repaired to the 
holy place Salagrama. Subsisting there upon 
dry grass and leaves, he atoned for the acts 
which had led to his being born in such a 
condition; and upon his death he was next 
born as a Brahmana, still retaining the memory 
of his prior existence. 


WeTAaa Wa AAMT wat Hern 3 & i 
Waa: Tayrenatarad| 
soya A a Ag! sear Waa: TAT ZI 
TIS eNTagAa aralfa Waray! 
AAAS A east VATA: 113 
AUNTS Tekh Ratatat: ATA 
A Avi UM HAUT Prior WTS TA UNV 
snista age: fafasareraarad 
AACA YUT ATTA AAT ¥ 0 II 

He was born in a pious and eminent family 


of ascctics, who werc rigid observers of 
devotional rites. Possessed of all true wisdom, 


and acquainted with the essence of all sacred 
writings, he beheld soul as contradistinguished 
from matter (Prakrti). Imbued with knowledge 
of self, he beheld the gods and all other beings 
as in reality the same. It did not happen to him 
to undergo investiture with the Brahmanical 
thread, nor to read the Vedas with a spiritual 
preceptor, nor to perform ceremonies, nor to 
study the scriptures. Whenever spoken to, he 
replied incoherently and in ungramatical and 
unpolished speech. 


seaetag: ast afore feat: 
feoraearat: Bea: Ufeypt: @ AMT: Ny aH 
SAA Ut Bilt UTE: Het Adz! 
watanay anit amfafesr ferefanx en 
Terata & rh sat anh 

WT GUTTA Teste AAA ¥ 3 Il 


His person was unclean, and he was clad in 
dirty garments. Saliva dribbled from his 
mouth, and he was treated with contempt by 
all the people. Regard for the consideration of 
the world is fatal to the success of devotion. 
The ascetic who is despised of men attains the 
end of the abstractions. Let therefore a holy 
man pursue the path of the righteous, without 
murmuring; and though men condemn him, 
avoid association with mankind. 


fevoumiaay fafa verata: | 
SIAM BVlarara Welatataia SAN ss 
YS HerIAM aM AA wet HITT 
ae Feel Yag aad ATTA YG I 
faadqurt asx wg-yIged-area: | 
allt: aaHalle HearSrcaad: 11 w & 
a yaaaal Wart @ HAhT 
TATA AYIA: I 9 11 

df wepmicant fanrnfafeefiay 

OTA UNA ET Sle UHCI ¥ CI 
Tal ¢ Waser ders faa: 
Seated Wee WAT AAT TAT ¥ eA 
qd: Tas area fafort Fafet at a 


210 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





arnt BCHAOM aad HUST: | 
wauniega sat wat SaTAEAUTTI G11 
Ad: MATA WATT AEN: | 
fafveandta waa fafearatsafteatai & 21 


art warm fafrararaarai& 21 


This, the counsel of Hiranyagarbha,° did 
the Brahmana call to mind, and hence assumed 
the appearance of a crazy idiot in the eyes of 
the world. His food was raw pulse, potherbs, 
wild fruit, and grains of corn. Whatever came 
in his way he ate, as part of a necessary, but 
temporary infliction’. Upon his father’s death 
he was set to work in the fields by the brothers 
and his nephews, and fed by them with vile 
food; and as he was firm and stout of make, 
and a simpicton in outward act, he was the 
slave of cvery one that chose to employ him, 
receiving sustenance alone for his hire. The 
head servant of the king of Sauvira, looking 
upon him as an indolent, untaught Brahmana, 
thought him a fit person to work without pay 
(and took him into his master’s service to 
assist in carrying the palankin). 

a ust forfaarsel aaj qerafafeet 
AYA A BATAAN 4 31) 

oa: fara war g:camra JoutAfe 

we a merendst aftemnet werqhan & vil 
sare forfaat wer arqaerranter: 

gun fafeyetararastat Bish wet 14 4 
yet faten far: adararnr 


WUAATUSA WTT TTHTA TATE ATT 4 & 11 
aa wenfa: Bsa wearer: | 

Hay Aaa Heed watt AY: 14 oii 
factan zafa: asa fant frfeearria 
ferraferne ae mera forferenraan: 114 ct 


Kapila, on the banks of the Iksumati river’, to 
consult the sage, to whom the virtues leading 
to liberation were known, what was most 
desirable in a world abounding with care and 
sorrow. Amongst those who by order of his 
head servant had been compelled gratuitously 
to carry the litter was the Brahmana, who had 
been equally pressed into this duty, and who, 
endowed with the holy universal knowledge, 
and remembering his former existence, bore 
the burden as the means of expiating the faults 
for which he was desirous to atone. Fixing his 
eyes upon the pole, he went tardily along, 
whilst the other bearers moved with alacrity; 
and the king, feeling the litter carried 
unevenly, called out, “Ho bearers! what is 
this? Keep equal pace together.” 


qaretta frfaat facies fart fe at 
qu: fertafecare wakttearts=emn & @ ii 
YUASA Teas AI AA: 
Prfacnratgal: Wats AnETATT TI & 011 


Still it procecded unsteadily, and the Raja 
again exclaimed, “What is this? how 
irregularly are you going!” When this had 
repeatediy occurred, the palankin-bearers at 
last replied to the king, “It is this man, who 
lags in his pace.” 


Tatar 


fe ardisaerrardt waren fof aa 
fenraraaal + et Uharafa fadeaan en 


“How is this?” said the prince to the 
Brahmana, “are you weary? You have carried 
your burden but a little way; are you unable to 
bear fatigue? and yet you look robust.” 


Gq Jara 


are tara cater frfaer waat am 
T Masher A area: BrSsTs het TST & 21 


The Brahmana answered and said, “It is not 
I who am robust, nor is it by me that your 


The king having ascended his litter, on One palankin is carried. I am not wearied, prince, 
occasion, was proceeding to the hermitage of nor am J incapable of fatigue.” 


BOOK Ii, CHAP. 13 


Teivara 


weet opaa drarrenta ferfaent cata 
SH Use Warde fe Shear & Bu 


The king replied, “I clearly sec that you are 
stout, and that the palankin is borne by you; 
and the carriage of a burden is wearisome to 
all persons.” 


TAU Sars 
waa waa wo! ae ee AW agal 
aearacaia area use fagraorq & Sul 
waar forfaenr aft create a afer 
faeces Y Waregug sat TANG KI 
Wa Weare we urease fer 
BR AGENT TaN TAHT & & I 
Bae AM GE Tae Marah eaatt 
Tartine fofaet aa anise faa: oll 
fofaarat Read ae aqgeaguerfaray 
aa TANGA Wead VeAzAMT & Cl 
He WY WwW ag ydea wigan 
TO MATSaA MTATSHT SATA St 
edaya yord tare: yfratad! 
sfaeratat Hl TANT SAI 9 oI 
STAT PBISAT: Vat frpur: Wd: UT 
WIGITA ATA UAT AGI 9 2 
aal VeTIey A Garay za! 
dal Warahies Har Fae AAT VI 
Y-Uie-TET-HeTeASTey TAA 
forfacnest er Tat aa AIT: WATAATN 931! 
carer ire! ferfaenret + aaery 
We-gu-yeraiste yudraerarsha aie xi 
ael Ya: gana: wed: arts! 
Asay ATA: Het AT FI! TATU Gu 
aager ferfeat eat cael YATE: | 
Waal Asha Tareas fad: 119 & it 


“First tell me,” said the Brahmana , *what it 
is of me that you have clearly seen’, and then 


211 


you may distinguish my properties as strong or 
weak. The asscrtion that you behold the 
palankin borne by me, or placed on me, is 
untrue. Listen, prince, to what I have to 
remark. The place of both the feet is the 
ground; the legs are supported by the feet; the 
thighs rest upon the legs; and the belly reposes 
on the thighs; the chest is supported by the 
belly; and the arms and shoulders are propped 
up by the chest; the palankin is borne upon the 
shoulders, and how can it be considered as my 
burden? This body which is seated in the 
palankin is defined as You; thence what is 
elsewhere called. This, is here distinguished as 
I and You and others are constructcd of the 
elements; and the elements, following the 
stream of qualities, assume a bodily shape; but 
qualities, such as goodness and the rest, are 
dependant upon acts; and acts, accumulated in 
ignorance, influence the condition of all 
beings'’. The pure, imperishable soul, tranquil, 
void of qualities, pre-eminent over nature 
(Prakrti), is one, without increase or 
diminution, in all bodics. But if it be equally 
excmpt from increase or diminution, then with 
what propriety can you say to me, ‘I see that 
you are robust?’ If the palankin rests on the 
shoulders, and they on the body; the body on 
the feet, and the feet on the earth; then is the 
burden borne as much by you as by me’. 
When the nature of men is different, either in 
its essence or its cause, then may it be said that 
fatigue is to be undcrgone by me. That which 
is the substance of the palankin is the 
substance of you and me and all others, being 
an aggregate of elements, aggregated by 
individuality.” 
QUT Sard 

VaGRaMaA O aetsatecni ET! 

asta tenadheateat aearet aye ATT V9 
Tatara 

at ot fagee fafaat ware ae a fia! 


HAA hl MART Wea: FA: cu 


212 


a wary afatt at serraqarcory 
aad aeaat fast! wat yaa aoe 
Having thus spoken, the Brahmana was 

silent, and went on hearing the palankin; but 
the king leaped out of it, and hastened to 
prostratc himself at his feet; saying, “Have 
compassion on me, Brahman, and cast aside 
the palankin; and tell me who you are, thus 
disguised under the appearance of a fool.” 


Tal Sara 


TAM Hiseaeda za! A we 

SMT Wat WHARATN ¢ 011 

qug: arom J at sereraean 

meet aig wacetapeatan ¢ it 

aaa fe yore! Wat; WaT ATTUTy 

TATA Ad: HEM ANT Ya AT VAT VI 

The Brahmana answered and said, “Hear 

me, Raja. Who I am it is not possible to say : 
arrival at any place is for the sake of fruition; 
and enjoyment of plcasure, or endurance of 
pain, is the cause of the production of the 
body. A living being assumcs a corporeal form 
to reap the results of virtue or vice. The 
universal cause of all living creatures is virtue 
or vice : why thcrefore inquire the cause (of 
my being the pcrson I appear).” 


Ta 


ant a wee: Tey HUT 

SHAT SSTSTATA Ic 3 

ads AAA Whe TAlsetaetrarcaa: | 

ae A Wes sts Tae wera c vl 

aster aisetatt Tar! wet ay A wa 

STAT A area yrelsefata at fac n 

The king said, “Undoubtedly virtue and 

vice are the causes of all existent effects, and 
migration into sevcral bodies is for the 
purpose of receiving their consequences; but 
with respect to what you have asserted, that it 


is not possible for you to tell me who you are, 
that is a matter which I am desirous to hear 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


explained. How can it be impossible, 
Brahmana, for any one to declare himself to be 
that which he is? There can be no detriment to 
one’s-self from applying to it the word I;” 


Areut Sara 


wreatsefata ciara sneqate ada A 
STATA Weal aT UTPeAATT: 12 GU 
frat saieretata axtet mere za! 

Wa We Ad: Wa ASTSASAT: 11 C9 Il 

fe eqfrdacten antarefaft ara 

TMT any Arenas apf A TIAN S cll 
fous: gory aa: Ga: fere-areariacaar: | 
aaiseaia Haat Gat Tay! SET ce 


The Brahmana said, “It is true that there is 
no wrong done to that which is one’s-sclf by 
the application to it of the word [; but the term 
is characteristic of error, of conceiving that to 
be the self (or soul) which is not self or soul. 
The tongue articulates the word I, aided by the 
lips, the teeth, and the palate; and these are the 
origin of the expression, as they are the causes 
of the production of speech. If by these 
instruments speech is able to utter the word I, 
it 1s nevertheless improper to asscrt that 
speech itself is 1. The body of a man, 
characterized by hands, feet, and the like, is 
made up of various parts; to which of these 
can I properly apply the denomination I? 


Geshe Ut: GIST Aa: Tier! 

ACRSTAASTAM FHAATUTAT F 0 I 

Gat AARISY YAY SSSA: | 

wal fe al war aisefaetag facet ar: 11 ei 

wa tT ferfaer Vara are: Weg: 

SAS Vad Stal A VeaAUTEAAH 2 2A 

If another being is different spccifically 

from me, most excellent monarch, then it may 
be said that this 1s I; that is the other: but when 
one only soul is dispersed in all bodies, it is 
then idle to say, Who arc you? who am I? You 


arc a king; this is a palankin; these are the 
bearers; these the running footmen; this is 


BOOK II, CHAP. 13 


213 





your retinue; yet it is unture that all these are 
said to be yours. 


aang ate aaa forfaenr wefatzan 

fa Gerda GTA: WrereawMaay FAN 3 

SARS WENT ATs Bale A WA: 

aa aan qaeat gather fof e x it 

forfarent areergrat cerafeerferetfeaa: | 

atacat yrs! wee frfereat crate Gt 

Ud SayetaMt gar fagyaart 

wa Ud wate aracata war af € 

The palankin on which you sit, is made of 

timber derived from a tree. What then? is it 
denominated either timber or a tree? People do 
not say that the king is perched upon a tree, 
nor that he is seated upon a piece of wood, 
when you have mounted your palankin. The 
vehicle is assemblage of pieces of timber, 
artificially joined together: judge, prince, for 
yourself in what the palankin differs really 
from the wood. Again; contemplate the sticks 
of the umbrella, in their separate state. Where 


then is the umbrella? Apply this reasoning to 
you and to mc’. 


Yar Gt Tieait ait Gert faerera: 

Sey Madae fagar HarVeqg eo 

qara dat 7 a 7 Ug w We: 

wrrpfatareg Toa HIATT NS Cit 

ae Walt Gees Bal Terran 

AMAT FI AA USOT 8 eit 

ay arearnonte aa dara a1 

uhornicanyat ase JI! aa fat gooll 

wai tan wdetraee fog: yar feat fea: 

Usa: Ufa: fran wat fea war YT! qETATNTI 02 

A man, a woman, a cow, a goat, a horse, an 

elephant, a bird, a tree, are names assigned to 
various bodies, which are the consequences of 
acts. Man’ js neither a god, nor a man, nor a 
brute, nor a trec; these are merc varieties of 


shape, the effects of acts. The thing which in 
the world is called a king, the servant of a 


king, or by any other appellation, is not a 
reality; it is the creature of our imaginations: 
for what is there is the world, that is subject to 
vicissitude, that does not in the course of time 
go by different names, You are called the 
monarch of the world; the son of your father; 
the enemy of your foes; the husband of your 
wife; the father of your children. What shall I 
dcnominate you? How are you situated? 


wt fartatest: far 3 tat wa warery 

fay wate at ar dae fe Weta go VII 

area FT YT! Sra: 

alsetacra Foot yar ferra uiferant go 311 

Ue ahaa at warefate snfaea 

WIG AU TaId JOA! HAT Yo vi 
ofa sifawrgunr fadraist sareyseaa: | 


Are you the head or the belly? or arc they 
your? Are you the feet? or do they belong to 
you? You are, oh king, distinct in your nature 
from all your members! Now then, rightly 
understanding the question, think who I am; 
and how it is possible for me, after the truth is 
ascertaincd (of the identity of all), to recognise 
any distinction, or to speak of my own 
individuality by the expression I.” 


NOTES 
1. One copy addresses ParfSara, Bhagavan 
sarvabhutesa, ‘Sacred sovereign, lord of all 


creatures;’ rather an unusual title for a sage, even 
though an inspired one. The other two copies begin, 
Samyagikhyatam. ‘All has been thoroughly 
explained.’ 

2. See Bk. II. Ch. I. 

3. The Mahfnadi is properly a river in Orissa, 
but the name is applicable to any great stream, and 
its connexion with Salagrama Tirtha makes it 
probable that it is intended for the Gandaki or 
Gandaka, in which the Salagram or Ammonite is 
most abundantly found. It may be here noticed that 
Salagrima is named amongst the Tirthas in the 
Mahabhirata : see Bk. II. Ch. I. n.6. 

4. The applicability of this simile is not 
explained by the commentator : it refers possibly to 


214 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





the croppcd or shaven heads of the religious 
students. 

5. According to the Bhagavata, Jambumarga is 
the Kalanjara mountain or Kzlanjar in 
Bundelkhand. 

6. Hiranyagarbha or Brahma is named here 
instead of the Yoga doctinc, which :s sometimes 
ascribed to him as its author. 

7. As a Kala sanyama (eaqa") a state of 
suffcring or mortification lasting only for a season; 
or, in the other words, bodily existence; the body 
bcing contemplated as a sore, for which food 1s the 
unguent; drink, the lotion; and dress, the bandage. 

8. A river in the north of India. 

9. That is, what have you discerned of me, my 
body, life, or soul? 

10. The condition—that is, the personal 
individuality-of any one is the consequence of his 
acts; but the same living principle animates him 
which is common to all living things. 

11. The body is not the individual; therefore it is 
not the individual, but the body, or eventually the 
earth, which bears the burden. 

12, That is, speech, or any or all of the faculties 
or senses, 1s not soul. 

13. The aggregate limbs and senses no more 
constitute the individual, than the accidental 
combination of certain pieces of wood makes the 
fabric anything else than wood: in like manner as 
the machine is still timber, so the body is still mere 
elementary matter. Again; the senses are limbs, 
considered separately, no more constitute the man, 
than each individual stick constitutes the umbrella. 
Whether separate or conjoined, therefore, the parts 
of the body are mere matter; and as matter does not 
make up man, they do not constitute an individual. 

14. The term in this and the preceding clause is 
Pum§an: here used generically, there spccifically. 


ee 


214 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





CHAPTER 14 


AUTEM SeaTe : 
(Ua: Was Wa:, WAAR) 


TUT SAT 


fra wea aa: acarehantaay 
WMATA Yar Wars ZahfSsrq VU 


ParaSara said— Having heard these remarks, 
full of profound truth, the king was highly 
pleased with the Brahmana, and respectfully 
thus addressed him : 


TRHara 

TAY! PAN We WAT Te: | 

ge afar wera ATA A FATA UI 

Tafgadafawt wary yy! 

araat aferd fam) were WHS 3 tl 

we aelft forfaat 3 af fea 

wetaeera Aa Heifer gar vA 

TOMS Far waht: arharfean 

Waa won aa fH wate caralfea Gi 

King said— “What you have said is no 

doubt the truth; but in listening to it my mind 
is much disturbed. You have shown that to be 
discriminative wisdom which exists in all 
creatures, and which is the great principle that 
is distinct from plastic nature; but the 
assertions— ‘I do not bear the palankin-the 
palankin does not rest upon me-the body, by 
which the vehicle is conveyed, is different 
from me-the conditions of elementary beings 
are influenced by acts, through the influence 
of the qualities, and the qualities are the 
principles of action;’°—- what sort of positions 
are these? 


Taher wears! wy staraet aa 

wat fagerafa wenratferat TAT GI 
yaiia vent afretard fia! ; 
wEMAETA war sa: fe waa era Aoi 


BOOK II, CHAP. 14 


215 





ASA UM MAM AeagT TATA 
aa UM waa aa: warafa cit 


Upon these doctrines entering into my ears, 
my mind, which is anxious to investigate the 
truth, is lost in perplexity. It was my purpose, 
illustrious sage, to have gone to Kapila Rsi, to 
inquire of him what in this life was the most 
desirable object: but now that I have heard 
from you such words, my mind turns to you, to 
become acquainted with the great end of life. 


afvafinttad: wearer & fia! 
arene WIAA TASTANTT: 1 8 
a Wa wary yes feta 
WANA Wet BACs WAATATAI Ro I 
ae WoraTa wh Tada: wot TET! 
agetharaarmerareyereasrary 82 


The Rsi Kapila is a portion of the mighty 
and universal Visnu, who has come down 
upon the earth to dissipate delusion; and surely 
it is he who, in kindness to me, has thus 
manifested himself to me in all that you have 
said. To me, thus suppliant, then, explain what 
is the best of all things; for you are an ocean 
overflowing with the waters of divine 
wisdom.” 


TaN Sara 

qa! yeota fa sa: tae J yea 
Staifa weaaits arerarfor a saat 22H 
canard Beant qrarrefastal 
Garett WIS SITS AFT 83 1 
Uy UM Haq: Tactical TI 
HA: VAS Wet AaTARTASA VI 
STAT AT: VET YT! ATTA KTATTT 
Sea HAT: NA A: THEA 2G UI 
TAA MAM SA USA: | 
CUT TUN AAT: AAT 7 FU Vg It 


The Brahmana replied to the king, “You, 
again, ask me what is the best of all things, not 
what is the great end of lifem! but there are 
many things which are considered best, as well 


as those which are the great ends (or truths) of 
life. To him who, by the worship of the gods, 
seeks for wealth, prosperity, children, or 
dominion, each of these is respectively best. 
Best is the rite or sacrifice, that 1s rewarded 
with heavenly pleasures. Best is that which 
yields the best recompense, although it be not 
solicited. Self-contemplation, ever practised 
by devout ascetics, is to them the best. But 
best of all is the identification of soul with the 
supreme spirit. Hundreds and thousands of 
conditions may be called the best; but these 
are not the great and true ends of life. Hear 
what those are. 


aqnta waved fay Tea et ate! 


STATS FAT BAT AUT TANT: 11 V9 UI 
Gay We: VA ASAT AAT! 


Tred: Bsa weal fe aferami ect 
Ue + weishea sora 

aoe fe aratfor arconarrstaa: 1128 1 
teafamfaaran warddar ate 

TU Waar A Mata A aA AA! oll 


Wealth cannot be the true end of life, for it 
may be relinquished through virtue, and its 
characteristic property is expenditure for the 
gratification of desire. If a son were final truth, 
that would be equally applicable to a different 
source; for the son that is to one the great end 
of life, becomes the father of another. Final or 
supreme truth, therefore, would not exist in 
this world, as in all these cases those objects 
which are so denominated are the effects of 
causes, and consequently are not finite. If the 
acquisition of sovereignty were designated by 
the character of being the great end of all, then 
finite ends would sometimes be, and 
sometimes cease to be. 


R- Ay AM BAH At Tal 
wea Tale saat WEA AAI 2 gil 
ag Feared area Yer areonyTan 

A BOP TATA FA! WATT 2 MI 
wa faite: aframa-qemfata: | 





216 THE VISNU-PURANAM 
Foner fear ar ¢ ar fast feenfsrin 230 aaa Tass fs Aq 

SATS UTA MEAT fart wemTaisat shertsaraat yrs: 1 3 kil 

ae afer A aat arforaearomnfeaqn 2 vi aurea Ye: wgunfeaira: | 

aces HY UTA Wea SSMU ARIAT TAT ARTA 3 21 


Ohne Tae A ARAN 24 I 
ar dart yu! omar 
Yeant ward wat + Azar 2 eI 
WATT: UT scree 


fasta xei fe Aft dagerat Aas VM 
AAA TAT Zaks A ATT: 
TAY Ure! AGUA AN VSI 


If you suppose that the objects to be 
effected by sacrificial itcs, performed 
according to the rules of the Rk, Yajur, and 
Sama Vedas, bc the great end of life, attend to 
what I have to say. Any effect which is 
produced through the causality of earth 
partakes of the character of its origin, and 
consists itself of clay; so any act performed by 
perishable agents, such as fuel, clarified butter, 
and Kusa grass, must itself be of but 
temporary efficacy. The great end of life (or 
truth) is considcred by the wise to be eternal; 
but it would be transient, if it were 
accomplished through transitory things. If you 
imagine that this great truth is the performance 
of religious acts, from which no recompense is 
sought, it is not so; for such acts are the means 
of obtaining liberation, and truth is (the end), 
not the means. Meditation on self, again, is 
said to be for the sake of supreme truth; but 
the object of this is to establish distinctions 
(between soul and body), and the great truth of 
all is without distinctions. Union of self with 
supreme spirit 1s said to be the great end of all; 
but this 1s falsc; for onc substance cannot 
become substantially another.’ 


Wat ard Wa: Yl For: WHA: Wes 
WARMEST ST Ma TANSSTT: 1 VSI 
UCATTAAS BPA TATRA 

4 atara galsyaa ufea! Baad 3 oll 


Uae Bay seaming: | 
eaacasueae Aesararay fF Wi 3a 
ofa sttfawrqeet fadtatst waeyseaa: | 


Objects, then, which are considered most 
desirable are infinite. What the great end of all 
is, you shall, monarch, briefly learn from me. 
It is soul: one (in all bodies), pervading, 
uniform, perfect, pre-eminent over nature 
(Prakrti), exempt from birth, growth, and 
decay, omniprescnt, undecaying, made up of 
true knowledge, independent, and unconnected 
with unrealities, with name, species, and the 
rest, in time present, past, or to come. The 
knowledge that this spirit, which is essentially 
one, is in one’s own and in all other bodies, is 
the great end, or true wisdom, of one who 
knows the unity and the true principles of 
things. As one diffusive air, passing through 
the perforations of a flute, is distinguished as 
the notes of the scale (Sharga and the rest), so 
the nature of the great spirit is single, though 
its forms be manifold, arising from the 
consequences of acts. When the difference of 
the investing form, as that of god or the rest, 1s 
destroyed, then there is no distinction.” 


NOTES 

1. You ask what is Sreyas (#44) not what is 
Paramartha (We:); the first means literally ‘best’, 
‘most excellent? and is here used to denote 
temporary and special objects, or sources of 
happiness, as wealth, posterity, power &c.; the 
latter is the one great object or end of life, true 
wisdom or truth, knowledge of the real and 
universal nature of soul. 

2. But this is to be understood as applying to the 
doctrines which distinguish between the vital spirit 
(Jivatma) and the supreme spirit (Paramatma), the 
doctrine of the Yoga. It is here argued, that it is 
absurd to talk of effecting a union between the soul 
of man and supreme soul; for if they are distinct 


BOOK II, CHAP. 15 217 





essentially, they cannot combine, if they are already 
one and the same, it is nonsense to talk of 
accomplishing their union. The great end of life or 
truth is not to effect the union of two things, or two 
parts of one thing, but to know that all is unity 


KKK 


BOOK II, CHAP. 15 


217 





CHAPTER 15 


USSSA: 
(mey-etardare:) 
WU Sarat 
sah WP yaar wérafry 
wayaram farsmagarrtat Bang ei 
Parasara continued— Having terminated 
these remarks, the Brahmana repeated to the 


silent and meditating prince a tale illustrative 
of the doctrines of unity. 


wet sara 


gaat FUMES! ARITTYTT YT 
STARS GTA FTL WBA Fh 
PANT Yat Fetor: UTAABA: | 
fama Frames spat 3 
cer foreat Frertsu ara: WT 
weresafagt Waa UAT FATS 
RATAN ATA A ARN ATATA 

aw mya Peres ATTN Gt 


Brahmana said— “Listen, prince,” he 
proceeded, “to what was formerly uttered by 
Rbhu, imparting holy knowledge to the 
Brahmana Nidagha. Rbhu was a son of the 
supreme Brahma, who, from his innate 
disposition, was of a holy character, and 
acquainted with true wisdom. Nidagha, the son 
of Pulastya, was his disciple; and to him Rbhu 
communicated willingly perfect knowledge, 
not doubting of his being fully confirmed in 
the doctrines of unity, when he had been thus 
instructed. 


tran aan aM a TA 
aygahrrt a yercey Praferaq § 


Tae a afer aware 

Frared AT arg AYMEM SAT FTN on 
feat ataee J ands ATT 

we TY: fore Ferrata on 
U Mey Agtard Welawa 

ferment yerareat Pastagsa wafer eh 
wafesaguint aw Haraaatiren 

sara & fewest ysaarfafa arecqn gon! 

The residence of Pulastya was at 
Viranagara, a large handsome city on the 
banks of the Devika river. In a beautiful grove 
adjoining to the stream the pupil of Rbhu, 
Nidagha, conversant with devotional practices, 
abode. When a thousand divine years had 
elapsed, Rbhu went to the city of Pulastya, to 
visit his disciple. Standing at the doorway, at 
the end of a sacrifice to the Visvadevas, he 
was seen by his scholar, who hastened to 
prcsent him the usual offering, or Arghya, and 
conducted him into the house; and when his 
hands and feet were washed, and he was 
seated, Nidagha invited him respectfully to eat 
(when the following dialoguc ensued): 


RY Vals 
at fayaed! wined ued wad Wel 
We Hea Heay A Wife: Tat AAT VM 
Rbhu, ‘Tell me, illustrious Brahmana, what 


food there is in your house; for I am not fond 
of indifferent viands.’ 


frend sare 


Weh-AaH- ASUS W We! 
ae Trae fees! a A yeRa sere ee 
“Nidagha, ‘There are cakes of meal, rice, 
barley, and pulse in the house; partake, 
venerable sir, of whichever best please you.’ 


RY Ca 
seals fant Goud wae FI 
aara-urvaraia xeaafirarafar wi 23 1 


218 


Rbhu said— ‘None of these do I like; give 
me rice boiled with sugar, wheaten cakes, and 
milk with curds and molasses.’ 


frend Sara 
@ @ wilt ure aq fafsefisierm 


‘\ e 


TOANTAE YS TATA Wargo I 
Nidagha said— ‘Ho dame, be quick and 
prepare whatever is most delicate and sweet in 
the house, to feed our guest.’ 


Delot Saray 


See TA A Ue goad fires aa 

wenferadt we Ss sera 84 

a HART TTA qeua weary 

Frere: wre saver! wera: Fert 26 11 

Having thus spoken, the wife of Nidagha, 

in obedience to her husband’s commands, 
prepared sweet and savoury food, and set it 
before the Brahmana; and Nidagha, having 
stood before him until he had eaten of the 
meal which he had desired, thus reverentially 
addressed him : 


fara sara 
ay a wen gfeaca gieta a 
afta a aad aererenat Hd FR Vott 
aq Fart vary far! ea a wg Tye: 
SETA UW aa Teeter FRAT eet 


Nidaigha said—- ‘Have you __ eaten 
sufficiently, and with pleasure, great 
Brahmana? and has your mind received 
contentment from your food? Where is your 
present residence? whither do you purpose 
going? and whence, holy sir, have you now 
come? 


RY SATA 


qe TAT AAT YSN Frater! waa 

a gantaq ofa: aerat uftpestan ee 
afaat urea anit afer gerne: 
TIM BT altar zor Gera Graai 2 oi 
aga Seantey a wad wal fiat 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


AA: FASTA AAT, TTS T AET 2 kit 
Waa: tae dfeireanifant fen 

SAA BA TL Ges THT aera 2 2A 
ay Farmar aa wate a aq waa 
Hamad ax fraaste Frater A231 
War VATA SAG streareraga Ad: 

Ga: HI Fa WANA AAaaa BMT 2! 


Rbhu said— ‘A hungry man, Brahmana, 
must necds be satisfied when he has finished 
his meal. Why should you tnguire if my 
hunger has been appeased? When the earthy 
element is parched by fire, then hunger is 
engendered; and ‘thirst is produced when the 
moisture of the body has been absorbed (by 
internal or digestive heat). Hunger and thirst 
are the functions of te body, and satisfaction 
must always be afforded me by that by which 
they are removed; for when hunger ts no 
longer sensible, pleasure and contentment of 
mind are faculties of the intellect : ask their 
condition of the mind then, for man is not 
affected by them. For your three other 
questions, Where I dwell? Whither I go? and 
Whence I come? hear this reply. Man (the soul 
of man) goes every where, and penetrates 
every where, like the either; and is it rational 
to inquire where it is? or whence or whither 
you go. 

We Wa Fara Tee: | 

@ Ue aaa we SY Fae GI 
BE A BEAT frarar F Hat aal 

fe aerate vant srat fasraeran 2&1 
fartatgaan ys ysraiss fest! 

BRAS Age Acalenrararyl 21! 

args wat Ys YEtehat WA: 
sifemearaary ferret afr Ve I 


I neither am going nor coming, nor is my 
dwelling in any one place; nor are you, thou; 
nor are others, others; nor am I, I. If you 
wonder what reply I should make to your 
inquiry why I made any distinction between 


BOOK Il, CHAP. 16 


219 





sweetened and unsweetened food, you shall 
hear my explanation. What is there that is 
really sweet or not sweet, to one eating a 
meal? That which is sweet, is no longer so 
when it oeeasions the sense of repletion; and 
that whieh is not sweet, becomes sweet when a 
man (being very hungry) fancies that it is so. 
What food is there that first, middle, and iast is 
equally grateful. 

war fe we weer feat fet wa 

Uladise dar te: ufsad: weap: 281 

aa-TMTA-Tele Ta tet wat afer 

TS Weal WAT Ua: TATA: 13 ol 


Aedes Vaal WaT Yorywiaanyt aA 
art: Waatetar are art fe WHA 3 
As a house built of elay is stregthened by 

fresh plaster, so is this earthly body supported 
by earthly particles; and barley, wheat, pulse, 
butter, oil, milk, eurds, treaele, fruits, and the 
like, are eomposed of atoms of earth. This 
therefore is to be understood by you, that the 
mind whieh properly judges of what is or is 
not sweet is impressed with the notion of 
identity, and that this effeet of identity tends to 
liberation. 


Galva Satay 

sarang aaeey waar FT 

wired VENI Frere araaraaa 3 21 
faa Sara 

wale ufgatate aeaqat CAAT: 

A Temaraud qari F fest 330 

“Having heard these words, conveying the 

substanee of ultimate truth, Nidagha fell at the 
feet of his visitor, and said, ‘Show favour to 
me, illustrious Brahmana, and tell me who it is 
that for my good has come hither, and by 


whose words the infatuation of my mind is 
dissipated.’ 


ANY Saray 
ae cared: waTaTaRa @ fest 
Serarse Greasy weaehetanfad: 113 6 


wanaind fats a ofa dene ST 
STACa TT TT TATA 3 4 I 
To this, Rbhu answered, ‘I am Rbhu, your 

preeeptor, come hither to eommunieate to you 
true wisdom; and having deelared to you what 
that is, I shall depart. Know this whole 
universe to be the one undivided nature of the 
supreme spirit, entitled Vasudeva.’ 


TIT Sata 

aegecat Freres wforarag7: ae 

UA: ULI MT SRST: WATT: 13 GI 
gia siege fatraryt wsreyseara: | 


Thus having spoken, and reeeiving the 
prostrate homage of Nidagha, rendered with 
fervent faith, Rbhu went his way. 

KKK 


BOOK Il, CHAP. 16 


yA Me 





CHAPTER 16 


GSS SeaTa: 
(Ferret sat; Ginaq, eiereraraeyey) 


Pelt Jara 


BMYSIASS F Was ALVA 
CASAS aes WL AAT Vi 
areal afe: aise Fart aaet yPt:| 
weractadtant ye farrier wife 20 

St fad werart waaay 
ATATAHVSATAUaA MAAN 3 It 
Spr frend a eyeuTharE a 

Jala Hentard Wiad Waal TMs 


“After the expiration of another thousand 
years, Rbhu again repaired to the city where 
Nidagha dwelt, to instruct him farther in true 
wisdom. When he arrived near the town, he 
beheld a prince entering into it, with a 
splendid retinue; and his pupil Nidagha 
standing afar off, avoiding the crow; his throat 
shrivelled with starvation, and bearing from 
the thicket fuel and holy grass. Rbhu 


220 


approached him, and _— saluting him 
revercntially (as if he was a_ stranger) 
demanded why he was standing in such a 
retired spot. 


frera sara 


a fan! wraarEl Were Sa 
wfafaet ot weal dara Wiad WaT & I 
Nidagha replied, ‘There is a great crowd of 


people attending the entrance of the king into 
the town, and I am staying here to avoid it.’. 


RY LATA 


AUMGISA HAA: HAMA SA 
aeaat 0 feasts! canhiat wat mt 


‘Tell me, excellent Brahmana,’ said Rbhu, 
‘for I believe that you are wise, which is here 
the king, and which is anyother man.’. 


frera Sara 


Use WWMM TEMG ETAT 
SHEARS ALSISA UT HRAAAT: Al 


‘The king,’ answered Nidagha, ‘is he who 
is seated on the fierce and stately elephant, 
vast aS a mountain peak; the others are his 
attendants.’ 


MY TATA 
at fe WHT Brae afer aT 
waa + fasrror yerafeararecaaiti ¢ ii 
ae Hera Wert! fase waaay: 
Meafrearag tsa TT: HT aT MTT st 


“You have shown me,’ observed Rbhu, ‘at 
one moment the elephant and the king, without 
noticing any peculiar characteristic by which 
they may be distinguished. Tell me, venerable 
sir, is there any difference between them? for I 
am desirous to Know which is here the 
clephant, which is the king.’ 


fara Sara 
Tal asa Tes! suede yore: 
arg-areanaard at a aaa & fast 2011 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


‘The elephant,’ answered Nidagha, ‘is 
underneath; the king is above him. Who js not 
aware, Brahmana, of the relation betwecn that 
which bears and that which is borne?’ 


RY Cary 

WATE GM Teetay Waa 

ara: vreatinel fir fergireg ated 22 

To this Rbhu rejoined, ‘Still explain to me, 

according to what I know of it, this matter: 
what is it that is meant by the word 
underneath, and what is it that is termed 
above?’ As soon as he had uttered this, 


TAIN Fare 
sym: Veaea Fara: we t wT 
TAA HMATAT Bat wa UTS gz 
Seas AT WT AV: Hat TAM 
saat T Ta! Tw aferdt WaT 31 


Brahmana said— Nidagha jumped upon 
Rbhu, and said, ‘Here is my answer to the 
question you have asked: I am above, like the 
Raja; you are underneath, like the elephant. 
This example, Brahmana, is intended for your 
information.’ 


my eara 
wa tea fg! fadisé mae afer 
Aaa wa MATA HATKAMS FAT LVI 
‘Very well,’ said Rbhu, ‘you, it seems, are 
as it were the Raja, and I am like the elephant; 


but come now do you tell me which of us two 
is you; which is I.’ 


Dials Saray 


Soh: MA TAI We WeOTgw 

Feta: Wie Waa aT Ya 84 UI 
APTS TA aM 
aA AT Tat A WTS WEAN 26 Il 
TATA MATS YoY TTON GT: 
Teesenyaten Fara! aya: VU 
aengufad & we WoT wea 
TAA ATATAH TT: NVC 


BOOK IH, CHAP. 16 


221 





Brahmana said— “When Nidagha heard 
these words, he immediately fell at the feet of 
the stranger, and said, ‘Of a surety you are my 
saintly preeeptor Rbhu; the mind of no other 
person is so fully imbued with the doetrines of 
unity as that of my teaeher, and hence | know 
that you are he.” To this Rbhu repled, ‘I am 
your preeeptor, by name Rbhu, who, pleased 
with the dutiful attention he has reeeived, has 
come to Nidagha to give him instruetion: for 
this purpose have I briefly intimated to you 
divine truth, the essenee of which is the non- 
duality of all.’ 


TaN sare 

vaya oat fag Fert a ate: 
PITAS UAHA TATA TAT 82 I 
AAAI TEM A TATA: | 

am geal YHA TAT TRAN Vol 

am canta aaa! qearaitgarra: | 

Ta WaT WAAAAAAATTAH 2 
fartrenfates ate: seat AAs 
giiaafetrrente ales Ul yr eH 2 VI 


Having thus spoken to Nidagha, the 
Brahmana Rbhu went away, leaving his 
diseiple profoundly impressed, by his 
instruetions, with belief in unity. He beheld all 
beings theneeforth as the same with himself, 
and, perfect in holy knowledge, obtained final 
liberation. “Jn like manner do you, oh king, 
who knows what duty is, regarding equally 
friend or foe, consider yourself as one with all 
that exists in the world. Even as the same sky 
ig apparently diversified as white or blue, so 
Soul, whieh is in truth but one, appears to 
erroneous vision distinet in different persons. 


qaqa Aiea Ue AAA 


ase Wu a a a Uada- 
SAE TT ASASAN 2 311 

That One, whieh here is all things, is 
Aechyuta (Visnu); than whom there is none 
other. He is I; he is thou; he is all: this 
universe is his form. Abandon the error of 
distinction.” 
WI Sara 


Scie @ Ustae- 
wean We WHAT: | 

a aia wifrerconeara- 
asd WATTS 2 ¥ I 

ste waa 
wate Bar sori aia: | 

a fancratette arate 
waft a Marg Ala GA 
ofa sitfaorgant fedtaigt wreytseaa: 


ParaSara resumed— The king, being thus 
instrueted, opened his eyes to truth, and 
abandoned the notion of distinct existenee: 
whijst the Brahmana, who, through the 
reeoliection of his former lives, had acquired 
perfeet knowledge, obtained now exemption 
from future birth. Whoever narrates or listens 
to the lessons ineulcated in the dialogue 
between Bharata and the king, has his mind 
enlightened, mistakes not the nature of 
individuality, and the eourse cf his migrations 


becomes fitted for ultimate emancipation.’ 
* K 


NOTES 

1. This legend is a good spccimen of a sectarial 
graft upon a Paurdanik stem. It is in a great measure 
peculiar to the Visnu P., as although it occurs also 
in the Bhagavata, it is narrated there in a much 
more concise manner, and in a strain that looks like 
an abridgment of our next. 


END OF THE SECOND BOOK 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 
BOOK Il 
Tatarst: 





CHAPTER 1 


wearysearea: 


(HaraTfaaruny) 
WH sara 


ai Tou MAT Tae: 
qadhrg tert saiaaraty fara 2 
carat can yfeadtorafe afore 
aqavars aaraecerAN TTT AU 2 
qavgicatid faara aarfary 
TATTOO AG TTT ATT 3 
Taaeiga wReaTATATT 

TAT HMA AGATE AAU 


Maitreva said—The disposition of the earth 
and of the ocean and the system of the sun and 
the planets, the cieation of the gods and the 
rest, the origin of the Rsis, the generation of 
the four castes, the production of brute 
ereatures and the narratives of Dhruva and 
Prahlada, have been fuily related by you, my 
venerable preceptor. | am now desirous to hear 
from you the series of all the Manvantaras, as 
well as an aceount of those who preside over 
the respective periods, with Sakra, the king of 
the gods, at their head. 


TWIG Sara 


aMdaarrarte aa Aaaafor a 
ATS MAA WH HTT TAHA & A 
Parasara replied— I will repeat to you, 
Maitreya, in their order, the different 
Manvantaras; those whieh are past and those 
whieh are to come. 


waraayal WT: Wat Wy: tartare 
START AHS THAMATT ETAT & I 


USt HAASAN: ATMTY TA: Yes 

aataasay BAA AA AAS ATTN 

The first Manu was Svayambhuva. then 
came Svdrocisa, then Auttami, then Tamasa, 
then Raivata, then Caksusa: these six Manus 
have passed away. The Manu who presides 
over the seventh Manvantara, which is the 
present period, is Vaivasvata, the son of the 
sun. 


raya aia Healey Wan 
dat: Mawae AMA HAT WAM 2 
ad He vaaata wat: Tanifarest TI 


TREAT SEI TACT SALAATTATI! 8 1 
Utaat: wafia sat: Tariferasart 


faufinta tert WaraATETaTT: 11 Qo ll 
Sa: TATA MTT enters eT 
frererataiy ct VALAIS TALI 2211 
aa- fares Yat: Tana faret 
fadraney afeerat oy BTA 821 


The period of Svayambhuva Manu, in the 
beginning of the Kalpa, has already been 
deseribed by me, together with the gods, Rsis 
and other personages, who then flourished.’ I 
will now, therefore, enumerate the presiding 
gods, Rsis and sons of the Manu, in the 
Manvantara of Svaroeisa.” The deities of this 
period (or the second Manvantara) were the 
elasses called Paravatas and Tusitas’: and the 
king of the gods was the mighty Vipascit. The 
seven Rsis’ were Urja, Stambha, Prana, 
Dattoli, Rsabha, Niscara and Arvarivat; and 
Caitra, Kimpurusa and others, were the Manu's 
sons. 


Wet aa gar! stafiata a aq: 
MR cag Aaa FAT 23 


BOOK Ill, CHAP. } 


223 





GAARA AMT: FRAT], HAGA: | 
Avaaagy THA WON Beet: Wat evi 
afasrtTaeaat WA MATa Ta 

BT: UTM: BAT 1 BGM 


In the third period or Manvantara of 
Auttami,’ Susanti was the Indra, the king of 
the gods; the orders of whom were the 
Sudhamas, Satyas, Sivas. Pradarsanas and 
Vasavartis’; each of the five orders consisting 
of twelve divinities. The scven sons of Vasist 
ha were the seven Rsis*: and Aja, Parasu, 
Divya and others, were the sons of the Manu.’ 

TAAL SAT: TANT SLATS 

wears werasta wafagritret Wa: Ve 

forfatiaccar ardkesaasacrart: | 

water Saat aa ATA A SqUTN Voll 

Riftarar ya: wrewsats Prada eM 

Wawsear eat Wa Tay UT Ve 

TU: Galt: MRgal TENT RTAM 

YAR THAT SY TST: TA ETAT: I SS Ul 

The Surtpas, Haris, Satyas and Sudhis 
were the elasses of gods, each comprising 
twenty-seven, in the pcriod of Tamasa, the 
fourth Manu.'' Sibi was the Indra, also 
designated by his performanee of a hundred 
sacrifices (or named Satakratu). The seven Rs 
is were Jyotirdhama, Prthu, Kavya, Caitra, 
Agni, Vanaka and Pivara.'* The sons of 


Tamasa were the mighty kings Nara, Khyati, 
Santahaya, Jénujangha and others." 


uaa aft aa! Yaa are ara: 
Tafa cat tala FOTN 2 1 
SANT YACAAHVST: AYATA: | 

WA SANTA USM ATA 2 2 
fear casita ag eae: | 
aeae: GAA A Uy Wey: | 

Wa Badal fay! aaraq Tada 22 
acta: TANTS: Wea ded’: | 
AUST: YAetaral TSA TATA 2 3 


10 


In the fifth interval the Manu was 
Raivata'*: the Indra was Vibhu: the classcs of 
gods, consisting of fourteen each, were the 
Amitaébhas, Abhitarajasas, Vaikunthas and 
Sumedhasas’: the seven Rsis were 
Hiranyaroma, Vedasri, Urddhabahu, 
Vedabahu, Sudhaman, Parjanya and 
Mahamuni’®: the sons of Raivata were 
Balabandhu, Susambhavya, Satyaka and other 
valiant kings. 


Tanifaasiaiter amrat taqetam 
fragaraar aa Wa AAACN 2¥ I 
fanned ara a Uae: faa: 
PIA, ARATE 24 I 


Thesc four Manus, Svaroeisa, Auttami, 
Tamasa and Raivata, were all descended from 
Priyavrata, who, in eonsequence of propitiat- 
ing Visnu by his devotions, obtained these 
rulers of the Manvantaras for his posterity. 


US Watt AAMAS TY: 

Tita care Fata TH 261 

Te: WaT weer ees fede: 

TSU MEET VAS IVT TTT V0 

que famnda efaergaay wey: 

SAAT few TATafat AIT VN 

He: FS: MAIS: FAI: | 

MYT TA: Yat: yratarats war 2 8 

Caksusa was the Manu of the sixth 

period’: in which the Indra was Manojava: the 
five classes of gods were the Adyas, Prastitas, 
Bhavyas, Prthugas and the magnanimous 
Lekhas, eight of each'®: Sumedhas, Virajas, 
Havismat, Uttama, Madhu, Abhinfman and 
Sahisnu were the scven sages’: the kings of 


the earth, the sons of Caksusa, were the 
powerful Uru, Puru, Satadyumna and others. 


faacaa: Yat far! sregeat waresfet: | 
aq: Gadd a AA AAAS 3 oll 
STfea-Ag-VM Sa TENT | 
qeardars Taq! freprat: 113 2 
afag: APAUsaTfastarty: AAA: | 


224 


faantaat axgrt: GA WAVAISMATN 3 211 
seaiasa at ge: walfata a 
aheray faa am sfes wa a3 3 
HEY JOT IQ cena: | 
Aaldaraareaed Aa VAT anftent: 13 I 


The Manu of the present period is the wise 
lord of obsequies, the illustrious offspring of 
the sun: the deities are the Adityas, Vasus and 
Rudras; their sovereign is Purandara: Vasistha, 
Kasyapa, Atri, Jamadagni, Gautama, 
Visvamitra and Bharadvaja are the seven Rsis: 
and the nine pious sons of Vaivasvata Manu 
are the kings Iksvaéku, Ndabhaga, Dhrsta, 
Sanyati, NariSyanta, Nabhanidista, Karisa, 
Prisadhra and the celcbrated Vasumat.”” 


famstharitoen aratfaent Ferat Ferm 
Tatar careafafrstarn 34 I 
SINT TAT TSH BR: TTIAASAT 
SHA AAA SA STA: WASH 3g Il 
da: U4: @ a Wa: We anifasan 
qfearat agers wieght: WE zo 
Baa a da Waa FA: Fa 
AMAA AT: A: ME FUT cl 
AMAR da ATA Yara fel 

earat eft: art eta aye Bi 3e i 
Taser ta: Wap AAAs TaA 
aa tad: ate tadaad aft: vol 
MYN UrPat tat Aqua: Waara: | 
fanaa wa aguddad: TEx v1 
wat 7 wos aM dara fea! 

arat: Hyanre fanaa Bays FS 2M 
fat: anitatectarfaran Yt weer 
Gears acted at Precaoea qi ¥ 3 


The uiequalled energy of Visnu combining 
with the quality of goodness and effecting the 
preservation of created things, presides over 
all the Manvantaras in the form of a divinity. 
Of a portion of that divinity Yajfia was born in 
the Svayambhuva Manvantara, the will- 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 
begotten progeny of Akiti.”2! When the 
Svadrocisa Manvantara had arrived, that divine 
Yajnia was born as Ajita, along with the Tusita 
gods, the sons of Tusita. In the third 
Manvantara, Tusita was again born of Satya, 
as Satya, along with the class of deities so 
denominated. In the next pcriod, Satya became 
Hari, along with the Haris, the children of 
Hari. The excellent Hari was again born in the 
Raivata Manvantara, of Sambhitti, as Manasa, 
along with the gods called Abhitarajasas. In 
the next period, Visnu was born of Vikunthi, 
as Vaikuntha. In the present Manvantara, Vis 
nu was again born as Vdmana, the son of 
Kasyapa by Aditi. With three paces he 
subdued the worlds and gave them, freed from 
all embarrassment, to Purandara.”” 


SAMA ATTA a 

Tersanrary far! af: Wagan: WTSI 
erg fate We TAT WRT ARIA: | 
Tae a vreat fasta: wag YI 


aa a tat Wa: WEN: 
Basa Ye AT TAaET| 

Soa Ast Fresrennit 
faeoirsrareg feeyerea ea: YE I 
sta stare ery Felkatset weratsearea: 11 VI 


These are the seven persons by whom, in 
the several Manvantaras, created beings have 
been protected. Because this whole world has 
been pervaded by the energy of the deity, he is 
entitled Visnu, from the root Vis, 'to enter’ or 
‘pervade’; for all the gods. the Manus, the 
seven Rsis, the sons of the Manus, the Indras 
the sovereigns of the gods, all are but the 
impersonated might of Visnu.”” 

*¥*k* 
NOTES 

1. The gods were said to be the Yamas (Bk. I. 
Ch. VII.); the Rsis were Marici, Angiras, etc. (Bk. 
1. Ch. VII. n. 2); and the sons were Priyavrata and 
Uttanapada (Bk. J. Ch. VII.). The Vayu adds to the 
Yamas, the Ajitas, who share with the former, it 
observes, sacrificial offerings. The Matsya, Padma, 


BOOK Ill, CHAP. 1 


225 





Brahma Purana and Hari Varhsa substitute for the 
sons, the grandsons of Svayambhuva, Agnidhra and 
the rest (Bk. II. Ch. 1). 

2. This Manu, according to the legend of his 
birth in the Markandeya Purana, was the son of 
Svarocisa, so named from the splendour of his 
appearance when born and who was the son of the 
nymph Varuthini by the Gandharba Kali. The text, 
in another place, makes him a son of Priyavrata. 

3. The Vayu gives the names of the individuals 
of these two classes, consisting each of twelve. It 
furnishes also the nomenclature of all the classes of 
divinities and of the sons of the Manus in each 
Manvantara. According to the same authority, the 
Tusitas were the sons of Kratu : the Bhagavata calls 
them the sons of Tusité by Vedasiras. The divinities 
of each period are according to the Vayu, those to 
whom offerings of the Soma juice and the like are 
presented collectively. 

4. The Vayu describes the Rsis of each 
Manvantara as the sons or in some cases the 
descendants in. a direct line, of the seven sages, 
Atri, Angiras, Bhrgu, Kasyapa, Pulaha, Pulastya 
and Vasistha; with some inconsistency, for 
Kasyapa, at least, did not appear himself until the 
seventh Manvantara. In the present series Urja is 
the son of Vasistha. Stambha springs from 
Kasyapa, Prana from Bhrgu, Dattoli is the son of 
Pulastya, Rsabha descends from Angiras, Niscara 
from Atri and Arvarivat is the son of Pulaha. The 
Brahma Purana and Hari Vamsa have a rather 
different list or Aurva, Stambha, Kasyapa, Prana, 
Brhaspati, Cyavana and Dattoli: but the origin of 
part of this difference is nothing more than an 
imperfect quotation from the Vayu Purdna; the two 
first, Aurva and Stambha, being specified as the son 
of Vasistha and the descendant of Kasyapa and then 
the parentage of the rest being omitted : to 
complete the seven, therefore, Kasyapa becomes 
one of them. Some other errors of this nature occur 
in these two works and from the same cause, 
blundering citation of the Vayu, which is named as 
their authority (wa aevaera aur Wetadt:). A 
curious peculiarity also occurs in these mistakes. 
They are confined to the first eight Manvantaras. 
The Brahma Purana omits all details of the last six 
and the Hari Varnsa inserts them fully and 
correctly, agreeably to the authority of the Vayu. It 
looks, therefore, as if the compiler of the Hari 


Varnsa had followed the Brahma, as far as it went, 
right or wrong : but had bad recourse to the original 
Vayu P, when the Brahma failed him. Dattoni is 
sometimes written Dattoli and Dattotri; and the 
latter appears to have been the case with the copy 
of the Hari Varhsa employed by M. Langlois, who 
makes one of the Rsis of this Manvantara, “le 
penitent Atri." He is not without countenance in 
some such reading, for the Padma Purana changes 
the name to Dattatreya, no doubt suggested by 
Datta-atri. Dattatreya, however, is the son of Atri; 
while the Vayu calls the person of the text the son 
of Pulastya. There can be no doubt therefore of the 
correct reading, for the son of Pulastya is Dattoli. 
(Bk, I. Ch. X.) 

5. The Vayu agrees with the text in these names, 
adding seven others. The Bhagavata has a different 
series. The Padma has four other names, Nabha, 
Nabhasya, Prasrti, Bhavana. The Brahma has ten 
names, including two of these and several of the 
names of the Rsis of the tenth Manvantara. The 
Matsya has the four names of the Padma for the 
sons of the Manu and gives seven others, 
Havindhra, Sukrta, Miirtti, Apas, Jyotir, Aya, Smrta 
(the names of the Brahmé), as the seven Prajapatis 
of this period and sons of Vasistha. The sons of 
Vasistha, however, belong to the third Manvantara 
and bear different appellations. There is, no doubt, 
some blundering here in all the books except the 
Vayu and those which agree with it. 

6. The name occurs Auttami, Auttama and 
Uttama. The Bhigavata and Vayu agree with our 
text (Bk. III. Ch. I) in making him a descendant 
from Priyavrata. The Markandeya calls him the son 
of Uttama, the son of Uttanapada : and this appears 
to be the correct genealogy, both from our text and 
the Bhagavata. 


7. The Brahma and Hari Vamsa have, in 
place of these, the Bhanus; but the Vayu and 
Markandeya concur with the text. 

8. All the authorities agree in this: but the 
Brahma and Hari Vamsa appear to furnish a 
different series also; or even a third, according to 
the French translation ‘Dans le troisieme 
Manvantara parurent comme Saptarchis leg fils de 
Vasichtha, de son nom appeles Vasichthas, les fils 
de Hiranyagarbha et les illustres enfans d'Ourdja.' 


The text is, @asqat: wae, alae ga fas: 


226 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





farminicy ga siintamaqana:i The meaning of 


which is, ‘There were (in the first Manvantara) 
scven celebrated sons of Vasistha, who (in the third 
Manvantara) were sons of Brahm (i.e. Rsis), the 
illustrious posterity of Urjja. We have already seen 
that Urjja was the wife of Vasistha, by whom she 
had seven sons, Rayas' (see Bk. I. Ch. X.), in the 
Svayambhuva Manvantara; and these were born 
again as the Rsis of the third period. The name of 
these persons, according to the Matsya and Padma, 
are however very different from those of the sons 
of Vasistha, given Bk. 1. Ch. X. or Kaukundihi, 
Kurundi, Dalaya, Sarikha, Pravahita, Mita and 
Sammita. 

9. The Vayu adds ten other namcs to those of the 
text. The Brahma gives ten altogether different. The 
Bhagavata and Padma have each a separate 
nomenclature. 

10. Of these, the Brahma and Hari Varhsa notice 
only the Satyas : the Matsya and Padma have only 
Sadhyas. The Vayu, Bhagavata, Korma and 
Markandeya agree with the text. 

11. He is the son of Priyavrata, according to the 
text, the Vayu, etc. The Markandeya has a legend 
of his birth by a doe; and from his being begotten 
in dark, tempestuous weather (TA), he derives his 
name, 

12. Severally, according to the V4yu, the 
progeny of Bhrgu, Kasyapa, Angiras, Pulastya, 
Atri, Vasistha and Pulaha. There is considerable 
variety in some of the names. Thus the Matsya has 
Kavi, Prthu, Agni, Salpa, Dhimat, Kapi, Akapi. The 
Hari Varmsa has Kavya, Prthu, Agni, Jahnu, Dhatri, 
Kapivat, Akapivat. For the two last the Vayu reads 
Gatra and Vanakapivat. The son of Pulaha is in his 
place (Bk [. Ch. X. n. 6), Arvarivat or Vanakapivat. 
Gatra is amongst the sons of Vasistha (BK. I Ch. 
X). The Vayu is therefore probably most correct, 
although our text, in regard to these two 
denominations, admits of no doubt; afataedat 
bICesE 

13. The Vayu, agree with the text; the Vayu 
naming eleven, the Brahma, Matsya and Padma 
have a series of ten names, Sutapas, Tapomila; of 
which seven are the Rsis of the twelfth Manvantara. 

14, Raivata, as well as his three predecessors, is 
regarded usually as a descendant of Priyavrata, The 
Markandcya has a long legend of his birth, as the 
son of king Durgama by the nymph Revati, sprung 


from the constellation Revati, whom Ritavak, a 
Muni, caused to fall from heaven. Her radiance 
became a lake on mount Kumuda, hence called 
Raivataka; and from it appeared the damsel, who 
was brought up by Pramuca Muni. Upon the 
marriage Of Revati, the Muni, at her request, 
restored the asterism to its place in the skies, 

15. The Brahma inserts of these only the 
Abhitarajasas, with the remark, that 'they were of 
like nature (with their name) @aaeERTaa WHAa: 
mt: | 1.e., they were exempt from the quality of 
passion. M. Langlois, in rendering the parallel 
passage of the Hari Vamsa. has confounded the 
epithet and the subject : ‘dont les dieux furent les 
Pracritis, depourvu de colere et de passion.’ He is 
also at a loss what to do with the terms Pariplava 
and Ratbhya, in the following passage; 
witwtastaa! asking, ‘qu’est ce quo Pariplava? 
qu’est ce que Rebhya?' If he had the commentary at 
hand, these questions would have been 
unnecessary: they are there said to be two classes of 
divinities : I STATON | 

16. There is less variety in these names than 
usual. Vedabaéhu is read Devabahu; Sudhadman, 
Satyanetra; and Mahdmuni, Muni, Yajur, Vasistha 
and Yadudhra. According to the Vayu, those of the 
text are respectively of the lineage of Angiras, 
Bhreu, Vasistha, Pulastya, Atri, Pulaha and 
Kasyapa. There is considerable variety in the names 
of the Manu's sons. 

17. Caksusa, according to the best authorities, 
descended from Dhruva (see Bk. I. Ch. XIII); but 
the Markandeya has a legend of his birth as the son 
of a Ksatriya, named Anamitra; of his being 
exchanged at his birth for the son of Visranta Raja 
and being brought up by the prince as his own; of 
his revealing the business when a man and 
propitiating Brahma by his devotions; in 
consequence of whiciu he became a Manu. In his 
former birth he was born from the eye of Brahma : 
when his name, from Caksusa, ‘the eye.’ 

18. The authorities agree as to the number, but 
differ as to the names : reading for Adyas, Aryas 
and Apyas: for Prastitas, Prabhitas and Prasittas; 
for Prthugas, Prthukas and Prthusas; and, which is a 
more wide deviation, Rbhus for Bhavyas. M. 
Langlois omits the Prasittas and inserts Divaukasas; 
but the latter, meaning ‘divinitics,’ is only an 
epithet. The Hari Varhsa has, Set: Wa Fa: 
yamafedtha: | MEts~— The comment adds, featma 
sha aaai faerety | 


BOOK III, CHAP. 2 


22) 





19. The Vayu reads Sudhdman for the first 
name; Unnata for Uttama; and Abhimdna for 
Abhindman. The latter occurs also Abhindmin 
(Matsya) and Atinadman (Hari Varsa). The latter 
reads, no doubt incorrectly, Bhrgu, Nabha and 
Vivasvat for Uttama, Madhu and Havismat. The 
sons of Caksusa are enumerated, Bk. J. Ch. XIU. 

2Q, There is no great variety of nomenclature in 
this Manvantara. The Vayu adds to the deities the 
Sdidhyas, Visvas, Maruts and gods sprung from 
Bhrgu and Angiras. The Bhagavata adds the Rbhus 
: and most include the two ASvins as a class. Of the 
Maruts, however, the Hari Varhsa remarks that they 
are born in every Manvantara, seven times seven 
(or forty-nine); that in each Manvantara four times 
seven or twenty-eight, obtain emancipation, but 
their places are filled up by persons reborn in that 
character. So the commentator explains the 
passages FAIRY Weary Wire: GA Was: and Wart 
Star TR: GAH: WH: TAA CHATS Ae 
cam: wWaaaat vari Comment, tat Akt WAR: Baal 
stetfasiqned: | Comment. It may be suspected, 
however, that these passages have been derived 
from the simple statement of the Matsya, that in all 
the Manvantara classes of Rsis appear by seven and 
seven and having established a code of law and 
morality, depart to felicity : Fay Gedy Wa wa 
TENA: | Peal wera Walt WH Wt The Vayu has 
a rather different list of the seven Rsis; or Vasumat, 
the son of Vasistha; Vatsdra, descended from 
KaSyapa; Visvamitra, the son of Gadhi and of the 
Kusika race; Jamadagni, son of Kuru, of the race of 
Bhrgu; Bharadvaja, son of Brhaspati; Saradvat, son 
of Gautama, of the family of Utatthya; and 
Brahmakoéga or Atri, descended from Brahma. All 
the other authorities agree with our text. 

21. The nominal father being the patriarch Ruci. 
(See Bkel- Chy VIL) 

22. There is no further account of this 
incarnation in the Visnu Purana. Fuller details 
occur in the Bhagavata, Kirma, Matsya and 
Vamana Puranas, The first of these (b. VIII. c. 15- 
23) relates the penance and sacrifices of Bali, son 
of Virocana, by which he had-overcome Indra and 
the gods and obtained supreme dominion over the 
three spheres. Visnu, at the request of the deities, 
was born as a dwarf, Vamana, the son of Aditi by 
Kasyapa. who, applying to Bali for alms, was 
promised by the prince whatever he might demand, 


notwithstanding Sukra, the preceptor of the 
Daityas, apprised him whom he had to decal with. 
The dwarf demanded as much space as he could 
step over at three steps; and upon the assent of Bali, 
enlarged himself to such dimensions as to stride 
over the three worlds. Being worshipped however 
by Bali and his ancestor Prahlada, he conceded to 
them the sovereignty of Patala. 
23. See the same etymology, Bk. J. ch. I. n. 7. 


ek ek 


BOOK III, CHAP. 2 227 


CHAPTER 2 
fedtatseara: 


(Mavaferantaray, aeqol ms) 
WAT Jared 


RAI saat Teas aI 
qaaoaty fart! warend warefan 2 


Maitreya said-You have recapitulated to 
me, most excellent Brahmana, the particulars 
of the past Manvantaras; now give me some 
account of those which are to come. 


UU SAT 
Beker ett Hara ferret: | 
aya at wa daventr FAM 21 
AEA FJ A ARAVA FART a 
Wy: PASS wat Ba aTa TaN 311 
AAT SATA 
What ASR aaa vil 
STATEM Tat PTT TATA splat aay 
aera afeahearae WAGs 4 UI 
ad fader qaaroraterae 
aafaetan zest area ata ferarqu & 
airauet: USA Wet taraanfah 
AAMAS Tard Teast aT ATA: WI 
sna 8 Wa: Gat TI War Ta: 
aA: WHA fant WaT geil 
giana yay Tel afagrary 


228 


FAAMATA ALT T APIA AMSTAT I 8 I 

aq Garg aera Aa: yrfad feerartom 

ARATE Wt OPATAI Ro I 

aba tat a4 famterracrd 

froesta exer firfaent ereet a Veit 

Vin Teer SaaS Taree 

dead darat a7 faaent aaaqi 82 

Parasara said~ Sanjfia, the daughter of 
Visvakarman, was the wife of the sun and bore 
him three children, the Manu (Vaivasvata), 
Yama and the goddess Yami (or the Yamuna 
river). Unable to endure the fervours of her 
lord, Sanjfia gave him Chaya! as his handmaid 
and repaired to the forests to practise devout 
exercises. The sun, supposing Chaya to be his 
wife Sanjfia, begot by her three other children, 
Sanigcara (Saturn), another Manu (Savarni) 
and a daughter Tapatt (the Tapti river). Chaya, 
upon one occasion, being offended with 
Yama, the son of Sanjnd, denounced an 
imprecation upon him and thereby revealed to 
Yama and to the sun that the was not in truth 
Sanjfid, the mother of the former. Being 
further informed by Chay4 that his wife had 
gone to the wilderness, the sun beheld her by 
the eye of medication engaged in austerities, in 
the figure of a mare (in the region of Uttara 
Kuru). Metamorphosing himself into a horse, 
he rejoined his wife and begot three other 
children, the two Asvins and Revanta and then 
brought Sanjfia back to his own dwelling. To 
diminish his intensity, Visvakarman placed the 
luminary on his lathe, to grind off some of his 
effulgence; and in this manner reduced it an 
eighth, for more than that was inseparable.’ 
The parts of the divine Vaisnava splendour, 
resiuing in the sun, that were filed off by 
Visvakarman, fell blazing down upon the earth 
and the artist constructed of them the discus of 
Visnu, the trident of Siva, the weapon’ of the 
god of wealth, the lance of K4rtikeya and the 
weapons of the other gods: all these 
Visvakarman fabricated from the superfluous 
rays of the sun.” 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


Brardarya Sa fara: wea Wy: | 

yao Wauisat araforedst Brea 83 1 

Te a Bad Malorne 

aeQUET Herre! safareat aerenfr A evi 

araforg agatsat Aya! sfeen aa: 

Fara TMT AAT FT RG 

ai Wore earache fags: wa: 

aaatae aaah afareary APTATAN 2g II 

aifaary metal Wa: Har aforear Tze: 

AGA TA ATA RAPS AAA: | VI 

FAME: UATARTCTAT: | 

farrrrgaanst afettsy wacarter ecu 

farmenatiaiay fraterereare 

aranieg war: yar afar Tet: eet 

The son of Chaya, who was called also a 
Manu, was denominated Savarni,” from being 
of the same caste (Savarna) as his elder 
brother, the Manu Vaivasvata. He presides 
over the ensuing or eighth Manvantara; the 
particulars of which and the following, I will 
now relate. In the period in which S4varni 
shall be the Manu, the classes of the gods will 
be Sutapas, Amitaébhas and Mukhyas; twenty- 
one of each. The seven Rsis will be Diptimat, 
Galava, Rama, Krpa, Drauni; my son Vyasa 
will be the sixth and the seventh will be Rs 
yasmga.’ The Indra will be Bali, the sinless 
son of Virocana, who through the favour of 
Visnu is actually sovereign of part of PAtala. 
The royal progeny of Savarni will be Virajas, 
Arvarivas, Nirmoha and others. 

wat ceraraant ater! sft Aq: | 

Ure watfertier qeratoreran Fra 2 ot 

wfereatel et SAT WeeAY BIER TUT: 

Taal Nerarat wfasrerg ar Fast 2 vi 

wae Oar wen ager gfe 

SAA VAN: AMAA A USVT 2 VII 

gandeltad: ween Fara: 

UYMATNET AMT SAT ATAU TATA: 112 3 1 


BOOK III, CHAP. 2 


229 





The ninth Manu will be Daksa-sdvarni.® 
The Paras, Maricigarbhas and Sudharmas will 
be the three classes of divinities, each 
consisting of twelve; their powerful chief will 
be the Indra Adbhuta, Savana, Dyutimat, 
Bhavya, Vasu, Medhatithi, Jyotisman and 
Satya will be the seven Rsis. Dhrtaketu, 
Drptiketu, Paficahasta, Niramaya, Prthusrava 
and others, will be the sons of the Manu. 


aN Ternraunifaca yt! wy: 
GAA FAQs T VATA YUU 2 wl 
anita ufaa wate Ware: 

waaay wear A Aat AT FOTN VN 
ear Yat: Weal wagers: | 
ATS MAT Bee TN 2G N 
qaagiedtones eftearear ay 
werarduryang wear ayer ot 


In the tenth Manvantara the Manu will be 
Brahmé-savarni: the gods will be the 
Sudhdmas, Viruddhas and Satasankhyas: the 
Indra will be the mighty Santi: the Rsis will be 
Havisman, Sukrti, Satya, Apammifrtti, 
Nabhaga, Apratimaujas and Satyaketu: and the 
ten sons of the Manu will be Suksetra, 
Uttamaujas, Harisena and others. 


Weave Usa marafarant Ay: | 

faezur: area Frarorereretann 2611 

TUNTRaT Tal CAT ears Afaerary! 

Uehara TEP st FTN VW 

Perantasny ager faraprrettr: | 

SaTAAEAA MM: WATT 3 0 1 

aan: Wat @ canara 

fast Aare Tra: Yaa: 3 Wn 

In the eleventh Manvantara the Manu will 

be Dharma-savarni: the principal classes of 
gods will be the Viharhngamas, Kamagamas 
and Nirmdnaratis, each thirty in number’; of 
whom Vrsa will be the Indra: the Rsts will be 
Niscara, Agnitejas, Vapusman, Visnu, Aruni, 
Havisman and Anagha: the kings of the earth 


and sons of the Manu, will be Savarga, 
Sarvadharma, Devanika and others. 


BUA Want visa gay wy: 

CITT ST RY Mera OT A YTTN 3 VN 

ater dfgar area Yarar few! 

GaaOwy WT SoH: TH SA AV 33H 

arat Yaya aaryfererarehe: | 

auth eenret: MANE ATT Sw 

qaaqueay Cassa ETM 

Wael Uetatar wat Yat FAN 34M 

In the twelfth Manvantara the son of 
Rudra-savarni, will be the Manu: Ritudhaéma 
will be the Indra: and the Haritas, Lohitas, 
Sumanasas and Sukarmas will be the classes 
of gods, each comprising fifteen. Tapasvi, 
Sutapas, Tapomirtti, Taporati, Tapodhrti, 
Tapodyuti and Tapodhana will be the Rsis: 
and Devavaén, Upadeva, Devasrestha and 


others, will be the Manu's sons and mighty 
monarchs on the earth. 


waremt Terran vfeeaft yt!) wy: 
BATT: YAU; YRATVTETATATT: 1 3 & 
wafasigiers tart a yf won: 
fearafrterterartasy wfereafen 3911 
froigeraest a Frrmncat frecqa: | 
ars: VAI: YATT YAN zoN 
ara eT Ga Pater FI 
farenfafaaren ufaeater wetfert: 1 3en 


In the thirteenth Manvantara the Manu will 
be Raucya’’: (he classes of gods, thirty-three 
in each, will be the Sudhdmans, Sudharmans 
and Sukarmans; their Indra will be Divaspatti: 
the Rsis will be Nirmoha, Tatvadarsin, Nis 
prakampa, Nirutsuka, Dhrtimat, Avyaya and 
Sutapas: and Citrasena, Vicitra and others, will 
be the kings. 


aiegqasiana tra! afear aq: 
Qratta: Geonredat UF JOST AN oN 
areata Ufaatar attest anfsraretem 
ANTS 4 Far: MATA F sgupN v gH 


230 


amare: yfa: wat ameishas wa a 

FMAM AA ATTA: TOT ¥ 2 

SHASTA TARA Yat FAT: | 

cafaeat Prencet! wrerreatar @ WET ¥ 3 i 

In the fourteenth Manvantara, Bhautya will 
be the Manu’’: Suci, the Indra: the five classes 
of gods will be the Caksusas, the Pavitras, 
Kanisthas, Bhrajiras and Vdavriddhas: the 
seven Rsis will be Agnibahu, Suci, Sukra, 
Magadha, Grdhra, Yukta and Ajita: and the 
sons of the Manu will be Uru, Gabhira, 
Bradhna and others, who will be kings and 
will rule over the earth.’ 


aqard deri wad feet fara: 
wadarea amet afa wader: feasuw vi 
ae Ha Wefaw! worar Arad wy: 

SAT UAH J MAAAATY AT SG 
qatar & wat: gat qaaraacy 31 
aaa Rags ateg: UfTaTe TAT ¥ gM 
WT: ada Sar WOT wt: Gat: | 
Ta Tae yronstarterant Tor: it v9 it 


At the end of every four ages there is a 
disappearance of the Vedas and it is the 
province of the seven Rsis to come down upon 
earth from heaven to give them currency 
again. In every Krta age the Manu (of the 
period) is the legislator or author of the body 
of law, the Smrti: the deities of the different 
classes receive the sacrifices during the 
Manvantaras to which they severally belong: 
and the sons of the Manu themselves and their 
descendants, are the sovereigns of the earth for 
the whole of the same term. The Manu, the 
seven Rsis, the gods, the sons of the Manu, 
who are the kings and Indra, are the beings 
who preside over the world during each 
Manvantara. 


aqemtatdeg madris! 
Vea: HET Fyre TATA Yo 
aaa o fren aat vata were! 


TARA: VA PATA AUTA! ¥ 2 1 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


Ahead Fear wTarteHe fay: 
Tanraniferedt far waya WATT: 4 0 I 


Wa: Wal WTA, Ga Yes AMT YA: 

Bis BURST HEY Hed TANTOT: 1 2 

Waal YY: Vay Vat: BATT 

tifrernlsyr: FRaftrent sora FesraTA & 21 

agyiserat fac: feafrearaneert: | 

Grea Hert Ga Aya! TAHT 31 

An entire Kalpa, oh Brahmana, is said to 
comprise a thousand ages or fourteen 
Manvantaras;'’ and it is succeeded by a night 
of similar duration; during which, he who 
wears the form of Brahma, Jandrdana, the 
substance of al] things, the lord of all and 
creator of all, involved in his own illusions 
and having swallowed up the three spheres, 
sleeps upon the serpent Sesa, amidst the 
ocean.'* Being after that awake, he, who is the 
universal soul, again creates all things as they 
were before, in combination with the property 
of foulness (or activity): and in a portion of his 
essence, associated with the property of 
goodness, he, as the Manus, the kings, the 
gods and their Indras, as well as the seven Rs 
is, is the preserver of the world. In what 
manner Visnu, who is characterised by the 
attribute of providence during the four ages, 
effected their preservation, I will next, 
Maitreya, explain. 


Ha Bt wt we airenigerangagl 

Salt MAMA Masyasd Ts & Vl 
aHRaaeUTT TATA wT wy: 

Sort Fae Hay Uae SATE & GH 

aan aque grat wrarnday: | 

HUA Agel TA ACSA ATA RATHN & & A 

aah et oer HATA WAHT: 

SHAS SHAM APT waa wy 4 Ol 
Taras ay wa atta ach a 

Brat Utara Area Safa ATG cH 


BOOK III, CHAP. 2 


231 





In the Krta age, Visnu, in the form of Mahadeva, obtained the rank of Lokapala and 


Kapila and other inspired teachers, assiduous 
for the benefit of all creatures, imparts to them 
true wisdom. In the Treta age he restrains the 
wicked, in the form of a universal monarch 
and protects the three worlds.’° In the Dvapara 
age, in the person of Veda-vydsa, he divides 
the one Veda into four and distributes it into 
innumerable branches: and at the end of the 
Kali or fourth age he appears as Kaeki and re- 
establishes the iniquitous in the paths of 
rectitude. In this manner the universal spirit 
preserves, creates and at last destroys, all the 
world. 


Wd wet uae Way: | 
TeaAAT aT far: ! Barta: Afra y eit 
arvagenir aferat war aa 
weufaasa fara Hera ag ot 
sf sttfaengerat qditatst fadtetseara: i 

Thus, Brahmana, I have described to you 
the true nature of that great being who is all 
things and besides whom there is no other 
existent thing, nor has there been, nor will 
there be, either here or elsewhere. J have also 
enumerated to you the Manvantaras and those 
who preside over them. What else do you wish 
to hear? 

kaAK. 
NOTES 

1. That is, her shadow or image. It also means 
‘shade’. The Bhagavata, however, makes both 
Sanjfiaé and Chaya daughters of Visvakarman. 
According to the Matsya, Vivasavat, the son of 
Kasyapa and Aditi, had three wives, Rajni, the 
daughter of Raivata, by whom he had Revanta; 
Prabha, by whom he had Prabhiata; and by Sanjnia, 
the daughter of Tvastri, the Manu and Yama and 
Yamuna. The storv then proceeds much as in the 
text. 

2. Yama, provoked at her partiality for her own 
children, abused Chaya and lifted up his foot to 
kick her. She cursed him to have his leg affected 
with sores and worms; but his father bestowed upon 
him a cock, to eat the worms and remove the 
discharge; and Yama, afterwards propitiating 


sovereign of Tartarus. 

3. The Matsya says he trimmed the sun every 
where except in the feet, the extent of which is 
could not discern. Consequently in pictures or 
images the feet of the sun must never be delineated, 
under pain of leprosy, etc. 

4. The term of Sivika, which properly means ‘a 
litter’. The commentator calls it Astra, 'a weapon’. 

5. This legend is told, with some variations of no 
great importance, in the Matsya, Markandeya and 
Padma Purana (Svarga Khanda), in the Bhagavata 
and Hari Varnhsa. 

6. The Markandeya, while it admits Savarni to 
be the son of the sun, has a legend of his former 
birth, in the Svarocisa Manvantara, as Suratha Raja, 
who became a Manu by having then propitiated 
Devi. It was to him that the Durga Mahatmya or 
Candi, the popular narrative of Durga's triumphs 
over various demons, was natrated. 

7. The Vayu has Jamadagnya or Parasurama, of 
the Kusika race; Galava, of that of Bhrgu; 
Dvaipayana (or Vy4sa), of the family of Vasistha, 
Krpa, the son Saradvat; Diptimat, descended from 
Atri; Rsyasrmmna, from Kasyapa; and Asvatthaman, 
the son of Drona, of the Bharadvaja family. The 
Matsya and Padma have Satdnanda in place of 
Diptimat. 

8. The four following Savarnis are described in 
the Vayu as the mind-engendered, sons of a 
daughter of Daksa, named either Suvrata (Vayu) or 
Priya (Brahma) by himself and the three gods, 
Brahma, Dharma and Rudra, to whom he presented 
her on mount Meru; whence they are called also 
Meru-savarnis. They are termed Savarnis from their 
being of one family or caste : 
TAA PARS: 1 Pant Aaa aac | ay ad! 
According to the same authority, followed by the 
Hari Varhsa, it appears that this Manu is also called 
Rohita. Most of the details of this and the following 
Manvantaras are omitted in the Matsya, Brahma, 
Padma and Markandeya Puranas. The Bhagavata 
and Kirma give the same as our text; and the Vayu, 
which agrees very nearly with it, is followed in 
most respects by the Hari Varnsa. The Matsya and 
the Padma are peculiar in their series and 
nomenclature of the Manus themselves, called the 
9" Raucya, 10" Bhautya, 11'" Merusavarni, son of 
Brahma, 12” Rtu, 13” Ritadhaman and 14" 


232 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





Visvaksena. The Bhagavata called the two last always considered as consentaneous with the day 


Manus, Deva-savarni and Indra-savarni. and night of Brahma alone. 
9, Hence the Vayu identifies the first with days, 15. As a Cakravarttin. 
the second with nights and the third with hours. 7 2k 


10. The son of the Prajapati Ruci (Vayu), by the 
nymph Manini, the daughter of the Apsaras 
Pramaloca (Markandeya). 

Il. Son of Kavi, by the goddess, Bhtti, 
according to the Vayu; but the Markandeya makes 
Bhiti the son of Angiras, whose pupil Santi, having 
suffered the holy firc to got out in his master's 
absence, prayed to Agni and so propitiatcd him, 
that he not only re-lighted the flame, but desired © 
Santi to demand a further boon. Santi accordingly 
solicited a son for his Guru; which son was Bhtoti, 
the father of the Manu Bhautya. 

12. Although the Puranas which give an account 
of the Manvantaras agree in some of the principal 
details, yet in the minor ones they offer many 
varieties, some of which have been noticed. These 
chiefly regard the first six and the eighth. Except in 
a few individual peculiarities, the authorities seem 
to arrange themselves in two classes; one 
comprehending the Visnu, Vayu, Karma, 
Bhagavata and Markandeya; and the other the 
Matsya, Padma, Brahma and Hari Varhsa. The 
Markandeya, although it agrees precisely with the 
Visnu in its nomenclature, differs from it and from 
all, in devoting a considerable number of its pages 
to legends of the origin of the Manus, all of which 
are evidently of comparatively recent invention and 
several of which have been no doubt suggested by 
the etymology of the names of the Manus. 

13. A thousand ages of the gods and fourteen 
Manvantaras are not precisely the same thing, as 
has been already explained. (See Bk. I. Ch. III, n. 
6.) 

14. The order of the text would imply, that as 
Brahma he sleeps upon Sesa; but if this be 
intended, it is at variance with the usual legend, that 
it is as Visnu or Narayana that the deity sleeps in 
the intervals of dissolution. The commentator 
accordingly qualifies the phrase Brahmardpadhara 
(SEER) by the term Diva (feat) : 'Visnu wears the 
form of Brahma by day; by night he sleeps on Sesa, 
in the person of Narayana : SARTORI ByETey 
Wa! This however may be suspected to be an 
innovation upon an older system; for in speaking of 
the alternations of creation and dissolution, they are 


232 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





CHAPTER 3 
qdrarseara: 
(Aqearreetfagiearraary) 
HAT sara 


Waa aut sagas TT! 

facnyfawt fawasy at at feed aa: gh 

Urg Aqfrent cre der were 

ACA BUT MT AT FT TAN 

aheaq afer at carat at a areierery 

df aaraea wa! sreMeig A aan 3h 

Maitreya said— I have learnt from you, in 
due order, how this world is Visnu; how it is in 
Visnu; how it is from Visnu; nothing further is 
to be known: but I should desire to hear how 
the Vedas were divided, in different ages, by 
that great being, in the form of Vedavydsa? 
and what were the branches..into which the 
Vedas were distributed? 


WUT Satay 
qaguea Bag! yrante: Wea: | 
qT pren fart ag dado yor a vil 


Pardsara said—The branches of the great 
tree of the Vedas are so numerous, Maitreya, 
that it is impossibie to describe them at length. 
I will give you a summary account of them. 


Brat grat fawjeataadt weg! 

Aates A Aga Head WA fet 4 0 
art aut aerret wyeader ah 
feara advert Aevtery Haft Wg 
Waa Het TAT ACN IH Wy: 
aeearaaE F At Yftgfafge: non 
afar wasnt 2 3 ere atenfaata 
aM Be: MER area feat FA cil 


BOOK II, CHAP. 3 


233 





In every Dvapara (or third) age, Visnu, in 
the person of Vy4sa, in order to promote the 
good of mankind, divides the Veda, which is 
properly but one, into many portions: 
observing the limited perseverance, energy 
and application of mortals, he makes the 
Vedas four-fold, to adapt it to their capacities; 
and the bodily form which he assumes, in 
order to effect that classification, is known by 
the name of Vedavydsa. Of the different 
Vyasas in the present Manvantara' and the 
branches which they have taught, you shall 
have an account. 


snfagtiageat a tar arent fe raeT:| 
AaaASN BAA ANG WA: FAN 
FeaITA Ada J arefaga WAT! 
UTat I: Heal ANl SMT YA: TAU Voll 
BY wae Stet: Ta Aer: TIAN 
faded art da deca: warafa:u ee 
Tas aye arasat wa geeahe: | 

Alaa THT SATAY ey: WS WA: WLI 
aay a adel afapenet We: 
areas wat frearar werd WTB 
Carat ¢ fear werd: TAI 
WHat UTA ait ait ages evi 
FATE: UBS WS F TAA: 

HYAA: TASH AUANSHTSN TIT VG I 
ay SATA ATRIA ATTA TAI 
THAMTSAA SATA AeA Ars Peta Ve 
IY aaa ATT: Wal awaaray: | 
DAS aT TUS TAT: 1 VA 
MAST AMAT Aree fenais feta 
TTS MRSA TASS FAN C1 
WTHUSHAAA: HOUTA: | 
serfafaheart SETA: FWA NSH 
wat Seagal g a: Heat areafegl 

afaer grat unfa siftreatar sfereafin 
Sia WA paste HONEA FA Qo! 


Twenty-eight times have the Vedas been 
arranged by the great Rsis in the Vaivasvata 
Manvantara in the Dvapara age and 
consequently eight and twenty Vydsas have 
passed away; by whom, in their respective 
periods, the Veda has been divided into four. 
In the first Dvapara age the distribution was 
made by Svayarhbhu (Brahma) himself; in the 
second, the arranger of the Veda (Vedavyasa) 
was Prajapati (or Manu); in the third Usanas; 
in the fourth, Brhaspati; in the fifth, Savitri; in 
the sixth, Mrtyu (death or Yama); in the 
seventh Indra; in the eighth, Vasistha; in the 
ninth, Sadrasvata; in the tenth, Tridhadman; in 
the eleventh, Trivrsan; in the twelfth, 
Bharadvaja, in the thirteenth, Antariksa; in the 
fourteenth, Vapra; in the fifteenth, 
Trayyaruna’; in the sixteenth, Dhanafijaya; in 
the seventeenth, Kritanjaya; in the eighteenth, 
Rina; in the nineteenth, Bharadvaja; in the 
twentieth, Gautama; in the twenty-first, 
Uttama, also called Harydétma; in the twenty- 
second, Vena, who is likewise named 
Rajasravas; in the twenty-third, Somasus 
m4pana, also Trinavindu; in the twenty-fourth, 
Rksa, the descendant of Bhrgu, who 1s known 
also by the name Valmiki; in the twenty-fifth, 
my father Sakti was the Vyasa; I was the 
Vyasa of the twenty-sixth Dvapara and was 
succeeded by Jaratkaru; the Vydsa of the 
twenty-eighth, who followed him, was Krsna 
Dvaipayana. These are the twenty-eight elder 
Vyadsas, by whom, in the preceding Dvapara 
ages, the Veda has been divided into four. In 
the next Dvapara, Drauni (the son of Drona) 
will be the Vyasa, when my son, the Muni Krs 
na Dvaipayana, who is the actual Vy4sa, shall 
cease to be (in that character).° 

gana gel sifaerd cater 

FHaTS FETA ASAT TT II 2 VU 
waar Fret yjascaftrern 

METRY ATTA A AA FATTY TAU VU 
Wa: Nees aro raA 

Hed: UM Yer TA YoeeUy AA Vl 


234 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





STANT BT ATA 
THATS FRATATAT TT 2 vit 
aketaat Tet ast: PACA 
ATHAZT WEA Tal PITTA V4 
WAATTAAAT Weraeasy WTA 


SAAT AAT VST ACAATAH TN 2G tt 

The syllable Orn is defined to be the eternal 
monosyllabic Brahma.* The word Brahma is 
derived from the root Vrha (to increasc), 
because it is infinite (spirit) and because it 1s 
the cause by which the Vedas (and all things) 
are developed. Glory to Brahma, who is 
addressed by that mystic word, associated 
eternally with the triple universe’ and who is 
one with the four Vedas. Glory to Brahma, 
who, alike in the destruction and renovation of 
the world, is called the great and mysterious 
cause of the intellectual principle (Mahat); 
who is without limit in time or space and 
exempt from diminution or decay; in whom 
(as connected with the property of darkness) 
originates worldly illusion; and in whom 
resides the end of soul (fruiting or liberation), 
through the properties of light and of activity 
(or goodness and foulness). He is the refuge of 
those who are versed in the Samkhya 
philosophy; of those who have acquired 
control over their thoughts and passions. He is 
the invisible, imperishable Brahma; varying in 
form invariable in substance; the chief 
principle, self-engendered; who is said to 
illuminate the caverns of the heart; who is 
indivisible, radiant, undecaying, multiform. To 
that supreme Brahma be forever adoration. 


WAGE TAY eae AA AA: 
Age ACA WATT SATUT: tt V9 
wag ge Heartertentt wT wy: 
wayeasa fred fragfat cn 
a Mya: WaT: A UAT FT AANA: 
TT ATTA A WaT STATIN 8 < 
a fuera aera: 7 ad 

ails Wea: WHS! 


VIIA W AARIVTAT 
WHR WEA 3 oll 
Stat Afereayy tray yetraret TeAraseaTT: HK tt 


That form of Vasudeva, who is the same 
with supreme spirit, which is Brahma and 
which, although diversified as threefold, is 
identical, is the lord, who is conceived by 
those that contemplate variety in creation to be 
distinct in all creatures. He, composed of the 
Rk, S4ma and Yajur Vedas, is at the same time 
their essence, as he is the soul of al embodied 
spirits. He, distinguished as consisting of the 
Vedas, creates the Vedas and divides them by 
many subdivisions into branches : he is the 
author of those branches he is those 
aggregated branches; for he, the eternal lord, is 
the essence of true knowledge’®. 

KKK 
NOTES 

1. The text has, ‘Hear from me an account of 
Vyasas of the different Manvantaras’ (fay FARR 
4 4 era); but this is inconsistent with what 
follows, in which the enumeration is confined to 
the Vaivasvata Manvantara. 

2. This name occurs as that of the one of the 
kings of the solar dynasty and is included by 
Colebrooke amongst the persons of royal descent, 
who are mentioned as authors of hymns in the 
Reveda. As. Res. VHI. 383. 

3. A similar list of Vy4sas is given in the Ktirma 
and Vayu Puranas. Many of the individuals appear 
as authors of different hymns and prayers in the 
Vedas; and it is very possible that the great portion, 
if not all of them, had a real existence, being the 
framers or teachers of the religion of the Hindus 
before a complete ritual was compiled. 

4. We have already had occasion to explain the 
sanctity of this mono-syllable (see Bk. I. Ch. I n. 1), 
which ordinarily commences different portions of 
the Vedas and which, as the text describes it, is 
identified with the supreme, undefinable deity or 
Brahma. So in the Bhagavadgita : sifiearet wer 
eMTet] AAT! ‘Repeating Om, the monosyllable, 
which is Brahma and calling me to mind :' which is 
not exactly the same idea that is conveyed by 
Schlegel's version; 'Mono-syllabum mysticum Or 


BOOK III, CHAP. 4 ZI5 





pronuntiando, numen adorans, mei memor;' where 
‘numen adorans’, although it may be defended as 
necessary to the sense, 1s not expressed by the 
words of the text, nor compatible with Hindu 
notions. In one of the MSS. employed, the 
transcriber has evidently been afraid of desecrating 
this sacred monosyllable and has therefore altered 
the text, writing it Yatarat we seme wafer 
instead of Yatra sifted arareareg | 

5. The daily prayers of the Brahmana commence 
with the formula. Om bhth, bhuvah, svar : Om 
earth, sky, heaven : these are the three mystical 
terms called Vyahrtis and are scarcely of less 
sanctity that the Pranava itself. Their efficacy and 
the order of their repetition preceding the Gayatri, 
are fully detailed in Manu, II. 76-81. In the Mitaks 
ara they are directed to be twice repeated minutely, 
with Om prefixed to each; Om bhih, Om bhuvah, 
Om svar; the breath being suppressed by closing 
the lips and nostrils : 31 |: aif Ya: ay Tahar ary 
FST SASL TAT TT 

6. The form or sensible type of Vasudeva is here 
considered to be the monosyllable Or and which is 
one with the thrce mystical, words, Bhth, Bhuvah, 
Svar and with the Vedas : consequently the 
Vyahrtis and the Vedas are also forms of Vasudeva, 
diversified as to their typical character, but 
essentially one and the same. 

kw 


BOOK Ili, CHAP. 4 


235 





CHAPTER 4 


Tae: 
(Acasa aefaumreaaty) 
WUT Ta 
STEN ACITMATS: WaASTAAA: | 
dat SMYOT: Pel AMiss MaaaraHI eI 
TAST VEYA SATE WETagiirys ae 
Fave UPME UA SATA WY VI 
aM J at a arent agora saa 
AAA VASAT STATA AAT 3 
qeata Aart vary faster? 
AAPA WATT TA I XI 


pong aang fats art TT 
aisan fe yfa aaa! werd FAA GI 
Ot SEAT BM AAT AAT ASIAT 
Brat wa aaa! afery yoy aerelet: 11 


Pardsara said— The original Veda, in four 
parts, consisted of one hundred thousand 
stanzas; and from it sacrifice of ten kinds’, the 
accomplisher of all desires, proceeded. In the 
twenty-eighth Dvapara age my son Vyasa 
separated the four portions of the Veda into 
four. Vedas. In the same manner as the Vedas 
were arranged by him, as Vedavy4sa, so were 
they divided in former periods by all the 
preceding Vydsas and by myself : and the 
branches into which they were subdivided by 
him were the same into which they had been 
distributed in every aggregate of the four ages. 
Know, Maitreya, the Vyasa called Krsna 
Dvaipayana to be the deity Narayana; for who 
else on their earth could have composed the 
Mahabharata’? Into what portions the Vedas 
were arranged by my magnanimous son, in the 
Dvapara age, you shall hear. 


Taunt Ufedt sarat aary Srey Wa 

ay fereary a wae U_¢d Asa VI 

maemad tei wae a Vege: 

STATA AAAS UTS SI 

Sf amar wrawdaatad 

aaqara feraisye Seoraret HAT 8 

TWaeduras weraheg Wears: | 

aa ware Foret a sftara-qearat: 1 20 

When Vydsa was enjoined by Brahma to 
arrange the Vedas in different books, he took 
four persons, well read in those works, as his 
disciples. He appointed Paila reader of the 
Rk’; VaiSampayana of the Yajus; and Jaimini 
of the Sadmaveda and Sumantu, who was 
conversant with the Atharvaveda, was also the 
disciple of the learned Vyasa. He also took 


Sita who was named Lomaharsana, as his 
pupil in historical and legendary traditions’. 


236 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





Wa aetg Aydeat aga aKCT A 
AGS AAS BST AAAATAH UN Vil 
ora ayhng afvett ca aA: 
sia Ora Tera VTA: zl 
Wd: T MAG was HIar AM: 
wate a aye Bae ATA: 1 B31 
UPRATAaAST TAHT T WY: | 
aaa Waa! gear Garters eeu 


There was but one Yajurveda; but dividing 
this into four parts, Vydsa instituted the 
sacrificial rite that is administered by four 
kinds of priests : in which it was the duty of 
the Adhvaryu to recite prayers (Yajus) (or 
direct the ceremony); of the Hotri, to repeat 
the hymns (Rcas); of the Udgatri, to chant 
other hymns (Sdma); and of the Brahmana, to 
pronounce the formulae called Atharva. Then 
the Muni, having collected together the hymns 
called Rcas, compiled the Rgveda; with the 
prayers and directions termed Yajusas he 
formed the Yajurveda; with those called Sama, 
SAmaveda; and with the Atharvas he 
composed the rules of all the ceremonies 
suited to kings and the function of the 
Brahmana agreeably to practice’. 


BISTAA Hea SAA FART: | 

Gal F Aal Vid ASMTSUAATAN Vu Nh 
fave yet fas ter ertaured 
SaMMAY Wels BrHens BT Aisa V6 ti 
agat a fave arafeten! afer 
drearfarnt cat areg foreter: a merqht:u gen 
TAS Tee AAAI 
PIGMUC ESM ICIDIEC ES IS mC OES CT EYAT 
samitary deat wage AA: 

mugs TERA AsaaTTa Taw Ve Il 
wee foreamigrea: yatrear, ware aah 
Aaftaeg yracar: deat aatrarq 2 ott 
Gat tea: wae frees: veel a att 


ae fora 3 us vat aah FH sya 2 eit 

Gat WPA aKa: MCT Wa 

fof: camara! Gererqh: 2 eh 

Ufenfard as grengforeraey 

Fromaan aug BPaAAI 2 31! 

SN aenfetHetas Ae AETAte: | 

Framperquisya AeceteareT: 11 2 vl 

Saat: Wagmanaisarean fear! 

arate: dean: Herary fea 24 

fora: arerafrirdegdiaes aera: | 

Baa Ag wrt: feat a: vafear:u AWE 
Sta sitfaeygerat qedbaigt agatseara: 1 


This vast original tree of the Vedas, having 
been divided by him into four principal stems, 
soon branched out into an extensive forest. In 
the first place, Paila divided the Rgveda and 
gave the two Sarhhités (or collections of 
hymns) to Indrapramati and to Baskali. 
Baskali® subdivided his Sarhhit4 into four, 
which he gave to his disciples Baudhya, 
Agnimathara, Yajfiavalkya and Pardsara; and 
they taught these secondary shoots from the 
primitive branch, Indrapramati imparted his 
Samhita to his son Mandukeya and it thence 
descended through successive generations, as 
well as disciples.’ Vedamitra, called also 
Sakalya, studied the same Samhita, but he 
divided it into five Samhita, which he 
distributed amongst many disciples, named 
severally Mudgala, Gosvalu, Vatsya, Saliya 
and Sisira®, Sakapirni made a different 
division of the original Sarnhita into three 
portions and added a glossary (Nirukta), 
constituting a fourth’. The three Sammhitds were 
given to his three pupils, Kraufica, Vaitalaki 
and Valaka; and a fourth, (hence named) 
Niruktakrt, had the glossary’. In this way 
branch sprang from branch. Another Bagkali"! 
composed three other Sarhhités, which he 
taught to his disciples Kalayani, Gargya and 
Kathajava’. These are they by whom the 


BOOK III, CHAP. 4 


237 





principal divisions of the Rk have been 
promulgated’’. 


NOTES 


1. According to the Grhya portion of the 
Samaveda, there are five great sacrificial 
ceremonies; 1. Agnihotra, bumt-offerings or 
libations of clarified butter on sacred fire; 2. 
DarSapaurnamasa, sacrifices at new and full moon; 
3, Caturmasya, sacrifices every four months; 4. 
Pasuyajiia or ASvamedha, sacrifice of a horse or 
animal; and 5. Soma-yaifia, offering and libations 
of the juice of the acid asclepias. These, again, are 
either Prakrta, ‘simple’ or 'Vaikrta, 'modified’, and 
being thus doubled, constitute ten. 

2. The composition of the Mahabharata is always 
ascribed to the Vyasa named Krsna Dvaipayana, 
the contemporary of the events there described. The 
allusion in the text establishes the priority of the 
poem to the Visnu Purana. 

3. Or rather, ‘he took Paila as teacher’. The 
expression is, Rgveda sravakam Pailam jagraha 
(setaearah Yet we). Srivaka means properly ‘he 
who causes to hera', ‘a lacturer’, 'a preacher’; 
although, as in the case of its applicablity to the 
laity of the Buddhist and Jainas, it denotes a 
disciple. The commentatory however observes, that 
the text is sometimes read AIR ‘one who had 
gone through the Rgveda'. So in the preceding 
verse it is said, ‘he took four persons, well read in 
the Vedas, as his disciples: aa Rrary a we Aq 
AINA! and again it is said, ‘Sumantu, conversant 
with the Atharvaveda, was his disciple:' 
aarddead) qatar freisyqn It is clear, 
therefore, that the Vedas were known, as distinct 
works, before Krsna Dvaipayana; and it is difficult 
to understand how he earned his title of arranger or 
Vyasa; at any rate, in undertaking to give order to 
the prayers and hymns of which the Vedas consist, 
Paila and the others were rather his coadjutors than 
disciples; and it scems probably that the first 
establishment of a school, of which the Vyasa was 
the head and the other persons named were the 
teachers. 

4. The Itihasa and Puranas; understanding by the 
former, legendary and traditional narratives. It is 
usually supposed that by the Itihasa the 
Mahabharata is especially meant; but although this 
poem is ascribed to Krsna Dvaipayana, the 


recitation of it is not attributed to his pupil, Roma 
or Lomaharsana, it was first narrated by 
VaiSampayana and after him by Sauti, the son of 
Lomaharsana. 

5. From this account, which is repeated in the 
Vayu Purana, it appears that the original Veda was 
the Yajus or in other words was a miscellaneous 
body of precepts, formulae, prayers and hymns, for 
sacrificial ceremonies; Yajus being derived by the 
grammarians from Yaj (a1), ‘to worship’. The 
derivation of the Vayu Purana, however, is from 
Yuj., ‘to join’, ‘to employ’; the formulae being those 
especially applied to sacrificial rites or set apart for 
that purpose from the general collection : ae a 
age da wag! Sara: Wade sft wreafafaa: 1 
again, Wad wave a waa ag a:! The 
commentator on the text however, citing the former 
of these passages from the Vayu, reads it, aris 
agae ef wreaeq freq: contining the derivation to 
Yaj, ‘to worship’. The concluding passage, relating 
to the Atharvan, refers in regard to regal 
ceremonies, to those of expiation, Santi. The 
function of the Brahmana (ward aemeza) is not 
explained; but from the preceding specification of 
the four orders of priests who repeat at sacrifice 
portions of the several Vedas, it relates to the office 
of the one that is termed specifically the Brahmana; 
so the Vayu has wart dens gy 'He 
constituted the function of the Brahmana at 
sacrifices with the Atharvaveda. 

6. Both in our text and in that of the Vayu this 
name occurs both Baskala and Baskali. Colebrooke 
writes it Bahkala and Bahkati, As. Res., VIII. 374. 

7. The Vayu supplies the detail Mandukeya or as 
one copy writes, Markandeya, taught the Sarhita 
of his son Satyagrvas; he to his son Satyahita; and 
he to his son Satyasri. The latter had three pupils, 
Sakalya, also called Devamitra (sic in MS.),. 
Rathantara and another Baskali, called also 
Bharadvaja. The Vayu has a legend of Sakalya's 
death, in consequence of his being defeated by 
Yajfiavalkya in a disputation at a sacrifice 
celebrated by Janaka. 

8. These names in the Vayu are Mudgala, 
Golaka, Khaliya, M4tsya, Saisireya. 

9. The commentator, who is here followed by 
Colebrooke, states that he was a pupil of 
Indrapramati; but from the Vayu it appears that 
Sakapimni was another name of Rathantara, the 


238 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





pupil of Satyasri, the author of the Samhitas and a 
Nirukta or glossary; whence Colebrooke supposes 
him the same with Yaska. As. Res. VII, 375. It is 
highly probably that the text of the Vayu may be 
made to correct that of the Visnu in this place, 
which is inaccurate, notwithstanding the copies 
agree : they read, dfemfiad we wmengiorer 
fepratdgedded Weds! Here Sakapiirnir-atha- 
itaram js the necessary construction; but query if it 
should not be Sakapirni Rathantara. The parallel 
passage in the Vayu is, Wara afeattaa: 
meqtrard: | fea Y yas veel fess: | Now in 
describing the pupils of Satyasri, Rathantara was 
named clearly enough Weed: Yared 
TAI: | areas aga eit aaa) In 
another passage it would seem to be implied that 
this Baskali was the author of the Sambhités and 
Rathatara of the Nirukta only : (Svayarhbhuva 
arenas wetter: Ward dea: | TaN Fee TTS 
aque However this may be, his being the author 
of the Nirukta identified him with Sakaptirni and 
makes it likely that the two names should come in 
juxtaposition in our text, as well as in the Vayu. It 
must be admitted, however, that there are some 
rather inexplicable repetitions in the part of the 
Vayu where this account occurs, although two 
copies agree in the reading. That a portion of the 
Vedas goes by the name of Rathantara we have 
seen (Bk. I. Ch. V); but as far as is yet known, the 
name is confined to different prayers or hymns of 
the Uhya Gana of the Samaveda. The text of the 
Visnu also admits of a different explanation 
regarding the work of Sakapirni and instead of a 
threcfold division of the original, the passage may 
mean that he composed a third Samhita. So 
Colcbrooke says "the Visnu Purana omits the 
Sakhas of Asvalayana and Sankhyadyana and 
intimates that Sakapirni gave the third varied 
edition from that of Indrapramati." The Vayu, 
however, is clear in ascribing three Sambhitas or 
Sakhds to Sakapimni. 

10. In the Vayu the four pupils of Sakapirni are 
called Kenava Dalaki, Satavalaka and Naigama. 

11. This Baskali may either be, according to the 
commentator, the pupil of Paila, who, in addition to 
the four Samhitas previously noticed, compiled 
thrce others; or he may be another Baskali, a 
fellow-pupil of Sakaptrni. The Vayu makes him a 


disciple of Satyasri the fellow-pupil of Sakalya and 
Rathantara and adds the name or title Bharadvaja. 

12. In the Vayu they are called Nandayaniya, 
Pannagari and Arjjava. 

13. Both the Visnu and Vayu Puranas omit two 
other principal divisions of the Rk, those of 
Asvalayana and Sankhydyana or the Kausitaki. As 
Res. VIII. 375. There is no specification of the 
aggregate number of Samhitas of the Rk in our text 
or in the Vayu; but they describe eighteen, 
including the Nirukta; or as Colebrooke sates, 
sixteen (As. Res. VIII. 374); that is, omitting the 
two portions of the original as divided by Paila. 
The Kiirma Purana states the number at twenty- 
one; but treatises on the study of the Vedas reduce 
the Sakhds of the Rk to five. 

ke 


238 THE VISNU-PURANAM 


CHAPTER 5 
USTAISeaa: 
(aqdarmaaam: , aarra- Tera) 


TU Sata 
ayaa: Yat: Wafagrreatt: 
Serarerarara sarafyreasranrt BH 8 
forepar: veel wer SG RISMHATT! 
MAAC TAM TETTTA FEST VN 
fereq: weal Teahrat: Wan 
afeatse sera: wat arifaeafern 31 
TS A BATATY Teer vacate 
yeahs Al: was Hat Fes vu 


Parasra continued— Of the tree of the 
Yajurveda there are twenty-seven branches, 
which VaiSampayana, the pupil of Vyasa, 
compiled and taught to as many disciples.’ 
Amongst these, Ydajnavalkya, the son of 
Brahmarata, was distinguished for piety and 
obedience to his preceptor. It had been 
formerly agreed by the Munis, that any one of 
them who, at a certain time, did not join an 
assembly held on mount Meru should incur 
the guilt of killing a Brahmana, within a 
period of seven nights.’ 


BOOK Il, CHAP. § 


ATR Wag f aafaardarecen 
aaa Me AISA WaT & 
forearrre Bt: feren! gees IAT 
ate upd aa a faeries aa g it 
sme aaeeare fart! fests 
SAAT Ase s TAT I 
Wt: Hel TE: We AMacaet Wert: | 
Tara Me aT Tay Pawar <I 


eae acer set aT Sar 
at forerr aratsea warartgenticor ei 


Vaisampayana alone failed to keep the 
appointment and consequently killed, by an 
accidental kick with his foot, the child of his 
sister. He then addressed his scholars and 
desired them to perform the penance expiatory 
of Brahmanicide on his behalf. Without any 
hesitation Yajfiavalkya refused and said, "How 
shall I engage in penance with these miserable 
and incfficient Brahmanas?" On which his 
Guru, being incensed, commanded him to 
rclinquish all that he had learnt from him. 
"You spcak contemptuously," he observed "of 
these young Brahmanas, but of what use is a 
disciple who disobeys my commands?" 


QAaeaAeAAT: We Wad alfa 

TMee aad Gra afes fe Von 
WUT Fara 

STH VENA TRTOT aalT A: 

wefan cal TA Bat A Wes FAA Vai 

ae from aac J fe! 

wygfeahara year arta FT FA VU 

Taeead aot meu alfadeq as 

GRAAL J ATO AA 23 Il 

"I spoke," replied Yajfiavalkya, "in perfect 

faith; but as to what I have read from you, I 
have had enough : it is no more than this—" 
(acting as if he would eject it from his 
stomach); when he brought up the texts of the 


Yajus in substance stained with blood. He then 
dcparted. The other scholars of Vaisampayana, 


239 


transforming themselves to partridges (Tittin), 
picked up the texts which he had disgorged 
and which from that circumstance were called 
Taittiriya;’ and thc disciples were called the 
Caraka professors the Yajus, from Carana, 
‘going through’ or ‘performing’ the expiatory 
rites enjoined by their master.” 


Saea AST AIA! MOTATATATATT: | 
TOA Wat: Ta Aaa ea Vv 


Yajfiavalkya, who was perfect in ascetic 
practices, addressed himself strenuously to the 
sun, being anxious to recover possession of the 
texts of the Yajus. 


Wye] Sard 

aq: afaa gra fad: fara 

WTA ATTA TAIT AT BG 

AMSTHRAYAT TTT: HUTT 

UTCHTS Ut Aa: BTS fawa V6 1 

HOTS AM AeA RATA Aq: | 

TT AMSAT UTATATTAAUUT I 9 II 

fanfa a: qormanarerd carfonfit: 

Barges ot faperet Gare TT Ve 

feareaqadgert wat gat a a: wy: 

ae frarereara Aq: qeate Aaa ee! 

ai eter fafaaoeay soratser areata: | 

ARTA at ATTA fata Pou 

Yajniavalkya exclaimed~ "Glory to the sun, 
who is the gate of liberation, the fountain of 
bright radiance, the triple source of splendour, 
as the Rk, the Yajur and the SAmaveda. Glory 
to him, who, as fire and the moon, is one with 
the cause of the universe; to the sun, that 1s 
charged with radiant heat and with the Sus 
umna ray (by which the moon is fed with 
light); to him who is one with the notion of 
time and all its divisions of hours, minutes and 
seconds; to him who is to be meditated upon 
as the visible form of Visnu, as_ the 
impersonation of the mystic Orh : to him who 


nourishes the troops of the gods, having filled 
the moon with his rays; who feeds the Pitrs 


240 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





with nectar and ambrosia and who nourishes 
mankind with rain; who pours down or 
absorbs the waters in the time of the rains, of 
cold and of heat. Glory be to Brahma, the sun, 
in the form of the three seasons; he who alone 
is the dispeller of the darkness of this earth, of 
which he is the sovereign lord; to the god who 
is clad 1n the raiment of purity be adoration. 


WGN FAA Fara: PiraHITITAL 
aferaqfed wat aut cart Aaa 2 gi 
Tet aceite: Frararats fara 
UfAAATARONT AA YS AA UM 
77: afar gate arena feared 
sTearnfeyeanes SAAT TAY AA 3 Al 
fern wi wer adatsqaeantar: 

aera yarteifraaye f TUTTE 2 v1 


Glory to the sun, until whose rising man is 
incapable of devout acts and water does not 
purify and touched by whose rays the world is 
fitted for religious rites; to him who is the 
centre and source of purification. Glory to 
Savitri, to Strya, to Bhaskara, to Vivasvat, to 
Aditya, to the first-born of gods or demons. I 
adore the eye of the universe, borne in a 
golden car, whose banners scatter ambrosia." 


UU Sara 
saamfetrers aan: wa wa: 
atareue: wre fraanfats area 24 I 
AAAI WE whores Fearenwy 
aaite art af art at a a a a1 
Wagral eat wet asife wary Wa: 
VITA BT AFA AT ASTS 1 VI 
auife ain anf fadfgsine! 

SAR TAMA: Ta: Mstas AA ALI 

wreMeanrd asi a ast wae a ara 

RUAN VETINT! AMACHM-Mafray: tt 23 
fa Afamygany qdaisst waratseara: 


Thus eulogised by Yajnavalkya, the sun, in 
the form of a horse, appeared to him and said, 


"Demand what you desire." To which the sage, 
having prostrated himself before the lord of 
day, replied, "Give me a knowledge of those 
texts of the Yajus with which even my 
preceptor is unacquainted." Accordingly the 
sun imparted to him the texts of the Yajus 
called Aydtayama (unstudied), which were 
unknown to Vaisampayana; and because these 
were revealed by the sun in the form of a 
horse, the Brahmanas who study this portion 
of the Yajus are called Vajis (horses). Fifteen 
branches of this school sprang from Kanva and 
other pupils of Yajfiavalkya.’ 


NOTES 

1. The Vayu divides these into three classes, 
containing each nine and discriminated as northern, 
middle and eastern ; 34a HAC WeTsa gertraen: | 
Of these, the chiefs were severally Syamayani, 
Aruni and Analavi or Alambi. With some 
inconsistency, however, the same authority states 
that Vaisampayana composed and gave to his 
disciples eighty-six Sarmhitas. 

2. The paralleled passages in the Vayu rather 
implies that the agreement was to meet within 
seven nights ; ddd WON Tod 1 Wa: 
ARTA GA BA: Pals Aa 

3. Also called the black Yajus. No notice of this 
legend, as Colebrooke observes (As. Res. VIII. 
376), occurs in the Veda itself; and the term 
Taittiriya is more rationally accounted for in the 
Anukramani or index of the black Yajus. It is there 
said that Vaisampayana taught it to Yadska, who 
taught it to Taittiri, who also became a teacher; 
whence the term Taittiriya, for a grammatical zule 
explains it to mean, ‘The Taittiriyas are those who 
read what was said or repeated by Tittiri :’ fafafter 
wreataa deni Panini, 4.3.102. The legend, 
then, appears to be nothing more than a Pauranik 
invention, suggested by the equivocal sense of 
Tittiri, a proper name or a partridge. Much of the 
myths of the Hinuds, the obviously of that of the 
Greeks and Romans originates in this source. It was 
not confined, at least amongst the former, to the 
case that Creuzer specifies relic. ou ‘telle 
expression cessa d'etre comprise, et l'on inventa des 
mythes pour eclair-cir ces nialentendus;" but was 
wilfully perpetrated, even where the word was 


BOOK III, CHAP. 6 241 





understood, when it afforded a_ favourable 
opportunity for a fable. It may be suspected in the 
present instance that the legend is posterior, not 
only to the Veda, but to the grammatical rule or it 
would have furnished Panini with a different 
etymology. 

4. This is another specimen of the sort of 
Paronomasia explained in the preceding note. The 
Carakas are the students of a Sakha, so 
denominated from its teacher Caraka. (As. Res. 
VUI. 377). So, again, Panini, 4.3.107 : 'The readers 
of that which is said by Caraka are Carakas:' Wt 
Wr ACH: | Caraka has no necessary connection with 
Cara, 'to go’. The Vayu states they were also called 
Catakas, from Cata (4), 'to divide’, because they 
shared amongst them their master’s guilt. 'Those 
pupils of Vaisampayana weie called Catakas by 
whom the crime of Brahmanicide was shared; and 
Carakas from its departure;' Q2URARTAIRA aT 
SAR: TAS Gas at Morsay ALS FIAT: | 

5. The Vayu names the fifteen teachers of these 
schools, Kanva, Vaidheya, Salin, Madhyandina, 
Sapeyin, Vidagdha, Uddalin, Tamrayani, Vatsya, 
Galava, Saigiri, Atavya, Parna, Virana and 
Samparayana, who were the founders of no fewer 
than 101 branches of the Vajasaneyi or white Yajus 
. Colebrooke specifies several of these, as the 
Jabalas, Baudhayanas, Tapaniyas. As. Res. VIII. 
376. 

Hwee 


BOOK III, CHAP. 6 


241 





CHAPTER 6 
Ueseara: 


(RATATAT TATA: 
QUOTA a FAUT) 
UU Sara | 
amaeda: yar saraferet: a sitar: 
sat aa Aa! fate yoy TATA hI 
GTS PAST FRAT Yr: 
seamaheat digat at wera 21 
Wea dfs Gaul agen: 
Gat ae dfesell syed Werratn 311 
faa: alged: uftufaes faire! 


serararam: Frearenesy: WHET BAT YI 
farreany Aas: Ufeat Sigs: | 
Telareashy area Ultsd: WeTATAT 1G I 
cane: qufigta qaefeataioren 
Ufiafafrerere: afer agettean: 1 § 
facrarmigrass ugfarrferifed: | 

Wars alaararat fereva: GT ASAT: 9M 
dante amaaiset ymartirtgetteret: | 


You shall now hear, Maitreya, how 
Jaimini, the pupil of Vyasa, divided the 
branches of the Samaveda. The son of Jaimini 
was Sumantu and his son was Sukarman, who 
both studied the same Samhita under Jaimini.' 
The latter composed the Sdhasra Samhita (or 
compilation of a thousand hymns), which he 
taught to two disciples, Hiranyanabha, also 
named Kausalya (or of Kosala) and Pausyini.” 
Fifteen disciples of the latter were the authors 
of as many Sarhhitas : they were called the 
northern chanters of the Saman. As many 
more, also the disciples Hiranyanabha, were 
termed the eastern chanters of the Saman, 
founding an equal number of schools. Lok&ksi, 
Kauthumi, Kusidi and Langali were the pupils 
of Pausyin; and by them and their disciples 
many other branches were formed. While 
another scholar of Hiranyanabha, named Krti, 
taught twenty-four Sarmhités to as many 
pupils; and by them, again, was the SAamaveda 
divided into numerous branches.” 


STA UTIAAN set Ufsarat AAAAA <I 
sade MYM: eG 
foreamercarirea sat alist & fee 
ara y taewla war ware aAATqN SII 
eaaves foreareg wtet serafereream 
vienraft: frorereerarat ARTETA Ro 
aerate wa: fore: Hat Sig! afer: 
wnnfer: Hyatfess Gala: virrent FEA Vell 
itary fear grat ealaary aya! 
fedrat dfeat werd Gaara 2211 


242 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





Surat gigas feet Prarie FA 

TaaHeN sera disarat aa Tn V3 

age: wreeta: wiitneasy TSA: 

Terao Usa He TAT: Vw 

I will now give you an account of the 
Samhités of the Atharvaveda. The illustrious 
Muni Sumantu taught this Veda to his pupil 
Kabandha, who made it twofold and 
communicated the two portions to Devadarsa 
and the Pathya. The disciples of Devadarsa 
were Maudga, Brahmabali, Saulkayani and 
Pippalada. Pathya had three pupils, Jajali, 
Kaumudadi and Saunaka; and by ll these 
were separate branches instituted. Saunaka 
having divided his Samhitaé into two, gave one 
to Babhru and the other to Saindhavayana; and 
from them sprang to schools, the Saindhavas 
and Munjakegas.* The principal subjects of 
difference in the Sarhhités of the Atharveda 
are the five Kalpas or ceremonials : the Naks 
atra kalpa or rules for worshipping thc planets; 
the Vaitina Kalpa or rules for oblations, 
according to the Vedas generally; the Sarhhita 
kalpa rules for sacrifices, according to 
different schools; the Angiras  Kalpa, 
incantations and prayers for the destruction of 
foes and the like; and the Santi Kalpa or 
prayers for averting evil.” 


STATURE: Beaparghy: 

Guaoraieat aan yeroretfergea: 1 V4 tt 

Wed carafrentsy gat f Weed: 

qaorefeat wat eet caret werqhy: 1 26 

qafeantraraies Trary: Via: | 

sTHTTT: Aater: we reawreresy UVTTTN oN 

aryad: fgarnal arate: wig: | 

Credit ara fargo yerafeanr: i ecu 

aE digaratag yA! 

Accomplished in the purpose of the 
Puranas, Vyasa compiled a Pauranik Sarhhita, 
consisting of historical and legendary 


traditions, prayers and hymns and _ sacred 
chronology.° He had a distinguished disciple, 


Sita, also termed Romaharsana and to him the 
great Muni communicated the Puranas. Sita 
had six scholars, Sumati, Agnivarcas, Mitrayu, 
Sarhsapayana, Akrtavrana, who is also called 
Kasyapa and Sadvarni. The three last composed 
a fourth, called Romaharsanika. The substance 
of which four Samhitas is collected into this 
(Visnu) Purana. 


BE MAYMOTA FTO GTS BF It 
ABTA YUN GAMUT: Weer 

Wet Wet doragy va ara FAT ol 
SURTANaAS AHUSaS AAA! 
arama fat wad Aan 2 eu 
amt gaaad cgtarest Bry 

AN BAAS THES AAS 2 VU 
ager amas att wget Bry 
WRAG WesHa GMVSH Aa: WTN IN 
TEMA PTS ASTI 

aa alana are: afer an es 
wry uftrenter dent weararfor ai 


waaty aa STU IT ATU VN 

The first of all the Puranas is entitled the 
Brahma. Those who are acquainted with the 
Puranas enumerate eighteen or the Brahma, 
Padma, Vaisnava, Saiva, Bhagavata, Naradiya, 
Markandeya, Agenya, Bhavisyat, 
Brahmavaivarta, Linga, Varah, Skanda, 
Vamana, Karma, Matsya, Garuda, Brahmanda. 
The creation of the world and its successive 
reproductions, the genealogies of the 
patriarchs and kings, the periods of the Manus 
and the transactions of the royal dynasties, are 
narrated in all these Puranas. 


aoa wa Ara! yuo Head Taw 

Une auras F WTA THAT 2G 
wt a wirert a ayrrarfey 

aad war fqaeeata AAA 211 


This Purana which [ have repeated to you, 
Maitreya, is called the Vaisnava and is next in 
the series to the Padma; and in every part of it, 


BOOK III, CHAP. 6 


243 





in its narratives of primary and subsidiary 
creation, of families and of periods, the mighty 
Visnu is declared in this Purana.’ 


sigift aga Aer dara =arafaeat: | 
Teor ctor fre SeaaTyaytit Bo 
srgaal aqdal tradata 8 7a: 
srigmra ugerg faer eeresta ai Veit 


The four Vedas, the six Angas (or 
subsidiary portions of the Vedas, viz., Siksa, 
rules of reciting the prayers, the accents and 
tones to be observed; Kalpa, ritual; Vyakarana, 
grammar; Nirukta, glossaries comment; 
Chandas, metre and Jyotisa, (astronomy), with 
Mimarsa (theology), Nyaya (logic), Dharma 
(the institutes of law) and the Puranas, 
constitute the fourteen principal branches of 
knowledge or they are considered as eighteen, 
with the addition of these four; the Ayurveda, 
medical science (as taught by Dhanvantari); 
Dhanurveda, the science of archery or arms, 
taught by Bhrgu; Gandharbaveda or the drama 
and the arts of music, dancing, of which the 
Muni Bharata, was the author; and the 
Arthsastram or science of government, as laid 
down first by Brhaspat. 

TM TAIT: Ys AeA Sawa: As 
TRAN: GRA FN HTATA: I 3 ON 

There are three kinds of Rsis or inspired 
sages; royal Rsis or princes who have adopted 
a life of devotion, as ViSvamitra; divine Rsis 
or sages who are demigods also, as Narada; 
and Brahmana Rsis or sage who are the sons 
of Brahma or Brahmanas as Vasistha and 
others.° 


fa YING: WGA: yEMerea a 
aaa MSM Wee: 3 VN 
Baas PNG: Wat: Ba: 
mrarocat sfatican afgmcateat faa 3 en 


1 have thus described to you the branches 
of the Vedas and their subdivisions; the 
persons by whom they were made; and the 
reason why they were made (or the limited 
capacities of mankind). The same branches are 


instituted in the different Manvantaras. The 
primitive Veda, that of the progenitor of all 
things, is eternal; these branches are but its 
modifications (or Vikalpas). 


Ua aafed aad aq yeIseite waa 
ta! tears fener Sera a3 30 
sfa sitfaeqyay qitaiset werseara: ne 1 


I have thus related to you, Maitreya, the 
circumstances relating to the Vedas, which 
you desired to hear. Of what else do you wish 
to be informed”? 

tet 
NOTES 

1, The Vayu makes Sukarman the grandson of 
Sumantu, his son being called Sunvat. 

2. Some copies read Pauspini. The Vayu agrees 
with our text, but alludes to a legend of Sukarman 
having first taught a thousand disciples, but they 
were all killed by Indra, for reading on an unlawful 
day or one when sacred study ts prohibited. 

3. The Vayu specifies many more names than the 
Visnu, but the list is rather confused. Amongst the 
descendants of those named in the text, Rayananiya 
(or Randyanfya), the son of Lokaksi, is the author 
of a Samhita still extant ; Saumitri his son was the 
author of three Sambhitas; Paradsara, the son of 
Kauthumi, compiled and taught six Sarhhitaés,; and 
Saligotra, a son of Langali, established also six 
schools. Krti was of royal descent : fevarnTey Hit: 
freq aA: | he and Pausyini were the two most 
eminent teachers of the Simaveda. 


4, According to the commentator, Mufijakesa is 
another name for Babhru; but the Vayu seems to 
consider him as the pupil of Saindhava, but the text 
is corrupt : Herat Aas wre (frat ares Fe FA: ). 

5. The Vayu has an enumeration of the verses 
contained in the different Vedas, but it 1s very 
indistinctly given in many respects, especially as 
regards the Yajus. The Rk is said to comprise 8600 
Rcas. The Yajus, as originally compiled by Vyasa, 
12000 : of which the Vajasneyi contains 1900 Rcas 
and 7600 Brahmanas; the Caraka portion contains 
6026 stanzas and consequently the whole exceeds 
12000 verses. The stanzas of the Saman are said to 
be 8014; and those of the Atharvan 5980. 
Colebrooke states the verses of the whole Yajus to 


244 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





be 1987; of the Satapatha Brahmana of the same 
Veda 7624; and of the Atharvan 6015. 

6. Or of stories (Akhyanas) and minor stories or 
tales (Upakhydanas); of portions dedicated to some 
particular divinity, as the Siva gita, Bhagavadgita; 
and accounts of the periods called Kalpas, as the 
Brahma kalpa, Varaha kalpa, etc. 

7. For remarks upon this enumeration see 
Introduction. 

8. A similar enumeration is given in the V4yu, 
with some additions. Rsis is derived from Rs, ‘to 
got to' or ‘approach’. The Brahmarsis, it is said, are 
descendants of the five patriarchs, who were the 
founders of races or gotras of Brahmanas or 
Kasyapa, Vasistha, Angiras, Atri and Bhrgu. The 
Devarsis are Nara and Narayana, the sons of 
Dharma; the Balakhilyas, who sprung from Kratu; 
Kardama, the son of Pulaha; Kubera, the son of 
Pulastya; Acala, the son of Pratyiisa; Narada and 
Parvata, the sons of Kasyapa. Rajarsis are Iksvaku 
and other princes. The Brahmarsis dwell in the 
sphere of Bhrama; the Devarsis in the region of the 
gods; and the Rayjarsis in the heaven of Indra. 

9. No notice is taken here of a curious legend 
which is given in the Mahabharata, in the Gada 
Parvan. It is there said, that during a great drought 
thc Brahmanas, engrossed by the care of 
subsistence, neglected the study of the sacred books 
and the Vedas were lost. The Rsi Sarasvata alonc, 
being fed with fish by his mother Sarasvati, the 
personified river so named, kept up his studies and 
preserved the Hindu scriptures. At the end of the 
famine the Brahmanas repaired to him to be taught 
and sixty thousand disciples again acquired a 
knowledge of the Vedas from Sdrasvata. This 
legend appears to indicate the revival or more 
probably the introduction, of the Hindu ritual by 
the race of Brahmanas or the people called 
Srasvata; for, according to the Hindu geographers, 
it was the narne of a nation, as it still is the 
appellation of a class of Brahmanas who chiefly 
inhabit the Punjab. (As. Res. VII. 219, 338, 341). 
The Sarasvata Brahmanas are met with in many 
parts of India and are usually fair-complexioned, 
tall and handsome men. They are classed in the Jati 
malas or popular lists of castes, amongst the five 
Gauda Brahmanas and are divided into ten tribes; 
they are said also to be especially the Purohitas or 
family priests of the Ksatriya or military castes; 


(see the Jati mala, printed in Price's Hindi 
Selections, II. 280); circumstances in harmony with 
the purport of the legend and confirmatory of the 
Sarasvatas of the Punjab having been prominent 
agents in the establishment of the Hindu religion in 
India. The holy land of the Hindus or the primary 
seat, perhaps, of Brahmanism, has for one of its 
boundaries the Sarasvati river : see Bk. II. Ch.IV. n. 
i 
kkKK 


244 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





CHAPTER 7 


Casey: 
(amnTtAt) 
aaa sara 
ware aie ad aq geisha war fea! 
aaftrarag wah aq war Wareaty A VI 
aa gts wenet-aeaer WaT! 
Ga Cea ASAT FAMUSEIMT AAT: PII 
ye: RTT BRAT AA: eA 
wet: wermsta waft 3 11 
argererearntste 1 aster gira! 
4 tet wifort aa arate: tv 
aad aa ast ait sare wa! fact 
STARS A AM AT AAT TST: 11 & 
ana: Uae career BPTI 
waa: aftadd vireo Fora: 11 & i 
Uisetrantt wag are aya: | 
A vara TT A TL He HATTA 9 


Maitreya said— You have indeed related to 
me, most excellent Brahmana, all that I asked 
of you; but I am desirous to hear one thing 
which you have not touched on. This universe, 
composed of seven zones, with its seven sub- 
terrestrial regions and seven spheres - this 
whole egg of Brahm4—is every where 
swarming with living creatures, large or small, 
with smaller and smallest and larger and 
largest; so that there is not the eighth part of 
an inch in which they do not abound. Now all 


BOOK Hl, CHAP. 7 


245 





these are captives in the chains of acts and at 
the end of their existence become slaves to the 
power of Yama, by whom they are sentenced 
to painful punishments. Released from these 
inflictions, they are again born in the condition 
of gods, men or the like; and thus living 
beings, as the SAstras apprise us, perpetually 
revolve. Now the question I have to ask and 
which you are so well able to answer, is, by 
what acts men may free themselves from 
subjection to Yama? 


WUT Sata 


saa YA! Weal AHery Wear 

Ue: frame: we ve aq aa Tic 

Paragara said— This question, excellent 
Muni, was once asked by Nakula’ of his 
grandfather Bhisma; and J will repeat to you 
the reply made by the latter. 


WET Sara 
UU Mara ae! ear arfergent fest: 
a mara yor a war snferart AF 1 
wanetatresttrersarg wfereater 
Aa DT Maye Ber! BAH As sera! Vor 
OT Yes Wa ya: eter FET: 
ae Fale Tae sera fe var saferqi Veil 
Waar J WaT ye ada wanifary 
wre afergent far: ayra TET PAT NAH 
Sfereartor Afra TET: UTA AA 
ay faxraratsy dare gate A V3 ti 
Bhisma said to the prince, "There formerly 
came on a visit to me a friend of mine, a 


Brahmana, from the Kalinga country, who told 
me that he had once proposed this question to 


a holy Muni, who retained the recollection of 


his former births, by whom what was and what 
will be, was accurately told. Being importuned 
by me, who placed implicit faith in his words, 


to repeat what that pious personage had 


imparted to him, he at last communicated it to 


me; and what he related I have never met with 


elsewhere. 


alicg Jara 
Tayeantaien Uses 
aeft au: feet ae sotyet 
UT AYSIU] 
WAAL A AMARTH Vv Il 
"Having, then, on one occasion, put to him 
the same question which you have asked, the 
Kalinga Brahmana recalled the story that had 
been told him by the Muni-the great mystery 
that had been revealed to him by the pious 
sage, who remembered his former existence—a 


dialogue that occurred between Yama and one 
of his ministers. 


SeAA TUNA ATAT 

aq sia citfented Fram: 
efeqeayrnstat + tara: 

marae Hear wee faery: 11g tt 


aH Aa 
BONER GUICC TLL SS 

CRacnhiredteada aks 11 VE 1 
fafasroracarnrats Ferd 

Uae att Vela AST: | 


FRAT TATA 
TOIT VATA AA V9 
aforroronfaarsiaast 


worata a: waa fe ART: | 
AATTAAARTATT ae 


aa Ute aenierrsararaai 8c It 


"Yama beholding one of his servants with 
his noose in his hand, whispered to him and 
said, "Keep clear of the worshippers of 
Madhusiidana. I am the lord of all men, the 
Vaisnavas excepted. I was appointed by 
Brahma, who is reverenced by all the 
immortals, to restrain mankind and regulate 
the consequences of good and evil in the 
universe. But he who obeys Hari, as his 
spiritual guide, is here independent of me; for 
Visnu is of power to govern and control me. 


246 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





As gold is one: substance still, however 
diversified as bracelets, tiaras or earrings, so 
Hari is one and the same, although modified in 
the forms of gods, animals and man. As the 
drops of water, raised by wind from the earth, 
sink into the earth again when the wind 
subsides, so the varieties of gods, men and 
animals, which have been detached by the 
agitation of the qualities, are reunited, when 
that disturbance ceases, with the eternal. He 
who through holy knowledge diligently adores 
the lotus foot of that Hari, who is reverenced 
by the gods, is released from all the bonds of 
sin; and you must avoid him as you would 
avoid fire fed with oil." 


Sa Wart Fyre Ushi 
ANTS ATT THAT 
were wy faut? wreang- 
Waft Ri: Gel AWSMSA Wes Leh 
"Having heard these injunctions of Yama, 
the messenger addressed the lord of 
righteousness and said, "Tell me, master, how 


am I to distinguish the worshipper of Hari, 
who is the protector of all beings?" 


aa sara 
a acta farautedat a: 


annfarerges famaraal 
+ aft a a eta fafsee: 
Farad anate faerAq 2 ott 
Yama replied, "You are to consider the 
worshipper of Visnu, him who never deviates 
from the duties prescribed to his caste; who 
looks with equal indifference upon friend or 
enemy; who takes nothing (that is not his 
Own), nor injures any being. Know that person 
of unblemished mind to be a worshipper of 
Visnu. 


Hay AT AAT 
faneradfertiqis staal 
Tafa Bae ATE 
Aaaales Fier AHA 2 Vi 


Know him to be a devout worshipper of 
Hari, who has placed Janardana in his pure 
mind, which has been freed from fascination 
and whose soul is undefiled by the soil of the 
Kali age. 


erent Teas Fea 
qufka a: wnat a weary 
Tah BRAT: | 
yeaat arate fawprayzn 2 2 


Know that excellent man to be a 
worshipper of Visnu, who, looking upon 
golden secret, holds that which is another's 
wealth but as grass and devotes all his 
thoughts to the lord. 

taleahitiveamaea: aa fawy- 

tafe gut aq a Aenfecta: 
a fe qfernqariors 

Mat FAA: WATT: 1 V3 
fanerafafancet: Wott 

Yfaaftas Racrarattasye: | 
frafeaaeris earara- 

aula War Efe AT ATG VN 

Pure is he as a mountain of clear crystal; 
for how can Visnu abide in the hearts of men 
with malice and envy and other evil passions? 
The glowing heat of fire abides not in a cluster 
of the cooling rays of the moon. He who lives 
pure in thought, free from malice, contented, 
leading a holy life, feeling tenderness for all 
creatures, speaking wisely and kindly, humble 
and sincere, has Vasudeva ever present in his 
heart. 


aata ef wart a afery 

waft Yar Was Bere: | 
fafarantaremrcaaisst: 

SAA ATA VTA TU Ve 
aarraatareraneraon- 

Wy leTEA TATA 

REA AS! FAO WAATATN 2G I 


BOOK III, CHAP. 7 


As the young Sala tree by its beauty 
declares the excellence of the juice which it 
has imbibed from the earth, so when the 
eternal has taken up his abode in the bosom of 
any one, that men is lovely amidst the beings 
of this world. Depart, my servant, quickly 
from those men whose sins have been 
dispersed by moral and religious merit,” whose 
minds are daily dedicated to the imperceptible 
deity and who are exempt from pride, 
uncharitableness and malice. 


gfe afe wrarrnfaret 
ehrePayrgrrarenseraram 
ceases rat 
Wala wet Uist UAT! 2911 


In the heart in which the divine Hari, who 
is without beginning or end, abides, armed 
with a sword, a shell and a mace, sin cannot 
remain; for it cannot coexist with that which 
destroys it, as darkness cannot continue in the 
world when the sun is shining. 


cifa wet Fehr se 
aefa aargatgutar usr 
ayaa Ta: 
HTS TAT AKITA VC 
q Weta aca fafrai 
HMA: Het TATA: | 
4 Gala 7 cart wey At 
WARS FT TET FATS TTA 23M 
The eternal makes not his abode in the 
heart of that man who covets another's wealth, 
who injures living creatures, who speaks 
harshness and untruth, who is proud of his 
inequity and whose mind is evil. Janardana 
occupies not his thoughts who envies another's 
prosperity, who calumniates the virtuous, who 
never sacrifices nor bestows gifts upon the 
pious, who is blinded by the property of 
darkness. 
UAE ara Hest 


Garranagyangerat 


247 


vonfravatt asagen 

AHIMA EAS AA WAN OM 
STypTAaaag hae: 

MATT AAA AT: | 
STAerHaa aT: 

ergs Argeawreh: 113 Vl 


That vile wretch is no worshipper of Visnu, 
who through avarice is unkind to his nearest 
friends and relations, to his wife, children, 
parents and dependants.’ The brute-like man 
whose thoughts are evil, who is addicted to 
unrighteous acts, who ever seeks the society of 
the wicked and suffers no day to pass without 
the perpetration of crime, is no worshipper of 
Vasudeva. 


waatates ayaa: 
WAGA WA: Us: 

ofa afasen Vara 
SSAA Ta AY FaaTT FUN 3 VI 


RAT VE STAT AATTUPTIN 3 31 
aura wate wea BrseraTeH 


Yerarer tea SfsUTA 
wa Tawar water aH- 


Weare GSAT 3 VI 


Do you proceed afar off from those in 
whose hearts Ananta is enshrined; from him 
whose sanctified understanding conceives the 
supreme male and ruler, Vasudeva, as one 
with his votary and with all this world. Avoid 
those holy persons who are constantly 
invoking the lotus-eyed Vasudeva, Visnu, the 
supporter of the earth, the immortal wielder of 
the discus and the shell, the asylum of the 
world. Come not into the sight of him in 
whose heart the imperishable soul resides, for 
he is defended from my power by the discus of 
his deity; he is designed for another world (for 
the heaven of Visnu).' 


248 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





alfetgs Sara an anomaly for the latter to cite a conversation in 
which Nakula formerly bore a part. 

ofa Framemraa eat 2. Or Yama and Niyama. The duties intended by 

Canta: @ fare eet: these terms are variously enumerated. The 

afratres : commentator on the text specifies under the first 

fa wm um head, absence of violence or cruelty to other beings 

HEAT! TA TS HATA VATA 3 (Ahirhsa), honesty (Asteya), truth (Satya), chastity 


"Such’, said the Kalinga Brahmana, ‘were (Brahmacarya) and disinterestedness or non 
the instructions communicated by the deity of a¢ceptance of gifts (Aparigraha). Under Niyama are 
justice, the son of the sun, to his servants, as COmprehended purity (Sauca), _ contentment 
they were repeated to me by that holy (Santosa), devotion (Tapas), study of the Vedas 
personage and as I have related them to you, (Svadhyaya) and adoration of the supreme (Igvara- 


; : pranidhana). 
chief of the house of Kuru’ (Bhisma). 3. Or Vaivasvata. This section is called the 
ateq Jared Yama-gita. 


veered yd aa fem ld 
HASTMAAT WAT FASTA 3 € I 

Aaade AMI Way aca! aarfary 

Sea Fay AA ATT WATAPTT 3 ot! 

feast USTAUSET TAA TT AAT: 

AANA TATA BAA: AUT 3 cil 


Bhisma said— So also, Nakula, I have 
faithfully communicated to you all I heard 
from my pious friend, when he came from his 
country of Kalinga to visit me. I have thus 
explained to you, as was fitting, that there is 
no protection in the ocean of the world except 
Visnu; and that the servants and ministers of 
Yama, the king of the dead himself and his 
tortures, are all unavailing against one who 
places his reliance on that divinity." 


WU sara 
Way dared ht daar aq 
aaparyTd Wag fearsrasre fresh 3 <i 

sft sttfaeyarat ydtaisst weatseaTa: 19H 


I have thus, resumed Paragara, related to 
you what you wished to hear and what was 
said by the son of Vivasvat.’ What else do you 
wish to hear? 

NOTES 

1. Nakula is one of the Pandava princes and 
consequently grand nephew, not grandson, of Bhis 
ma; he is great grandson of ParaSara; and it is rather 


248 THE VISNU-PURANAM 


ee el 


CHAPTER 8 


STSAISEATA: 


(Hana weft: , agavdertarts) 

OAT Jaret 

Wey Wary ta: Wanfaferttger: | 

arareanfe srraren feropermeney ae B11 

Ua MaaTaTTAT AS 

Aq Wert wet ste Tear Targa VA 

Maitreya said— Inform me, venerable 

teacher, how the supreme deity, the lord of the 
universe, Visnu, is worshipped by those who 
are desirous of overcoming the world; and 


what advantages are reaped by men, assiduous 
in his adoration, from the propitiated Govinda. 


WU Sard 


aq yest warty WUT Tere! 
Sa: We AAT UMA BATA: TOT ZU 
am: wforadentd ures antag 
faotrentarraang aPrera ¥ i 
west fae aq Sarasa 
BAe YON aaa warhaet TNA 


ParaSara said—The question you have asked 
was formerly put by Sagara to Aurva.' I will 
repeat to you his reply. Sagara having bowed 


BOOK III, CHAP. 8 


249 





down before Aurva, the descendant of Bhreu, 


whatever extent, whether much or little, he 


asked him what were the best means of receives it, when Acyuta is content with him. 


pleasing Visnu and what would be the 
consequence of obtaining his favour. 


aid Jaret 
War WRAY tank wares qareaey 
weenie fat Fatoraty ara & 
ag see wear wemrrfesea 
ae aarena wears! aft caccteanft amon 
ay yeofa sore! arent fe a: 
Wee Wael Pa Heras Prats A cil 
SUTANTAT WERT WT: YAR 
FAO Ad CM ARAL TATTATONTI Ft 
Wr TA Bae TR zT! 
Sea eRe Pa Aat ST Yo tt 
TA ASTANA FRAO SATE: | 
SEAT TAU H- AAT STAHCOTT & a 
Tero: arta aya: WET quia! 
area FIOTAT TTA AAMT VU 
Teas Uys FT ATT 
STAUNATHTEM ATA AT HYAT VB 
Wert - ager TAY ar afer 
A Billa YA yO! Aer Va Heya vi 
T asafe a eft wrforis=ier afer: 
SY AAS ATePR! ae Tr eras Vall 
Ja-fEA-TROT FT: YAY Ware: | 
aera VT MS: THOT LAT Ue I 
GA BUA T WATT VAM 
fara efter wader ahead WaT won 
wea wnfecta + gs TT! ara! 
faye fawspetert at Adawil gc 
antsy Y qat: prea Fras! 
ag freq ae faeareerafst ara 8911 


Aurva replied, "He who pleases Visnu 
obtains all terrestrial enjoyments; heaven and 
a place in heaven; and what is best of all, final 
liberation whatever he wishes and to 


In what manner his favour is to be secured, 
that also I will, oh king, impart to you, 
agreeably to your desire. The supreme Visnu 
is propitiated by a man who observes the 
institutions of caste order and purifactory 
practices; no other path is the way to please 
him. He who offers sacrifices, sacrifices to 
him; he who murmurs prayer, prays to him; he 
who injures living creatures, injures him; for 
Hari is all beings. Janardana therefore is 
propitiated by him who is attentive to 
established observances and follows the duties 
prescribed for his caste. The Brahmana, the Ks 
atriya, the Vaisya and the Sidra, who attends 
to the rules enjoined by his caste, best 
worships Visnu. KeSava is most pleased with 
him who docs good to others’ who never utters 
abuse, calumny or untruth; who never covets 
another's wife or another's wealth and who 
bears ill-will towards none; who neither beats 
nor slays any animate or inanimate thing; who 
is ever diligent in the service of the gods, of 
the Brahmanas and of his spiritual preceptor; 
who is always desirous of the welfare of all 
creatures, of his children and of his own soul; 
in whose pure heart no pleasure is derived 
from the imperfections of love and hatred. The 
man, oh monarch, who conforms to the duties 
enjoined by scriptural authority for every caste 
and condition of life, is he who best worships 
Visnu: there is no other mode." 


AM Bara 
ace sight aoteratayrad: 
darsmants frat? gaife arn oll 


Aurva having thus spoken, Sagara said to 
him, “Tell me then, venerable Brahmana, what 
are the duties of caste and condition:* I am 
desirous of knowing them." 


aie sara 
Trerot-arza- fag Yes BATH 
NATTA YA OT TA WANA 2 Vl 


250 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





Ort Gene We SAM Ua: TAATAAAT: | 

Preteat wae fax: qatentrafreqn 2 2 

qe IAI ATTA FIM 

ware wrerert wae array feat: 23 

wavelet Sarnied Hea fear: 

Tat AEN SOAR FTN xi 

Tea Tt A Una arghgiad fa: 

RAAT: West PAT ANAT Ufa V4 

To which Aurva answered and _ said, 
"Attentively listen to the duties which I shall 
describe as those severally of the Brahmana, 
the Ksatriya, the Vaisya and the Sidra. The 
Braéhmana should make gifts, should worship 
the gods with sacrifices, should be assiduous 
in studying the Vedas, should perform 
ablutions and libations with water and should 
preserve the sacred flame. For the sake of 
subsistence he may offer sacrifice on behalf of 
others and may instruct them in the Sastras; 
and he may accept presents of a liberal 
description in a becoming manner (or from 
respectable persons and at an appropriate 
season). He must ever seek to promote the 
good of others and do evil unto none; for the 
best riches of a Brahmana are universal 
benevolence. He should look upon the jewels 
of another person as if they were pebbles; and 
should, at proper periods, procreate offspring 
by his wife. These are the duties of a 
Brahmana. 


amir cenfecord fasta: afratste fin 
aaa fafaeigreteia a afar 261 
VRAsal Wea Wat act sitfaa 
Tae wat aed yfadiafareraqn 2001 
afatareraa Hagen wafeat: | 

Taft TAA Aat AefeHtorq 2c 
Sart areaare Tat feet uicarera 
weeds aol FI: 28 UI 


"The man of the warrior tribe should 
cheerfully “ give presents to Brahmanas, 
perform various sacrifices and study the 


scriptures. His especial sources of 
maintenance are arms and the protection of the 
earth. The guardianship of the earth ts indeed 
his especial province; by the discharge of this 
duty a king attains his objects and realises a 
share of the merit of all sacrificial rites. By 
intimidating the bad and cherishing the good, 
the monarch who maintains the discipline of 
the different castes secures whatever rcgion he 
desircs. 

UUs afore alter wast! 

avara vifaent wen eat Sreafrary:11 3 ott 

Tea Bet SH ates yeaa 

ReArarereqers BaOrq 3 eH 

fants aad creed Aa creo 

mafamaMalta at: AARAA AT 3 VI 


"Brahma, the great parent of creation, gave 
to the Vaisya the occupations of commerce 
and agriculture and the feeding of flocks and 
herds, for his means of livelihood; and sacred 
study, sacrifice and donations are also his 
duties, as is the observance of fixed and 
occasional rites. 


(Beet Bafa: whet Var tarfaAM 
MATA PAS east Faweaory) tt 3 3 11 
ae ceragasht wena 
franfens aad ye: Haft At a3 vl 


"Attendance upon the three regenerate 
castes is the province of the Sidra and by that 
he is to subsist or by the profits of trade or the 
earnings of mechanical labour. He is also to 
make gifts; and he may offer the sacrifices in 
which food is presented, as well as obsequial 
offerings.’ 


qeanferunats ada uiere: 
Rgareshrast Taerg wea 3 & 

war arenyay fifaensrntrm 

aes virrraray aged firrenfeen 3&1 
Haregel TM Ages Ata 

HAT BT AAA ATTA HAT TOT: |i 
STATON VARTA ATTRACT: | 


BOOK III, CHAP. 8 


251 





"Besides these their respective obligations, 
there are duties equally incumbent upon all the 
four castes. These are, the acquisition of 
property, for the support of their families; 
cohabitation with their wives, for the sake of 
progeny; tenderness towards all creatures, 
patience, humility, truth, purity, contentment, 
decency of decoration, gentleness of speech, 
friendliness; and freedom from envy and 
repining, from avarice and from detraction. 
These also are the duties of every condition of 
life. 


TON a Ey fawrerarhrarsauyn 3 cu 
at at finrearh dye at carafe 
THs F Ava yeas TS eat geN 
arn af maequrearata urfaa! 
adarafe ariet 7 Hall SAASTAN Yon 
selt fear War aoterat war AN 


matin weary gad W Fryer ¥ eN 
sta stfarenyyeret aeitaisst oTeatsearear uct 


"In times of distress the peculiar functions 
of the castes may be modified, as you shall 
hear. A Brahmana may follow the occupations 
of a Ksatriya or a Vaisya; the Ksatriya may 
adopt those of the Vaisya and the Vaisya those 
of the Ksatriya; but these two last should never 
descend to the functions of the Sudra, if it be 
possible to avoid them’; and if that be not 
possible, they must at least shun the functions 
of the mined castes. I will now, Raja, relate to 
you the duties of the several Asramas or 
conditions of life." 

NOTES 

1. Sagara, as we shall see, was a king of the solar 
race. Aurva was a Sage, the grandson of Bhrgu. 
When the sons of king Krtavirya persecuted and 
slew the children of Bhrgu, to recover the wealth 
which their father and lavished upon them, they 
destroyed even the children in the womb. One of 
the women of the race of Bhrgu, in order to 
preserve her embryo, secreted it in her thigh (Uru), 
whence the child on his birth was named Aurva, 
from his wrath proceeded a flame, that threatened 
to destroy the world; but at the persuation of his 


ancestors he cast it into the ocean, where it abode 
with the face of a horse. Aurva was afterwards 
religious preceptor to Sagara and bestowed upon 
him the AgneyAstram or fiery weapon, with which 
he conquered the tribes of barbarians, who had 
invaded his patrimonial possessions. Mahabh. Adi 
Parvan, Dana Dharma Purana, Hari Varhsa. 

2. Most of the Puranas, especially the Kirma, 
Padma, Vamana, Agni and Garuda, contain 
chapters or sections more or less in detail upon the 
moral and ceremonial duties of the Hindus; and a 
considerable portion of the Mahabharata, especially 
in the Moksa Dharma Parvan, is devoted to the 
same subject. No other Pauraénik work, however, 
contains a series of chapters exactly analogous to 
those which follow and which contain a 
compendious and systematic description of the 
Acaras or personal and social obligations of the 
Hindus. The tenor of the whole is conformable to 
the institutes of Manu and many passages are the 
same. 

3. The Pakayajfia or sacrifice in which food is 
offcred, implies either the worship of the 
Visvadevas, the rites of hospitality or occasional 
oblations, on building a house, the birth of a child 
or any occasion of rejoicing. It is to be understood, 
however, that this injunction intends his performing 
these ceremonies through the agency of a 
Brahmana, as a Sidra cannot repeat the mantras or 
prayers that accompany them; and it might be a 
question how far he might be present for he ought 
not even to hear such prayers repeated. The 
performance of funeral rites involves some 
personal share and the Sidra must present the 
cakes, but it must be done without mantras; as the 
Mitaksara; ‘This rite (the presentation of cakes) 
must be performed by the Sidras, without formulae 
on the twelfth day’. yermraaersh aided gress: The 
Vayu Purana, directs the performance of the five 
great sacrifices by Sidras, only omitting the 
mantras : YeeMty yader Wad Farafeta: 1 It may be 
suspected that the Puranas relaxed in some degree 
from the original rigour; for ‘it may be inferred that 
the great ceremonies were altogether withheld from 
Stdras in the time of Manu, who declares that none 
have any right or part (Adhikara) in his code except 
those who perform rites with mantras or the three 
regenerate castes (II. 16); and denounces as heinous 
sins teaching the Vedas to Sidras, performing 


252 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





sacrifices for them or taking gifts from them X 109, 
110, 111. Yajnavalkya, however, allows them to 
perform five great rites with the Namaskara or the 
simple salutation. TA@RT ATT FT waa 
which Gautama confirms. Some restrict the sense 
of mantra, also, to the prayers of the Vedas and 
allow the Siidras to use those of the Puranas; as 
Silapani : 7 acaftara yews fraa yooraftrm: | and 
the Titthi Tattva is cited in the Sidra Kamalakara as 
allowing them any mantras except thosc of the 
Vedas : afer YESNTER: | 

4. This last clause reconciles what would else 
appear to be an incompatibility with Manu, who 
permits the Vaisya in time of distress to descend to 
the servile acts of a Sidra, X. 98. 

week 


252 


CHAPTER 9 
TANTSEATA: 


(WaerAeNsM TAG Taal Ay) 
ata sara 

Alot: FAIA ACTSLOTAT: | 
yee ade yo geet Ware: 
vitarantaat aa are Yee TT: 
SMT UAT Ara Aas ecgqhegan VN 
sy wea tia ya! atari wafed:: 
safer Hale WaraaTsTTN 30 
fad fade ase are Arete carat 
forett yt ques! wftenet A Ae vn 
‘arm: we ad arafeat: Wt: Fer: 
SAMA MATA PAS TROT ATG 
sTamTeaa: YeHreretorrerntteat: | 
UfamenfeRarel Hed HEATUTTLN G1 


Aurva continued—When the youth has been 
invested with the thread of his caste, let him 
diligently prosecute the study of the Vedas, in 
the house of his preceptor, with an attentive 
spirit and leading a life of continence. He is to 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


performance of religious rites. In the morning 
Sandhya he is first to salute the sun; in the 
evening, fire and then to address his preceptor 
with respect. He must stand when his master 1s 
standing; move when he is walking and sit 
beneath him when he is seated; he must never 
sit, nor walk, nor stand when his teacher does 
the reverse. When desired by him, let him read 
the Veda attentively, placed beforc his 
preceptor; and let him eat the food he has 
collected as alms, when permitted by his 
teacher.’ Let him bathe in water which has 
first been used for his preceptor's ablutions; 
and every morning bring fuel and water and 
whatsoever else may be required. 


SAMA AAS ARTA TI 

TSCA RT AY PTET ETAL: 119 1 

faferrraraercey at wre <aaHOM 

yewarntadt gare wore! yi en 

Parts fare agcaterenteair) 

STAT TaeaeTaeaT wafer 81 

afeadon yor arpaeritaet Sera 

wrettfa crear, yest Fsrrharaferarq gon 

fraps 2 afaq aftarererafir: | 

Waa whisad Weed IT aA TTT aI 

aaa deers a wr! 

sefat aget fam: yfrategarea an 22 

Stand MAST AAAS ET Bh 

Vat Teer: Vaart wire Aa an 3h 

aot Taree aHet WIT FT 

YRMA SET PRATT BY 

fafa aergt yer whifradth 

Marat sepa wet Guamrars Tephe VG M1 

"When the scriptural studies appropriate to 

the student have been completed and he has 
received dismissal from his Guru, let the 


regenerate man enter into the order of the 
householder; and taking unto himself, with 


wait upon his Guru, assiduously observant of |awful Ceremonies, house, wife and wealth, 


purifactory practices and the Veda is to be 
acquired by him, while he is regular in the 


discharge to the best of his ability the duties of 


BOOK Ill, CIIAP. 9 


253 





his station;’ satisfying the manes with funeral 
cakes; the gods with oblations; guests with 
hospitality; the sages with holy study; the 
progenitors of mankind with progeny, the 
spirits with the residue of oblations; and all the 
world with words of truth.’ A householder 
secures heaven by the faithful discharge of 
these obligations. There are those who subsist 
upon alms and lead an erratic life of self- 
denial, at the end of the term during which 
they have kept house. They wander over the 
world to see the earth and perform their 
ablutions, with rites enjoined by the Vedas at 
sacred shrines : houseless and without food 
and resting for the night at the dwelling at 
which they arrive in the evening. The house- 
holder is to them a constant refuge and parent : 
it is his duty to give them a welcome and to 
address them with kindness; and to provide 
them, whenever they come to his house, with a 
bed, a seat and food. A guest disappointed by a 
householder, who turns away from his door, 
transfers to the latter all his own misdceds and 
bears away his religious merit.“ 


TAMAS STS WS Wa: 
UfLATAA I UTS AF PTETAI 2G II 
Tey Wea HUIS yews: ues faery 
aaaatarre HAA TAATTI 29 1 


In the house of a good man, contumely, 
arrogance, hypocrisy, repining, contradiction 
and violence are annihilated and the 
householder who fully pertorms this his chief 
duty of hospitality is released from very kind 
of bondage and obtains the highest of stations 
after death. 


aa uf Tay! HHA TEs 

Way wat Ferma at wedy Wes AT VII 
Tote: HMPA: | 
afaereat waa AP: Pathahasan Ve 
aaa: Hated utara 

Tee fared TA PRT AAT II 


Caan BA: Pahang 


TAT AAS PATA ALATI 2 II 


STAT TAUNTS ITA PAA 

TU TAT TPR! Vite arSTAT 2 VI 

aaa Pieasrat aaah: 

UT aeeatracary Wace H PALI 2 3 i 

When the householder, after performing 
the acts incumbent on his condition, arrives at 
the decline of life, let him consign his wife to 
the care of his sons and go himself to the 
forests.” Let him there subsist upon leaves, 
roots and fruit and suffer his hair and beard to 
grow and braid the former upon his brows; and 
sleep upon the ground : his dress must be 
made of skin or of KaSa or KuSa grasses; and 
he must bathe thrice a day; and he must offer 
oblations to the gods to fire and treat all that 
come to him with hospitality : he must beg 
alms and present food to all creatures; he must 
anoint himself with such unguents as the 
woods afford; and in his devotional exercises 
he must be endurant of heat and cold. The sage 
whe diligently follows these rules and leads 
the life of the hermit (or Vanaprastha), 
consumes, like fire, all imperfections and 
conquers for himself the mansions of eternity. 


aqua fae: wread ay aay: | 

Tea aS NeA Wa Ae Teta evil 

TARTAN AEST TUT! 

GAA ATT TSP TATCTT 11 24 I 

Fata Parner | 

faarfeg wat da: Waa WAN PEI 

SU ATOS HSA AT AA: HASNT: | 

Bw: Hala A He Uda BAT VII 

"The fourth order of men Is called that of 

the mendicant; the circumstances of which it 1s 
fit, oh king, that you should hear from me. Let 
the unimpassioned man, relinquishing all 
affection for wife, children and possessions, 
enter the fourth order.° Let him forego the 
three objects of human existence (pleasure, 


wealth and virtue), whether secular or 
religious and indifferent to friends, be the 


254 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





friend of all living beings. Let him, occupied 
with devotion, abstain from wrong, in act, 
word or thought, to all creatures, human or 
brute; and equally avoid-attachment to any. 


Ceara Vaart: Wh 

ao fase ser wifey AT AST STA ICI 
WOT SARL YHA 

caret WeTetaUTAaT free we WET Vs I 
waa: HTT edaeeTeasy A 

ag ear utters uftarg Fray waa 3 of 
ae Ta sear wad why: 


aearhey etre AT ret ferent saeTTU 3 8 


Let him reside but for one night in a village 
and not more than five nights at a time in a 
city; and let him so abide, that good-will and 
not animosity, may be engendered. Let him, 
for the support of existence, apply for alms at 
the houses of the three first castes, at the time 
when the fires have been extinguished and 
people have eaten. Let the wandering 
mendicant call nothing his own and suppress 
desire, anger, covetousness, pride and folly. 
The sage who gives no cause for alarm to 
living beings need never apprehend any 
danger from them. 


WA AS Felker 
fame dearortefaty- 

fren a aa St AN 3 211 
Hersh at wea 

fa: wagicutgieg: | 
arradt wafakta ware: 

OB Fae wate fess 30 

sfa sitfaaquol adtaisst Taniseara: ett 


Having deposited the sacrificial fire in his 
own person, the Brahmana fecds the vital 
flame, with the butter that is collected as alms, 
through the altar of his mouth; and by means 
of his spiritual fire he proceeds to his own 


proper abode. But the twice-born men’ who 
seeks for liberation and is pure of heart and 
whose mind 1s perfected by self-investigation, 
secures the sphere of Brahma, which is 
tranquil and is as a bright flame that emits not 


smoke." 
Re 


NOTES 

1, These directions are the same as those 
prescribed by Manu though not precisely in the 
same words. II.175. 

2.90 Manu, III, 4. 

3. The great obligations or as Jones terms them, 
sacraments, the Mahayajfias or great sacrifices, are 
according to Manu, but five; Brahmayajfia, sacred 
study, Pitryajfia, libations to the raanes; Devayajfia, 
burnt-offerings to the gods; Baliyajfia, offerings to 
all creatures; and Nryanja, hospitality. III. 70, 71. 
The Prajapatiyajfia or propagation of offspring, and 
Satyayajfia, observance of truth, are apparently 
later additions. 

4. This is also the doctrine of Manu, III. 100. 

5. Manu, VI. 3. 

6. Manu, VI. 33. 

7. The text use the term Dvijdti, which 
designates a man of the three first castes. The 
commentator cites various authorities to prove that 
its sense shouid be Brahmana only, who alone is 
permitted to enter the fourth order, afreqeaisa ariea 
TeeAN: safe qaist «afe: wer Feat caaayaa 
Tae: | aT: « wasrerefa aa eadalereraerea 
‘Entrance into the fourth order is never for the Ks 
atriya and Vaisya. Entrance into the fourth order is 
for Brahmanas, according to Svayarhbhu. So says 
Dattatreya : "Let the Brahmana proceed from his 
dwelling is also the expression of Yama, Samvartta 
and Baudhdyana." But this is not the general 
understanding of the law, nor was it originally so 
restricted apparently. Manu does not so limit it. 

KE 


BOOK III, CHAP. 10 


255 





CHAPTER 10 
SUSAN: 
(SitaTicrae: BarNy AAAI) 
att Sava 
wird VT aaa saree 
qa: frame staftrents fisreran en 
frat afafred erat feat yarastaa:1 
anrene was Adal ahs A wa VU 
Sagara then addressed Aurva and said, 
"You have described to me, venerable 
Brahmana, the duties of the four orders and of 
the four castes. I am now desirous to hear from 
you the religious institutes which men should 
individually observe, whether they be 
invariable, occasional or voluntary. Describe 


these to me; for all things are known, chief of 
Bhrgu's race, unto you." 


ated sara 
aeagth waar Frerafatrantarry 
des wufaeantiy squpetarrar FIN 31 
BUTT MTHAT fe faa HTUS ATT: | 
qaer Hata fra seca TH y I 
Gary Wagar fast aeeaTyTaT | 
aan gira Hated fist ESAT GI 
wen aa: vaatfaary fiver Yar ya: 
ardgenaedes can tat urferan gt 
WATT at Vagrant weferory 
Hale THATS hgHrery STAI 9 At 


To this Aurva replied, "I will communicate 
to you, oh king, that which you have asked, 
the invariable and occasional rites which men 
should perform : do you attend. 

"When a son is born, let his father perform 
for him the ceremonies proper on the birth of a 
child and all other intitatory rites, as well as a 
Sraddha, which is a source of prosperity. Let 
him feed a couple of Brahmanas, seated with 
their faces to the east; and according to his 


means offer sacrifices to the gods and 
progenitors. Let him present to the manes! 
balls of meat mixed with curds, barley and 
jujubes, with the part of his hand sacred to the 
gods or with that sacred to Prajapati.” Let a 
Brahmana perform such a Sraddha, with all its 
offerings and circumambulations, on every 
occasion of good fortune.’ 


ater AT wale fade alse 

aay ares fe sranifedaazic tt 

wre sreureaits ata atreisrey 

YRS ATT Meret APIA 
aert 7 Urpred ATageRgeT TAM 

AST A PY AMT HAT AMAT ot 
afeent afieet aafrrteraerry 
GEA TAT Hale Ae WATTATTAN eK 
AASTATA AAA TRAIL 
agrnfafansrer sate foarte zn 


Next, upon the tenth day after birth, let the 
father give a name to his child; the first term 
of which shall be the appellation of a god, the 
second of a man, a Sarman or Varman; the 
former being the appropriate designation of a 
Brahmana, the latter of a warrior; while Gupta 
and Dasa are best fitted for the names of 
Vaisyas and Sidras.* A name should not be 
void of meaning; it should not be indecent, nor 
absurd, nor ill-omened, nor fearful; it should 
consist of an even number of syllables; it 
should not be too long nor too short, nor too 
full of long vowels; but contain a due 
proportion of short vowels and be easily 
articulated. After this dnd the succeeding 
initiatory rites,’ the purified youth is to acquire 
religious knowledge, in the mode that has been 
described, in the dwelling of his spiritual 
guide. 


qf Wa sat T Taaanry 
TeRarasy yore! Hale arcane 23 
TATA aT are Hay ARIAT 

TT: YSAT Hall TYAS aT evil 


256 


aarrat aft saq waste at Berean 
qaagiead wen we Hataraferan uti 


"When he has finished his studics and 
given the parting donation to his preceptor, the 
man who wishes to lead the life of a 
householder must take a wife. If he does not 
propose to enter into the married state, he may 
remain as a student with his teacher, first 
making a vow to that effect and employ 
himself in the service of his preceptor and of 
that preceptor's descendants; or he may at once 
become a hermit or adopt the order of the 
religious mendicant, according to his original 
determination.” 


adtagon aralqaed fry: eer 
TAA aT arse 7 FSeTTN VE 1 
Fretat faonstataraesta area 
Aas MIT ssHerat aaah gon 
T But guateret eae fag-arga:t 

a wyeradt + da yearpfr ge 

AT TUTAT QTA-aeat aTHAT FT A) 
APracgeron wae Tatelt Ages GAN een 
Teng Was ae eat Fears 
Tse: Huet TAT CAAA A AEST oll 
Teed West aa wa: Hrifagee:) 
Wfreareata Woy BATT HUATTTAN 2 8M 
MAAC S A HATERS TT: | 

qT araat Mtarat Aged, AEAATTN 2 2M 

t otfdtasgeyrtt 4 HTH A: 

Tat agua Tagua AAA 2 3 0 
JewMeaed qa aA fafet za! 


"If he marry, he must select a maiden who 
is of a third of his age;’ one who has not too 
much hair, but is not without any; one who is 
not very black nor yellow complexioned and 
who is not from birth a cripple or deformed. 
He must not marry a girl who is vicious or 
unhealthy, of low origin or labouring under 
disease; one who has been ill brought up; one 
who talks improperly; one who inherits some 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


malady from father or mother ; one who has a 
beard or who is of a masculine appearance; 
one who speaks thick or thin or croaks like a 
raven; one who keeps her eyes shut or has the 
eyes very prominent; one who has hairy legs 
or thick-ankles or one who has dimples in her 
cheeks when she laughs. Let not a wise and 
prudent man marry a girl of such a description 
: nor let a considerate man wed a girl of a 
harsh skin; or one with white nails; or one 
with red eyes; or with very fat hands and feet; 
one who 1s a dwarf or who is very tall; or one 
whose eyebrows meet or whose tecth are fat 
apart and resemble tusks. Let a householder 
marry a maiden who 1s in kin at least five 
degrees remote from his mother and seven 
from his father, with the ceremonies enjoined 
by law.’ 


Teal Caan: WATTAGE: BX 
TPTATATR APA VITA STAT 1 Bt 
Waar Bet At mat quiziear wear: | 


HAT SAMSON Ara WLAN 2G 

Teta wear Mew AleTeTan 

WYANT SAAT WANTS AENHETTN 2911 

"The forms of marriage are eight, the 

Brahma, Daiva, the Arga, Prajapatya, Asura, 
Gandharba, Raksasa and Paisaca; which last 1s 
the worst:'? but the caste to which either form 
has been enjoined as lawful by inspired sages 
should avoid any other mode of taking a wife. 
The householder who espouses a female 
connected with him by similarity of religious 
and civil obligations and along with her 
discharges the duties of his condition, derives 
from such a wife great benefits." 


NOTES 

1. To the Nandimukhas. The Pitrs or progenitors, 
are so termed here from words occurring in the 
prayer used on the occasion of a festive Sraddha. 
As. Res. VII. 270. 

2. With the Daiva tirtha, the tips of the fingers; 
or with the Prajapatya tirtha, the part of the hand at 
the root of the little finger. Manu, II. 58, 59. The 


BOOK III, CHAP. 1] 257 





second is called by Manu the K4ya tirtha, from Ka, 
a synonym of Prajapati. 

3. The Sraddha is commonly an obsequial or 
funeral sacrifice, but it implies offerings to the 
progenitors of an individual and of mankind and 
always forms part of a religious ceremony on an 
occasion of rejoicing or an accession of prosperity, 
this being termed the Abhyudaya or Vrddhi 
Sraddha. As. Res. VII. 270. 

4. So Manu, II. 30, 31, 32. The examples given 
in the comment are, Somasarman, Indravarman, 
Candragupta and Sivadasa, respectively appropriate 
appellations of men of the four castes. 

5. Or Samskdras; initiatory ceremonies, 
purificatory of the individual at various stages. 

6. Or the vow or pledge he has taken, that he will 
follow for life the observances of the student or 
ascetic; both of which are enumerated in the 
Nirnaya Sindhu, as acts prohibited in the Kali age; 
a man is not to continue a student or Brahmacari, 
i.e. a coenobite, for life; nor is he to become a 
mendicant without previously passing through the 
order of householder. In practicc, however, the 
prohibition is not infrequently disregarded. 

7. By this is to be understood, according to the 
commentator, merely a young girl, but at the same 
time one not immature; for otherwise, he observes, 
a man of thirty, by which age he completes his 
sacred studies, would espouse a girl of but ten years 
age. According to Manu, however, the period of 
religious study does not terminate until thirty-six; 
and in the East a girl of twelve would be 
marriageable. The text of Yajfiavalkya has merely 
the word Yaviyasi, 'a very young woman.’ It is 
worthy of remark here, that neither that text, nor the 
text of Manu, nor the interpretation of our text, 
authorises the present practice of the nuptials of 
children. The obligation imposed upon a man of a 
life of perfect continence until he is more than 
thirty is singularly Malthusian. 

8. For the credit of Hindu taste it is to be noticed 
that the commentator observes the hemstitch in 
which this last clause occurs is not found in all 
copies of the text. 

9, See Manu, IIL. 5. 

10. These different modes of marriage are 
described by Manu, III. 27. 

ee 


BOOK III, CHAP. 11 


257 


CHAPTER 11 


WaTaynseara: 
(qeweerann yayiereanifefader aT) 


Mt Sara 
Tera warm Agha 7! 
MASA UT Aafasa erazaii 21 
Sagara again said to Aurva, "Relate to me, 
Muni, the fixed observance of the 


householder, by attending to which he will 
never be rejected from this world or the next." 


sid sara 


gaat pleat! Mera CATT 
Werarcae war fat reargqararan Vi 
Gra: aurea Taper: UAT: | 
ATA Ay Mara: A eA 3M 
BRUAISA WA: WAT WaTeaM 
AAT SN: HAT ACTA 


Aurva replied to him thus : "Listen, Prince, 
to an account of those perpetual observances, 
by adhering to which both worlds are subdued. 
Those who are called Sadhus (saints) are they 
who are free from all defects; and the term Sat 
means the same or Sadhu : those practices or 
observances (Acaras) which they follow are 
therefore called Sadacaras, 'the institution or 
observances of the pious." The seven Rsis, the 
Manus, the patriarchs, are they who have 
enjoined and who have practised these 
observances. 


oayqed Fa a ura afary za! 
faqafaaag eeoetarearfaterrg 4 i 
sis wal: ars Feraaqi 
eprgpfaatena frat arafgram & i 
ufratedanrat adutetantt 7a! 
annealed caareeaa Ail9i1 
ad: Hed WT Halts ata! 
Tetagiaarraareanaere Yas 


258 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





queers Ties frase 
Weaaaareass waa Era sn 
Let the wise man awake in the Muhirtta of 

Brahma (or n the third Muhirtta, about two 
hours before sunrise) and with a composed 
mind meditate on two of the objects of life 
(virtue and wealth) and on topics not 
incompatible with them. Let him also think 
upon desirc, as not conflicting with the other 
two; and thus contemplate with equal 
indifference the three ends of life, for the 
purpose of counteracting the unseen 
consequence of good or evil acts. Let him 
avoid wealth and desire, if they give 
uneasiness to virtue; and abstain from virtuous 
or religious acts if they involve misery or are 
censured by the world.” Having risen, he must 
offer adoration to the sun; and then, in the 
south-east quarter, at the distance of a bow- 
shot or more or any where remote from the 
village, void the impurities of nature. The 
water that remains after washing his feet he 
must throw away into the courtyard of the 
house. 

STARS Teese Weather 

Tefgardtey gar A Wet Here Qo 

A He werd at Tay wraafe 

Tach t Aenfartehy yeerietn eg 

areg Fareed? PAST A AAT 

sero yitees yarer a feast 22 

sega fen aa fart Ff 

eatarrafe walt Wareertse afar e320 

CONTR ae SATA: | 

froafafat aa ta fafredtaqn ex 

aotanrarannt erttet Ta 

vireraferet Vert AMET ATANTN Bu I 

STA MUTaTA WT soiled Ufa! 

URaSryal Vet: Tae: yitereiforn en 


A wise man will never void urine on his 
own shadow, nor on the shadow of a tree, nor 
On a cow nor against the sun, nor on fire, nor 


against the wind, nor on his Guru, nor men of 
the three first castes; nor will he pass either 
excrement in a ploughed field or pasturage or 
in the company of men or on a high road or in 
rivers and the like, which are holy or on the 
bank of a stream or in a place where bodies are 
burnt; or any where quickly. By day let him 
void them with his face to the north and by 
night with his face to the south, when he is not 
in trouble. Let him perform thesc actions in 
silence and without delay; covering his head 
with a cloth and the ground with grass. Let 
him not take, for the purposes of cleanliness, 
earth from an ant-hill, nor a rat-hole, nor from 
water, nor from the residue of what has been 
so used, nor soil that has been employed to 
plaster a cottage, nor such as has been thrown 
up by insects or turned over by the plough. All 
such kinds of earth let him avoid, as means of 
purification. 


want fers ye frac amrat zen 
eMaa UT Wa wy: virarauriear: 1 von 
TSPATTMOAT AeATTGST A 

STATA YS ARM SEM TATA VS 
Preofanetarierey werayqet ot WA: 

fa faa aferet aa cer iE: uftantaq een 
vintoenft ad: Gt Welter TAMA! 

ag its aet Tea MeAN oN 
STAT Aa: HPAL FART BYTE! 
MEM AMTTA TAMPA A 2 aN 


One handful is sufficient after voiding 
urine; three after passing ordure: then ten 
handfuls are to b2 rubbed over the left hand 
and seven over both hands. Let him then rinse 
his mouth with water that is pure, neither fetid, 
nor frothy, nor full of bubbles; and again use 
earth to cleanse his feet, washing them well 
with water. He is to drink water then three 
times and twice wash his face with it; and next 
touch with it his head, the cavities of the eyes, 
ears and nostrils, the forehead, the navel and 
the heart.’ Having finally washed his mouth, a 
man is to clean and dress his hair and to 


BOOK III, CHAP. 11 


259 





decorate his person, before a glass, with 


unguents, garlands and perfumes. 

ad: waver ars eARAT 

Hala eeraarat wart yfTaraa 2 2 

aren fase waders afer: | 

et Fal APSA AAA TATA 2 3A 

He is then according to the custom of his 
caste, to acquire wealth, for the sake of 
subsistence; and with a lively faith worship the 
gods. Sacrifices with the acid juice, those with 
Clarified butter and those with offerings of 
food, are comprehended in wealth; wherefore 
let men exert themselves to acquire wealth for 
these purposes.’ 


Tal-AS-TSMY SATAY Tl 
Frafrare crete fafirerasry an esi 
ply giles A Fala at yfen 
TRIS TATA PAA YRTATTSI 24 tl 
Yfaawenr: Endt tafafagedory 
wana fe deta Hala Geena: ei 


As preparatory to all established rites of 
devotion the household should bathe in the 
water of a river, a pond, a natural channel or a 
mountain torrent; or he may bathe upon dry 
ground, with water drawn from a well or taken 
from a river or other source, where there is any 
objection to bathing on the spot.” When bathed 
and clad in clean clothes, let him devoutly 
offer libations to thc gods, sages and 
progenitors, with the parts of the hand 
severally sacred to each. 


fara: Sturrala tarred 
NUTS GAIT AAT WATT: Ht V9 UI 
faqut stomata fara: yferatad! 
faaraeaey aa WrorenftrarNr 3 ctl 
arataera ateay afar a AArfed: 

aed Gaur cela arr peR_OTET A 281 
A Was AANA TeIasst aa za! 

Tra were ferafieras yy 3 ot 


He must scatter water thrice, to gratify the 
gods; as many times, to please the Rsis; and 
once, to propitiate Prajapati: he must also 
make three libations, to satisfy the progenitors. 
He must then present, with the part of the hand 
sacred to manes, water to his paternal 
grandfather and great-grandfather, to his 
maternal grandfather, great-grandfather and 
his father; and at pleasure to his own mother 
and his mother's mother and grandmother, to 
the wife of his preceptor, to his preceptor, his 
maternal uncle and other relations,° to a dear 
friend and to the king. 


Sema Wag cerervasat a! 

STATA YA FATA TTTT: 1 3 il 

SATU EAA VAT ATTTRTATATAT: | 

faye year; FAST: POTVSeATA: GT: 11 3 2 
BAT PATA STATE STATE: | 

TAT ARAY MEAATTATSCT: 11 3 3 tt 


Let him also, after libations have been 
made to the gods and the rest, present others at 
pleasure for the benefit of all beings, reciting 
inaudibly this prayer; 'May the gods, demons, 
Yaksas, serpents, Raksasas, Gandharvas, 
Pigacas, Guhyakas, Siddhas, Kusmdandas, 
trees, birds, fish, all that people the waters or 
the earth or the air, be propitiated by the water 
I have presented to them. 


Tag TAG arg a a fear: | 
TATA Afetet WAT 3 XII 
Aaa Aa a ASA BTA: | 

oY aa feararg & renter 1 34 I 
Oa FAT TAMA FCMNTEASAT! 
SST WaT Set Freier 3G II 
araeawered Waa afer 7a! 

US TAT MUA: Tae WIT 3 Oil 
Wrearated Wut aT! 

SM ATA AANA: AAA: 3 cl 


This water is given by me for the 
alleviation of the pains of all those who are 
suffering in the realms of hell. May all those 


260 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





who are my kindred and not my kindred and 
who were my relations in a former life, all 
who desire libations from me, receive 
satisfaction from this water! May this water 
and sesamum, presented by me, relieve the 
hunger and thirst of all who are suffering from 
those inflections, wheresoever they may be!" 
Presentations of water, given in the manner, 
oh king, which I have described, yield 
gratification to all the world : and the sinless 
man, who in the sincerity of faith pours out 
these voluntary libations, obtains the merit that 
results from affording nutriment to all 
creatures. 


STI UT At TaN Vala aferoraferqi 

7H fart gery wired fawasra 

STeaar yet aiat Arar 3 ei 

aa Jers Hataitwegrasry 

Sena Te qe Faet: ¥ ol 

"Having then rinsed his mouth, he is to 
offer water to the sun, touching his forchead 
with his hands joined and with this prayer; 
‘Salutation to Vivasvat, the radiant, the glory 
of Visnu; to the pure illuminator of the world; 
to Savitri, the granter of the fruit of acts.' He is 
then to perform the worship of the house, 
presenting to his tutelary deity water, flowers 
and incense, 


saute Hall WL Taek FT 

waraf ayfeva cenarefrarata x ei 

TANT: HATA AaSAMAA BALI ¥ 2 

weae uftrasaaise asrare fata: 

art argfaenger wet a grater: fare 

Tew perce! fearate a yop 3 1 

He is next to offer oblations with fire, not 
preceded by any. other rite, to Brahma. 
Having . invoked . Prajapati, , det..-him ;. pour 
oblations reverently to his | household gods, to 
residue of the’ éblation’ let’hiin ‘offer - ne the 
earth, to water and:to rain, in.a pitcher at hand; 
and to Dhata and Vidhata at the doors of his 
house and in the middle of it to Brahma. 


So tra Feursy Area 


wreanfey Get Cagayan Aer sv 
met a fen aaatater ger: 

fate aueas at Hated: WAT 4 ht 
araret area fey arerg ait feer7 
van arena wa a fete afer ve i 


fatter fear fasaiy far 
aay Ayfeva afer TANTATATH Vigil 


Let the wise man also offer the Bali, 
consisting of the residue of the oblations, to 
Indra, Yama, Varuna and Soma, at the four 
cardinal points of his dwelling, the east an the 
rest; and in the north-east quarter he will 
present it to Dhanvantari.'° After having thus 
worshipped the domestic deities, he will next 
offer part of the residue to all the gods (the 
Visvadevas); then, in the north-west quarter, to 
Vayu (wind); then, in all directions, to the 
points of the horizon, Brahma to the 
atmosphere and to the sun; to all the gods, to 
all beings, to the lords of beings, to the Pitrs, 
to twilight. 


AASACAMTTS YUM Yet GET: | 
SENT: WIM Al Wafed: Xe i 
dat ATT: at aaifa 
fag: TANTS AST I 
Yar: fayreareta: TAT 
Q arate WaT WATT I 
faatterat: Hlevagenten 
ayant: aaa: | 
warg & gfafad war 
wat fags gfe seq y ott 
Then taking other rice,'’ let the 
householder at pleasure cast it upon a clean 
spot of ground; as an offering to all beings, 
repeating with collected ‘mind.-this prayer; 
‘May gods, men, animals, birds, saints, Yaks 


CAC ou ee ees Ca 


as, serpents, demons, ghosts, goblins, trees, all 
that desire food -given’ by me; may ants, 
worms, moths and other..insects, hungered-and 


BOOK III, CHAP. 1] 


261 





bound in the bonds of acts; may all obtain 
satisfaction from the food left them by me and 
enjoy happiness. 
Sat Tatar + frat + ay- 
Taratatgs aarate 
APRISA Ya SAAT 
Y arg gfe yfeat wer & VN 
wa alfor Tarawa 
cee fap aatszreten 
Tees Yaar 
wera wars AAT Y Vi 


wena 8 yfad way 31 

May they who have neither mother, nor 
father, nor relations, nor food, nor the means 
of preparing it, be satisfied and plcased with 
the food presented for their contentment.’ 
Inasmuch as all beings and this food and I and 
Visnu are not different, I therefore give for 
their sustenance the food that is one with the 
body of all creatures. May all beings, that are 
comprehended in the fourteen orders of 
existent things,’ be satisfied with the food 
bestowed by me for their gratification and be 
delighted.’ 


Sgurl at wed agra: | 
Yfa walrania gat waterat TAG vi 


sAOSassra la TeMAvAT! 
a ure ufsat: Seager: AP Arar Gh 


Having uttered this prayer, let the devout 
believer cast the food upon the ground, for the 
nourishment of all kinds of beings; for the 
householder is hence the supporter of them all. 
Let him scatter food upon the ground for dogs, 
outcasts, birds and all fallen and degraded 
persons. 


aa: Melenst a aret fase TergAn 
atafarreonata Wes AT MATTAM & i 


srfatar aa ond Yaa carrer 
AMAA WEVA ATG 9 HI 
TEM aaa frawearacer ai 


Treas WieyeaTaS WET & ci 

MAHATMA ASM ZITA 

Teta Was Tamara & 8 

SHAT ARAM AHA eT 

STATA AL AERA TAT: 11 & 0 I 

‘The householder is then to remain at 

eventide in his courtyard as long as it takes to 
milk a cow,” or longer if he pleases, to await 
the arrival of a guest. Should such a one 
arrive, he is to be received with a hospitable 
welcome; a Seat is to be offered to him and his 
feet are to be washed and food is to be given 
him with liberality and he is to be civilly and 
kindly spoken to; and when he departs, to be 
sent away by his host with friendly wishes. A 
householder should ever pay attention to a 
guest who is not an inhabitant of the same 
village, but who comcs from another place and 
whose name and lineage are unknown. He who 
feeds himself and neglects the poor and 
friendless stranger in want of hospitality, goes 
to hell. Let a householder who has a 
knowledge of Brahma reverence a guest, 
without inquiring his studies, his school, his 
practices or his race.'° 


faatarat fartenrearerrg! 

aay fafemencacyht Vera HATH & 
STATS APE FHA eITy 
Frama yoret! stfraretrrencwaqi & 311 
cena frend uftarererantton | 
Soa A ga cane fanad qerarferq § vii 
serach: Meat: wrayer firerasy a 
AGU: WRIA FARO MEAT G4 A 
steerer Ure Fert wafer 

OB AS Seed KAT Yoo rare Tea ia & & 
aa waraft: war afedaronsaan 
wfavafafarad ysisat ATG Il 


262 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





were Aaa Wat AT: 
a Sacre yes at yeh elas far cil 
O king, "A householder should also at the 

perpetual  Sraddha entertain — another 
Brahmana, who is of his own country, whose 
family and observances are known and who 
performs the five sacramental rites. He is 
likewise to present to a Brahmana learned in 
the Vedas four handfuls of food, set apart with 
the exclamation Hanta; and he is to give to a 
mendicant religious student three handfuls of 
rice or according to his pleasure when he has 
ample means. These, with the addition of the 
mendicant before described, are to be 
considered as guests; and he who treats these 
four descriptions of persons with hospitality 
acquits himself of the debt due to his fellow 
men. The guest who departs disappointed from 
any house and proceeds elsewhere, transfers 
his sins to the owner of that mansion and takes 
away with him such a householder's merits. 
Brahma, Prajapati, Indra, firc, the Vasus, the 
sun, are present in the person of a guest and 
partake of the food that is given to him. Let a 
man therefore be assiduous in discharging the 
duties of hospitality; for he who eats his food 
without bestowing any upon a guest feeds only 
upon iniquity. 

aa: Garferig :fantiviggarcrart 

MAA UAT WI ATT WAT & Vil 


anyway aly Ys yeh fe SaRTY 
Fey A TAT PSN] AAT AT ol 
HENATS Het Yer SAT Yara 
MAHAUAS YA ACTHAA WHI VU 
(aertt & HL yes sterar fara) 

"In the next place the householder must 
provide food for a married damsel, remaining 
in her father's dwelling; for any one who is ill; 
for a pregnant woman; for the aged and the 
infants of his house; and then he may eat 
himself. He who eats while these are yet unfed 
is guilty of sin in this life and when he dies is 


condemned in hell to feed upon phlegm. So he 
who eats without performing ablutions is fed 
in hell with filth; and he who repeats not his 
prayers, with matter and blood: he who eats 
unconsecrated food, with urine; and he who 
eats before the children and the rest are fed is 
stuffed in Tartaurs with ordure. 


TaesTESyT Wa! GN Ysa as Vel 
WHAT TM FA: Wee TATA 2 

sé uNIeIge aergfgen a! 
VAAMSM aT Alea fLEATI 9 3 A 
Pah aera Feat w Fafafagetary 
WATT FRAT AAT ETI 9 X11 
PATA FI Tal YaST FT 
crarfaferat fsa yet: draTs B94 I 
QUT: PRATT ALT 


Hear therefore, oh kings of kings, how a 
householder should fced, so that in eating no 
sin may be incurred, that invariable health and 
increased vigour may be secured and all evils 
and hostile machinations may be averted. Let 
the householder, having bathed and offered 
libations to the gods and manes and decorated 
his hand with jewels, proceed to take his meal, 
after having repeated the introductory prayers 
and offered oblations with fire and having 
given food to guests, to Brahmanas, to his 
elders and to his family. 


AHAAAUNSATATUTATSY ATTA 19 & A 

faggaet: wat yatta a fafeerpa: 

Weqa@reaqal aft 4 darret FA vt 

Ta Wore Wet er ier wlaroTtaa: | 

T leated ta PTAC AAAI <I 

He must not eat with a single garment on, 
nor with wet hands and feet, but dressed in 
clean clothes, perfumed and wearing garlands 
of flowers : he must not eat with his face to 
any intermediate point of the horizon, but 
fronting the east or the north : and thus, with a 


smiling countenance, happy and attentive, let 
him partake of food, of good quality, 


BOOK HII, CHAP. 11 


263 





wholesome, boiled with clean water, procured 
from no vile person nor by improper means, 
nor improperly cooked. 


areal F Yh Morea: gfervreta yet 
WAY GITAY yattareaheat Tree 
Area TY aay a AAT! 

Aer ATA SATIS TUSTNN ¢ ot 
TARP Wat Ta Tafa TT! 

SAA HATA: YH PTET aT AAT 2 VN 
AGRA WUT Va A 


Yelargranafor > Hears ALATH SVM 
ae Yeas eareaa wa | 
vengefraina: aT faaarqc 3 


Having given a portion to his hungry 
companions, let him take his foot without 
reproach out of a clean handsome vessel, 
which must not be placed upon a low stool or 
bed. He must not eat in an unfit place or out 
of season, nor in an incommodious attitude; 
nor must he first cast any of his meal into the 
fire. Let his food be made only with suitable 
texts; let it be good of its kind; and it must not 
be stale, except in the case of fruit or meat; '° 
nor must it be of dry vegetable substances, 
other than jujubes'’ or preparations of 
molasses; but never must a man eat of that of 
which the juices have been extracted.'* Nor 
must a man eat so as to leave no residue of his 
meal, except in the case of flour, cakes, honey, 
water, curds and butter. 


THAT Year TY ATT TAI 

Manet war wet aefretfed Tat eK 

wea yeas afore: | 

area WRAY TAMMY F PST CG 

ara waafeet aradisarneray 

US Wary West Woe AS & I 

Let him, with an attentive mind, first taste 

that which has a sweet flavour; he may take 
salt and sour things in the middle course and 


finish with those which are pungent and bitter. 
The man who commences his meal with 


fluids, then partakes of solid food and finishes 
with fluids again, will ever be strong and 
healthy. In this manner let him feed without 
fault, silent and contented with his food; 
taking, without uttering a word, to the extent 
of five handfuls, for the nutriment of the vital 
principle. 


TRA TPIT weqaeearsty an 

AAA TATA UOT WATT YET C8 

TN: Wry Fararaers: | 

SMBAAAMY Hala VA ATU Co 

afereanrraaa ufaed waafia: | 

Saag WAT Wray F TSA ei 

sta Geng B yERUTATarea A 

HAA AAAS YAN Sol 

MUTA AAAS TAT 

ota Yaa AATAeed FSAI F vil 

Having eaten sufficiently, the householder 

is then to rinse his mouth, with his face turned 
towards the east or the north; and having again 
sipped water, he is to wash his hands from the 
wrist downwards. With a pleased and tranquil 
spirit he is then to take a seat and call to 
memory his tutelary deity; and then he is thus 
to pray : "May fire, excited by air, convert this 
food into the earthly elements of this frame 
and in the space afforded by the ethereal 
atmosphere cause it to digest and yield me 
satisfaction! May this food, in its assimilation, 
contribute to the vigour of the earth, water, fire 
and air of my body and afford unmixed 
gratification! 


amifeantdsarery 
Yeh Waa BAAN 
Gas F acakorrasad 
THAN AT AB SNe VM 
fan: aaaiqacecet 
Waa Tar Ba: | 
Wart saraseata- 
anrad F uftoraagn ¢ 3 


264 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





ferret wars uftoraey & am 
wart aa & ye siearafas game vi 


May Agasti, Agni and submarine fire effect 
the digestion of the food of which I have 
eaten; may they grant me the happiness which 
its conversion into nutriment engenders; and 
may health ever animate my form! May Visnu, 
who is the chief principle of all invested with 
bodily structure and the organs of sense, be 
propitiated by my faith in him and influence 
the assimilation of the invigorating food which 
I have eaten! For verily Visnu is the eater and 
the food and the nutriment : the through this 
belief may that which I have eaten be 
digested.' 


sya tages ute wae 

STATA HA HATTA TT: eG 

teaclataaet BAMA 

fet vara: Geargafas Wafea: 11e & I 

farresat ger yatyegqat ar: 

Saas Baa TTT UTA 89 

Raat wea: ular 

STITT TTA AAT AT THA ea I 8 CI 

qaumafedt wer era: qatar at taeq 

SMTA WAST WATT: 18 2 I 

amrediad ga Wye wala 

SOBA: TATA FATT Qo ot 

sufaeta & aeat a 3 yaf a afar 

sata F Stearns ATH FTN Yo 2M 

"Having repeated this prayer, the 

householder should rub his stomach with his 
hand and without indolence perform such rites 
as confer repose, passing the day in such 
amusements as are authorised by holy writings 
and are not incompatible with the practices of 
the righteous; until the Sandhya, when he must 
engage in pious meditation. At the Sandhya at 
the close of the day he must perform the usual 
rites before the sun has quite set; and in the 


morning he must perform them before the 
stars have disappeared.'” The morning and 


evening rites must never be neglected, except 
at seasons of impurity, anxiety, sickness or 
alarm. He who is preceded by the sun in rising 
or sleeps when the sun is setting, unless it 
proceed from illness and the like, incurs gilt 
which requires atonement; and therefore let a 
man rise before the sun in the morning and 
sleep not until after he has set. They who 
sinfully omit both the morning and the 
evening service go after death to the hell of 
darkness. 


WA: Wega Baer | 

aaa a ut afer BAI 0 2 
way grenfaearaaatry 

Stee UN AA TARTAR UAT ATI Ro ZAI 
USANA GAARA FT ITA 
TAITANTAT PRET A UAa Yo Vit 
fearfaett gy faq wa aq Wa TTI 
aca Yat gals faa wai gout 
TA CAVA WIS Taleahats az: 
Garaate aferaitar: WaCTAT | Ro GMI 
SAMANGSAT TAME HUTA 
VATA TAAT ATI Lot 


In the evening, then, having again dressed 
food, let the wife of the householder, in order 
to obtain the fruit of the Vaisvadeva rite, give 
food, without prayers, to outcasts and unclean 
spirits. Let the householder himself, according 
to his means, again show hospitality to any 
guest who may arrive, welcoming him with 
the salutation of evening, water for his feet, a 
seat, a supper and a bed. The sin of want of 
hospitality to a guest who comes after sunset is 
eight times greater than that of turning away 
one who arrives by day. A man _ should 
therefore most especially show respect to one 
who comes to him in the evening for shelter, 
as the attentions that gratify him will give 
pleasure to all the gods. Let the householder, 
then, according to his ability, afford a guest 
food, potherbs, water, a bed, a mat or, if he can 
do no more, ground on which to lie. 


BOOK III, CHAP. 11 


PUTA MAY YRAT AW aay Tet 
TreEaAMepfeaae sera JIN ogi 
amet + a wat arent aferat + a 
TT Wey regrafafayaarega4rgn Yo Vi 
reat fefer fare: sre area at za! 
ea WaTa: Gar faatrarg Wren eon 
MANGIA: Wet: TATRA | 

Tamel By aret eeraary TAN eee 
arated fart Tada T We 
arat 7 water argent Ta aerate eee 
areferont Arrenrat arerat arena 
STATAT ANfayyeat aT Taeatfenyorye: 1 893 
Mt: SL ITH Wat 3 ear: gfettsfa a 
AAT: AGW Sart YEA TAT Lev 
aqevapMt da smaraary yore 
Garon erg! tataPata a 224 Ul 
dea Wea a FAL 
faosrt ara wef Awa FTN Vee I 
sTrqudaag ae Tahara: | 

WT TOTRACA RTA ETT TTT I 2 9 
APTATAAAY AT ATCT ATT 

Sa ROS Sara ANY AI VV UI 
UT Ta MT WANT! 

Aa yaa aferery Tara eke It 
Wravaeasag ta yore! wear: 


TRESS SATS UTA A PAENTHPS A 22 oll 
yarahrmisaan fear waver za! 

af Wererat FOUTS TeATPTAU 82 VII 
WERE A reads Trey Here 

faq arentiraenste artes agorarfarr 92 2 
Oat aarate Haass arge: 


UMIUa: Tareas wifr|Nen 22 30 

sie Arar AatY GAY FAT ate 
AAATTEAT MATT TATAT 22 ¥ 

sfa sttfaeargarat qetaisyy WareeseArT: 1 VAM 


265 





"After eating his evening meal and having 
washed his feet, the householder is to go to 
rest. His bed is to be entire and made of wood: 
it is not to be scanty, nor cracked, nor uneven, 
nor dirty, nor infested by insects, nor without a 
bedding: and he is to sleep with his head either 
to the east or to the south; any other position is 
unhealthy. In due season a man _ should 
approach his wife, when a fortunate asterism 
prevails, in an auspicious moment and on even 
nights, if she is not unbathed, sick, unwell, 
averse, angry, pregnant, hungry or over-fed. 
He should be also free from similar 
imperfections, should be neatly attired and 
adorned and animated by tenderness and 
affection. There are certain days on which 
unguents, flesh and women are unlawful, as 
the eighth and fourteenth lunar days, new 
moon and full moon,” and the entrance of the 
sun into a new sign. On these occasions the 
wise will restrain their appetites and occupy 
themselves in the worship of the gods, as 
enjoined by holy writ, in meditation and in 
prayer; and he who behaves differently will 
fall into a hell where ordure will be his food. 
Let not a man stimulate his desires by 
medicines, nor gratify them with unnatural 
objects or in public or holy places. Let him not 
think incontinently of another's wife, much 
less address her to that end; for such a man 
will be born in future life as a creeping insect. 
He who commits adultery is punished both 
here and hereafter; for his days in this world 
are cut short and when dead he falls into hell. 
Thus considering, let a man approach his own 
wife in the proper season or even at other 


times." 
kk 


NOTES 

1. Jones renders Acara (aa), ‘the immemorial 
customs of good men' (Manu, II. 6); following the 
explanation of Kullika Bhatta, which is much the 
same as that of our text : WacacHarearaeread: UAT 
wferara ‘Acdra means the use of blankets or bark, 
for dress. Sadhus are pious or just men.' Acaras are, 
in fact, all ceremonial and purificatory observances 


266 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





or practices, not expiatory, which are enjoined 
either by the Vedas or the codes of law. 

2. That is, he may omit prescribed rites, if they 
are attended with difficulty or danger; he may 
forego ablutions, if they disagree with his health; 
and he may omit pilgrimage to holy shrines, if the 
way to them is infested by robbers. Again, it is 
enjoined in certain ceremonies to eat meat or drink 
wine; but these practices are generally reprehended 
by pious persons and a man may therefore 
disregard the injunction. 

3. Many of these directions are given by Manu, 
IV, 45. 

4. That is, wealth is essential to the performance 
of religious rites and it is also the consequence of 
performing them. A householder should therefore 
diligently celebrate them, that he may acquire 
property and thus he enabled to continue to 
sacrifice. According to Gautama there are seven 
kinds of each of the three sorts of sacrificial nites 
particularised in the text or those in which the 
Soma juice, oiled butter or food are presented. Of 
the latter, according to Manu, there are four 


varieties, the offering of food to the Vaisvadevas, 


to spirits, to deceased ancestors and to guests. II, 
86. The seven of Gautama are, offerings to 
progenitors on certain eighth days of the fortnight, 
at the full and change, at Sraddha generally and to 
the manes on the full moon of four different 
months or Sravana, Agrahayana, Caitra and Aévin. 

5. A person may perform his ablutions in his 
own house, if the weather or occupation prevent his 
going to the water. If he be sick, he may use warm 
water; and if bathing be altogether injurious, he 
may perform the mantra snana or repeat the prayers 
used at ablution, without the actual bath. 

6. The whole series is thus given by Colebrooke; 
As. Res. V. 367. Triple libations of tila (sesamum 
seeds) and water are to be given to the father, 
paternal grandfather and great-grandfather; to the 
mother, maternal grand-father, great-grandfather 
and great great-grandfather; and single libations are 
to be offered to the paternal and maternal grand- 
mother and great grandmother, to the paternal 
uncle, brother, son, grandson, daughter's son, son- 
in-law, maternal uncle, sister's son, father's sister's 
son, mother's sister and other relatives. With the 
exception of those, however, offered to his own 


immediate ancestors, which are obligatory, these 
libations are optional and are rarely made. 

7. The first part of this prayer is from the 
Saémaveda and is given by Colebrooke. As. Res. V. 
367. 

8. The rite is not addressed to Brahma specially, 
but he is to be invoked to preside over the oblations 
offered to the gods and sages subsequently 
particularised. 

9, Kasyapa, the son of Kagyapa, is Aditya or the 
sun. Anumati is the personified moon, wanting a 
digit of full. The objects and order of the ceremony 
here succinctly described differ from those of 
which Colebrooke gives an account (As. Res. VII. 
236) and from the form of oblations given by Ward 
(Account of the Hindus, Ul. 447); but, as observed 
by Colebrooke, "oblations are made with such 
ceremonies and in such form, as are adapted to the 
religious rite which is intended to be subsequently 
performed." As. Res. VII. 237. 

10. See also Manu, III. 84 and the As. Res. VII. 
9H ger 

11. Or this ceremony may be practised instead of 
the preceding. 

12. This prayer is said by Colebrooke to be taken 
from the Purdnas (As. Res. VII. 275): he translates 
the last clause, ‘May they who gave neither food, 
nor means of obtaining it.' In our text the phrase is 
{wi-tastestsaeafei which the commentator 
explains by aaa ai aa a em as fale: wear 
arde7a: | understanding Annasiddhi to mean ‘means 
of dressing food', Paka sadhana. The following 
passages of the prayer are evidently peculiar to the 
Visnu Purana. 

13. Either fourteen classes of Bhitas or spirits or 
the same number of living beings or eight species 
of divine, one of human and five of animal 
creatures. 

14. This, according to the commentator, is equal 
to the fourth part of Ghatikd which, considering the 
latter synonymous with Muhirtta or one-thirtieth of 
the day and night, would be twelve minutes. 

15. These precepts and those which follow, are 
of the same tenor as those given by Manu on the 
subject of hospitality CHI, 99), but more detailed. 

16. By stale, as applied to meat, is intended in 
this place probably meat which has been previously 
dressed as part of an offering to the gods or manes : 


BOOK HI, CHAP. 12 267 





meat which is dressed in the first instance for an 
individual being prohibited; as by YdAajfiavalkya : 
gumid asad! Let him avoid flesh killed in vain;' 
or that which is not the residue of an offering to the 
gods, carreatafars aystafa | So also Manu, V.7. 

17. By dried vegetables, etc. (—ePwaiieh) is to 
be understood unboiled vegetables or potherbs 
dressed without being sprinkled with water : 
aera faat te! Instead of Aah: 'jujubes', the 
reading is sometimes @Rd#*4: 'myrobalans' : the 
other term, 7JSI#a*4:, is explained 'sweet-meats’. 
The construction here, however, is somewhat 
obscure. 

18. As oil-cake or the sediment of any thing after 
expression. 

19. So Manu, II. 101 and IV. 93. 

20. So Manu, IV. 128. 

Keke 


BOOK II, CHAP. 12 


267 





CHAPTER 12 


BICMNSAATA: 


(TEMA HIAT) 
aid sara 


SATA, Fg-seraareTaTAa 
fees AA Wage at 
AarTEd TA Wee Tate: 

TES a Tent faye Waar AT VM 
WET YUATEaAT THI 
faa: Garay wen fayars At: Warn 3 i 


Aurva continued—"Let a_ respectable 
householder ever venerate the gods, kine, 
Brahmanas, saints, aged persons and holy 
teachers. Let him observe the two daily 
Sandhydas and offer oblations to fire. Let him 
dress in untorn garments, use delicate herbs 
and flowers, wear emeralds and other precious 
stones, keep his hair smooth and neat, scent 
his person with agreeable perfumes and 
always go handsomely attired, decorated with 
garlands of white flowers. 


fafaq weed 4 Rares aed 
fra arya Yarararetarqereaq vt 


arafas car at trea Gea! 
Te MAAN Heres A AAT G 
Let him never appropriate another's 

property, no address him with the lease 
unkindness. Let him always speak amiably and 
with truth and never make public another's 
faults. Let him not desire another's prosperity, 
nor seek his enmity. Let him not mount upon a 
crazy vehicle, nor take shelter under the bank 
of a river (which may fall upon him). 


I 
Taal-TAHTY-Ia TAHA: WEG 
AMATI Uae: YS: 

gat Aa + Hala ta: Waal 
ATA TAY TLIT! 

wala apy + favrantefarat atc 

T Haag Hula a aaa 
AAAS Fara aaa 8 it 
Aaa Aya A YT Var ge: 

TEA SCA AMA Fi 7 El TSA Yo 
7 PAT weaels A Weitere fase: 
Rikiemeagrents arfreietr aT wari 22H 
wai Wasaga ys Urea 

7 Rgahwasa vrerren fe arr: zt 
PML PANT aT 
eatatats atafafor waa V3 


A wise man will not form a friendship nor 
walk in the same path with one who is 
disesteemed, who is a sinner or a drunkard, 
who has many enemies or who is lousy, with a 
harlot or her gallant, with a pauper or a liar, 
with a prodigal, a slanderer or a knave. Let not 
a man bathe against the strength of a rapid 
stream, nor enter a house on fire. not climb to 
the top of a tree; nor (in company) clean his 
teeth or blow his nose, nor gape without 
covering his mouth, nor clear his throat, nor 
cough, nor laugh loudly, nor emit wind with 
noise, nor bite his nails, not cut grass, nor 
scratch the ground,’ nor put his beard into his 


268 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





mouth, nor crumble a clod of clay; nor look 
upon the chief planetary bodies when he is 
unclean. Let him not express disgust at a 
corpse, for the odour of a dead body is the 
produce of the moon. Let a decent man ever 
avoid by night the place where four roads 
meet, the village tree, the grove adjacent to the 
place where bodies are burnt and a loose 
woman. 


eisacramtferearat TRIS ge: 
AH: VME WaT A YAMS TAA Vv 
CPCCA OC IFAs GET 
SUAS FIA: UASTAT V4 UI 
AM cits frat teats ae: 
srata 4 ened fat fsa aifera: 0 61 


Let him not pass across the shadow or a 
venerable person, of an image, of a deity, of a 
flag, of a heavenly luminary.” Let him not 
travel alone through a forest, nor sleep by 
himself in an empty house.’ Let him keep 
remote from hair, bones, thorns, filth, 
remnants of offerings, ashes, chaff and earth’ 
wet with water in which another has bathed. 
Let him not receive the protection of the 
unworthy, nor attach himself to the dishonest. 


WAT ATA AERA FT: | 

JT VAT TA VAT AAT AVIT Vl 
Sheol syfgoeta wat gtr asta 
TAVIS Wars! Yararaat qa eeu 
q Sana Gare + dare Fa: | 
WHT Was CaM AKATN V3 


aacardreny feararaay qm 
qaara: waded frraratres Fan 2 ott 


Let him not approach a beast of prey; and 
let him not tarry long when he has risen from 
sleep. Let him not lie in bed when he is awake, 
nor encounter fatigue when it is time to rest. A 
prudent man will avoid, even at a distance, 
animals with tusks and horns; and he will shun 
exposure to frost, to wind and to sunshine. A 
man must neither bathe, nor sleep, nor rinse 


his mouth while he is naked:” he must not 
wash his mouth or perform any sacred rite, 
with his waistband unfastened: and be must 
not offer oblations to fire, nor sacrifice to the 
gods, nor wash his mouth, nor salute a 
Brahmana, nor utter a prayer, with only one 
garment on. 


TATRAMCY AEA HATTA! 

regratrenat fe aOTAlT PATI 2 VI 

fata arahisarater wel ga: 

feratest faareey GrayerTUeTAH 2 UI 

aaa Bie We: Yada ata 

STATA: MSA SONATAS ATTN 2 3M 

Let him never associate with immoral 
persons: half an instant is the limit for the 
intercourse of the righteous with them. A wise 
man will never engage in a dispute with either 
his superiors or inferiors: controversy and 
marriage are to be permitted only between 
equals. Let not a prudent man enter into 
contention: let him avoid unprofitable enmity. 
A small loss may be endured; but he should 
shun the wealth that is acquired by hostility. 


Saal Tet Frenisig SA eeM FT Ufo 
ao Peat Sorry Aearate ater: 1 Iw 
Wes AH Urs F PENA AAT 
aad Waa ware faranraa 241 
sae FT Teda Cag 
Agra aan fartara starry 2&1 
TarTargqara Was A AATSaAI 
ald vatfauqaagqenias ufdsa:u Vol 
fase Wad Taq wert Aaa) 
PerMQugarHa Wada F ABALN VL 
PAREARAT AAT MOTTA 
aferagerrarel FB A AST 28H 


"When a man has bathed, he must not wipe 
his limbs with a towel nor with his hands, nor 
shake his hair, nor rinse his mouth before he 
has risen. Let him not (when sitting) put one 
foot over another, not stretch forth his foot, in 


BOOK III, CHAP. 12 


269 





the presence of a superior, but sit with 
modesty in the posture called Virasana (or on 
his knees). He must ncver pass round a temple 
upon his left hand, nor perform the ceremony 
of circumambulating any venerable object in 
the reverse direction. A decent man will not 
spit, nor eject any impurity, in front of the 
moon, fire, the sun, water, wind or any 
respectable person,° nor will he void urine 
standing, nor upon the highway: he will never 
step over phlegm ordure, urine or blood; nor is 
the expectoration of the mucus of the throat 
allowable at the time of eating, offering 
sacrifices or oblations or repeating prayers or 
in the presence of a respectable person. 


afad Tara a arat farsa ga:1 

qt wagsamey Ararat He 3 0M 
TFPI TAA 

At Freee WaT WT HATA AT 13 Vi 
AYU THAT, ATT GATT TTT 
SATS ALATA ASAATTI 3 2 
ahr: weTE faghrosreare | 
Cena Ufaaat a: W AAA STI 3 31 
fet fart fret are ayer atsferaraa 

OT Aft HHATSee TIAL FATIMA 3 ¥ tl 
etary Stary aargen ariferant fervent 
faerbrerqagt aft Ma 34 I 


"Let not a man treat women with 
disrespect, nor let him put entire faith in them. 
Let him not deal impatiently with them, nor set 
them over matters of importance. A man who 
is attentive to the duties of his station will not 
go forth from his house without saluting the 
chaplets, flowers, gems, clarified butter and 
venerable persons in it. At proper seasons he 
will salute respectfully the places where four 
roads meet, when engaged in offering 


oblations with fire. Let him liberally relieve . 


the virtuous who are poor and reverence those 
who are learned in the: Vedas: :He who is a 


worshipper. of the: gods .and sages;: who. gives 


cakes..and water...to the .manes and who 


exercises hospitality, obtains the highest 
regions after death. He who speaks wisely, 
moderately and kindly, goes to those worlds 
which are the inexhaustible sources of 
happiness. He who 1s intelligent, modest, 
devout and who reverences wisdom, his 
superiors and the aged, goes to heaven. 


Ba II ROM CECIN IDC TIGA 
STRATE FT: HAST FAT 3 & A 
WH wala a: Par WaT 


Maa, Ws: TATA HEMT 3 91 


On the days called Parvas, on periods of 
impurity, upon unseasonable thunder and the 
occurrence of eclipses or atmospheric portents, 
a wise man must desist from the study of the 
Vedas.’ The pious man who suppresses anger 
and envy, who is benevolent to all and allays 
the fears of others, secures, as the least of his 
rewards, enjoyment in Svarga. 


aurea wat euat waaay a 
WAAC ot ATO: WaT ANT 3 C1 
ang a fehl et at Fraary wee gar: 
ATT BETS AT Tele 3 8 


A man should carry an umbrella, as a 
defence against sun and rain; he should bear a 
staff when he goes by night or through a 
wood; and he should walk in shoes, if he 
desires to keep his body from harm. As he 
goes along he should not look up, nor about 
him, nor afar off, but keep his eyes upon the 
ground to the extent of a couple of yards. 


aeeqaig avarean a Frese 
TE MMAR esareats raza volt 
(erantt: wat farentaraferfera: 1) 
ues: Teasers frarfor a: 
TagarT HTT Bich: Ht Prati gi 

"The householder who expels all sources of 
imperfection is in a great degree acquitted of 
the thrce ordinary objects of existence, desire, 
wealth and virtue; sinless amongst the sinful; 
speaking amicably to all-men; his whole soul 


270 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





melting with benevolence; final felicity is in 
his grasp. 
a SMAI sea FT ATT 


ATA AGATA WMT ¥ FM 


The earth is upheld by the veracity of those 
who have subdued their passions and 
following righteous practices, are never 
contaminated by desire, covetousness and 
wrath. 


TA Te Ma Mel Toit ferearcory 
ae FL WE aT aa Aa WaT 3 
fret ach fed tafefer wat 4 wae 
ae fed aet AATEIATAHAT ¥ I 
WoT wae WT aI 


SA AAA Aa Aes AAA WAN YG 
sft sitfeaeaygaret qetaisyt wregeaa: 1 2H 


Let therefore a wise man ever speak the 
truth when it is agreeable and when the truth 
would inflict pain let him hold his peace. Let 
him not utter that which, though acceptable, 
would be detrimental; for it were better to 
speak that which would be salutary, although 
it should give exceeding offence.® A 
considerate man will always cultivate, in act, 
thought and speech, that which is good for 
living beings, both in this world and in the 
next."” 


NOTES 

1. Manu, IV. 71. "He who breaks clay or cute 
grass or bites his nails, will speedily fall to ruin.” 

2. Manu. IV. 130. 

3. Ibid. 57. 

4. Ibid. 78 

5. Ibid. 45 

6. Ibid. 52 

7. Manu, IV. 101. The legislator is much more 
copious on this subject than the author of the 
Purana. 

8. So Manu, IV. 138. "Let him say what is true, 
but let him say what is pleasing. Let him speak no 
disagreeable truth, nor let him speak agreeable 
falsehood. This is a primeval rule.” 

9. That the preceding chapter agrees in many 
respects very closely with the contents of the fourth 


book of the Institutes of Manu, on economics and 
private morals, will be evident from the instances 
cited of some of the parallel passages. Several 
others might have been adduced. 

hee 


270 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





CHAPTER 13 
FANS: 


(Wace, aielaet, Valfesea, afquiawiesr a 
TRA) 


ate sare 

wae fag: SA att ys fae 

WASH del Hakargnyca FT Aq eh 

gary dais fais wer vera fer 

Gade Wsaa AAT ATT UH 

wad: Udet: Weyalespaists an 

cade &f frosty SE BA AT FTN FN 

ard: fagrores sre aria! 

Wad ay aed get: wdghsgn vi 

HUGAaaAey WAN AIAG: | 

AMaUToT TAT BSTRUiess FAT GA 

Wana da yafequ@esr 

arctyea fagrot gare wareat wet & 0 

faggenfafa: wrat qgree Ware: 

TAMAS! Weta Spareaher: 11 9 0 

Aurva continued—"The bathing of a father 

without disrobing is enjoined when a son is 
born; and he is to celebrate the ceremony 
proper for the event, which is the Sraddha 
offered upon joyous occasions.’ With 
composed mind and thinking on nothing else, 
the Brahmana should offer worship to both the 
gods and progenitors and should respectfully 
circumambulate, keeping Brahmanas on his 
left hand and give them food. Standing with 
his face to the east, he should present, with the 
parts of the hand sacred to the gods and to 


Prajapati, balls of food,” with curds, unbruised 
grain and jujubes; and should perform, on 


BOOK ITI, CHAP. 13. 


every accession of good fortune, the rite by 
which the class of progenitors termed 
Nandimukha is propitiated.* A householder 
should diligently worship the Pitrs so named, 
at the marriage of a son or daughter, on 
entering a new dwelling, on giving a name to a 
child, on performing his tonsure and other 
purificatory ceremonies, at the binding of the 
mother's hair during gestation or on first 
seeing the face of a son or the like. The 
Sraddha on such occasions, however, has been 
briefly alluded to. Hear now, oh king the rules 
for the performance of obsequial rites. 


Waed YA: SA: Safad anfayferq 
SRT UMTS aie: Sat Wee: USS ci 
aa ua Perraacqeratrantat: | 
aferontsrytar azarae: Uferersrferqu 8 
Wages ad mR aera 
HEMT: PATA WEATMAAT: I Qo 
amensaiet frus: vara afa urea 
feat @ anh aRoTTATa TST eit 
fanfe qafeardt: anet fare! 
Nereaie aan wif aeyartor sera ez 
waste gata a aad zat aan 


aan af: er Heat cere ferettearq 93 
misy yet” yfrceng frcteanry 


"Having washed the corpse with holy 
water, decorated it with garlands and burnt it 
without the village, the kinsmen, having 
bathed with their clothes on, are to stand with 
their faces to the south and offer libations to 
the deceased, addressing him by name and 
adding, "wherever you may be."* They then 
return, along with the cattle coming from 
pasture, to the village; and upon _ the 
appearance of the stars retire to rest, sleeping 
on mats spread upon the earth. Every day 
(while the mourning lasts) a cake or ball of 
food’ is to be placed on the ground, as an 
offering to the deceased; and rice, without, 
flesh, is to be daily eaten. Brahmanas are to be 
fed for as many days as the mourner pleases, 


271 


for the soul of the defunct derives satisfaction 
accordingly as his relatives are content with 
their entertainment. On the first day or the 
third or seventh or ninth (after the death of a 
person), his kinsmen should change their 
raiment and bathe out of doors and offer a 
libation of water, with (tila) sesamum-seeds. 


ugdstg a aded went 7a 
ASAT AUST VII 
SPN: PaHaorry AAA eTaT 


Tease Ufa eh th 
VATA AUST 


Tener PAM A J Afar 26 1 

On the fourth day® the ashes and bones 
should be collected: after which the body of 
one connected with the deceased by offerings 
of funeral cakes may be touched (by an 
indifferent person), without thereby incurring 
impurity; and those who are related only by 
occupation.’ The former class of relatives may 
use beds, but they must still refrain from 
unguents and flowers and must observe 
continence, after the ashes and bones have 
been collected (until the mourning is over). 


are Serra a ufat a AAt WAI 

TE vitst Sa TAP AEMTegN Vol 

WAGE Heras A YR 

art wheel Ua: Tarearasr Prada 2c 

When the deceased is a child or one who is 

abroad or who has been degraded or a spiritual 
preceptor, the period of uncleanness is but 
brief and the ceremonies with fire and water 
are discretional. The food of a family in which 
a kinsman is deceased is not to be partaken of 
for ten days; and during that period, gifts, 
acceptance, sacrifice and sacred study are 
suspended. 

fareiag game Terai 

SAAT APTA ATT MRT YsaAN LVI 

aga ater card fgarearel act fe 

ang auy frussy daratfesratatn 2 ol 


272 


aratammarey es ETAT! 
BANSAL AU: PATA AT: HATTI 2 gi 
ad: Taauteat & faurétargereat: | 

ar Halt Yar safareaahsyeta 2 VU 


The term of impurity for a Brahmana is ten 
days; for a Ksatriya, twelve; for a VaiSya, half 
a month; and a whole month for a Sidra.” On 
the first day after uncleanness ceases, the 
nearest relation of the deceased should feed 
Braéhmanas at his pleasure, but in uneven 
numbers and offer to the deceased a ball of 
rice upon holy grass placed near the residue of 
the food that has been eaten. After the guests 
have been fed, the mourner, according to his 
caste, 1s to touch water, a weapon, a goad or a 
staff, as he is purified by such contact. He may 
then resume the duties prescribed for his caste 
and follow the avocation ordinarily pursued by 
its members. 


Water a aeataleonT: TOT! 
smariighaaaa Fareed fe TAU WII 
Ualsdeaa arreretearafaarcay 

vars faust arent ymacy feonfag 2 wii 
Wey carriage 
TATRA ares frat TATU VU 


"The Sraddha enjoined for an individual is 
to be repeated on the day of his death (in each 
month for a year),’” but without the prayers 
and rites performed on the first occasion and 
without offerings to the ViSvadevas. A single 
ball of food is to be offered to the deceased, as 
the purification of one person and Brahmanas 
are to be fed. The Brahmanas are to be asked 
by the sacrificer if they are satisfied; and upon 
their assent, the prayer, 'May this ever satisfy 
such a one (the deceased) is to be recited. 


Weert Me SAT ATT, EAT: 
afqustanrat asa ret TS! WATT EM 
Walesa art aefe ua! 
(Haratsa eS at ura ar grevisfe 7) 
frerreancaath AT WATGTATN Vol 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 
Ua Wawel ase US Tae TAM 
Praag fagaag Naas AAT 2c 
aa: fageraran afeay Wea wera! 
MEM a Yarra FATT 281 


"This is the Sraddha called Ekoddista, 
which is to be performed monthly to the end 
of a twelve month from the death of a person; 
at the expiration of which the ceremony called 
Sapindana is to be observed. The practices of 
this rite are the same as those of the monthly 
obsequies, but a lustration is to be made with 
four vessels of water, perfumes and sesamum : 
one of these vessels is considered as dedicated 
to the deceased, the other three to the 
progenitors in general; and the contents of the 
former are to be transferred to the other three, 
by which the deceased becomes included in 
the class of ancestors, to whom worship is to 
be addressed with all the ceremonies of the 
Sraddha. 


Ua: Ut: walal ar wat ar ag arafer | 
afiuseafraita fraret Ja! STAT 3 ol 
Saree Heat MAA: 
mquaraquss Mag Be Aes AT 3 I 
qereasty ulfasa eit: arat frat za! 
agarcidafe arat: dearer a eat: 
THATINGAAT BATAAN TT: 113 VU 


The persons who are competent to perform 
the obsequies of relations connected by the 
offering of the cake are the son, grandson, 
great grandson, a kinsman of the deceased, the 
descendants of a brother or the posterity of one 
allied by funeral offerings. In absence of all 
these, the ceremony may be instituted by those 
related by presentations of water only or those 
connected by offerings of cakes or water to 
maternal ancestors. Should both families in the 
male line be extinct, the last obsequies may be 
performed by women or by the associates of 
the deceased in religious or social institutions 
or by any one who becomes possessed of the 
property of a deceased kinsman. 


BOOK III, CHAP. 13 


vat: fear wemney vat date: feat: 
faxant: feat: walarat We spt W330 
WaTe- ATA NaeIMEraAy A: HAT: | 
a: Yat wera wife arenas: 3 xi 


We fags afausteaconey| 
fad a: frat: fran: wreart at FRAT 34 


fagargfauser warrafereteran 
a Agreridarie Wat TaterToTT 3 & 


Obsequial rites are of three descriptions, 
initiative, intermediate and subsequent. The 
first are those which are observed after the 
burning of the corpse until the touching of 
water, weapons (or until the cessation of 
uncleanness). The intermediate ceremonies are 
the Sraddhas called Ekoddista, which are 
offered every month: and the subsequent rites 
are those which follow the Sapindikarana, 
when the deceased is admittcd amongst the 
ancestors of his race; and the ceremonies are 
thenceforth general or ancestral. The first set 
of rites (as essential) are to be performed by 
the kindred. of the father or mother, whether 
connected by the offering of the cake or of 
water, by the associates of the deceased or by 
the prince who inherits his property. 


yal: feawr adem: gata UT: | 
afeital yee! arabes 391 
Garett a acer: etorrepAT: Frat: | 
wiadarat usravantfep fad: 3 cil 
TAS at: Rarer: Foy wie! 

Aal Hal ST Sian fafear AT AAT 3 8 
sfa sttfaepgaay gitaisy waleyitseara: it 23 i 


The first and the last rites are both to be 
performed by sons and other relations and by 
daughter's sons and their sons; and so are the 
sacrifices on the day of the person's death. The 
last class or ancestral rites, are to be performed 
annually, with the same ceremonies as are 
enjoined for the monthly obsequies; and they 
may be also pertained by females. As the 
ancestral rights are therefore most universal, I 


273 
will describe to you, oh king, at what seasons 
and in what manner, they should be 
celebrated.” 

NOTES 


1. The offerings of the Hindus to the Pitrs 
partake of the character of those of the Romans to 
the lares and manes, but bear a more conspicuous 
part in their ritual. They are said indeed by Manu 
(III. 203), in words repeated in the Vayu and 
Matsya Puranas and Hari Vamsa, to be of more 
moment than the worship of the gods : ta#ratefa qer 
fagarat fafirert1 These ceremonies are not to be 
regarded as merely obsequial; for independently of 
the rites addressed to a recently deceased relative 
and in connection with him to remote ancestors and 
to the progenitors of all beings, which are of a 
strictly obsequial or funereal description, offerings 
to deceased ancestors and the Pitrs in general, form 
an essential ceremony on a great variety of festive 
and domestic occasions. The Nimnaya Sindhu, in a 
passage referred to by Colebrooke (As. Res. VII.) 
specifies the following Sraddhas : 1. The Nitya or 
perpetual; daily offerings to ancestors in general; 2. 
The Naimittika or occasional; as the Ekoddista or 
obsequial offerings on account of a kinsman 
recently deceased; 3. The Kamya, voluntary; 
performed for the accomplishment of a special 
design (sfiwafasa); 4. The Vrddhi; performed on 
occasions of rejoicing or prosperity; 5. The 
Sapindana; offerings to all individual and to general 
ancestors; 6. The Parvana Sraddha; offerings to the 
manes on certain lunar days called Parvas or day of 
full moon and new moon and the eighth and 
fourteenth days of the lunar fortnight; 7. The Gost 
hi; for the advantage of a number of learned 
persons or of an assembly of Brahmanas, invited 
for the purpose; 8. The Suddhi; one performed to 
purify a person from some defilement; an expiatory 
Sraddha; 9. The Karm4nga; one forming part of the 
intiatory ceremonies or Safiskaras, observed at 
conception, birth, tonsure; 10. The Daiva; to which 
the gods are invited; 11. The Yatra Sraddha; held 
by a person going a journey; and 12. The Pusti 
Sriddha; one performed to promote health and 
wealth. Of these, the four which are considered the 
most solemn are the rite performed for a parent or 
near relative, lately deceased; that which is 
performed for kindred collectively: that observed 


274 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





on certain lunar days; and that celebrated on 


occasions of rejoicing : aa Wate feattostenconencd 
wafawta yet Nirnaya Sindhu, p. 27}. 


2. Manu directs the balls to be made from the 
remainder of the clarified butter constituting the 
previous oblation to the gods. III, 215. Kullika 
Bhatta explains, however, the oblation to consist 
partly of Anna (24) food or boiled rice. The latter is 
the article of which the balls chiefly consist. 
Yajiiavalkya directs them to be made of rice and 
sesamum-seeds. The Vayu Purana adds to these 
two ingredients, honey and butter : but various 
kinds of fruit, of pulse and of grain and water, 
frankincense, sugar and milk, are also mixed up in 
the Pindas. Their size also differs; and according to 
Angiras, as quoted by Hemadri in the Sraddha 
Mayikha, they may be of the dimension of the fruit 
of the jujube or of the hogplum, of the fruit of the 
Bel or of the wood-apple or of a fowl's egg. Some 
authorities direct Pindas of a different size for 
different Sraddha; prescribing them no larger than 
the wood-apple at the first or pure funereal 
ceremony and as big as a cocoa-nut at the monthly 
and annual Sraddha. In practice the Pinda is usually 
of such a magnitude that it may be conveniently 
held by the hand. 


3. We have here the authority of the text for 
classing the Nandimukhas amongst the Pitrs (see 
Bk. III. Ch. X): the verse is, werye: fiat: a4 aga 
Wize) waa aq Hiei Yes: sedafeyqii and the same Gana 
or class is presently again named : wet ya fray 
wad adi Jet! The Mantra of the Vrddhi or festival 
Sraddha is also said, in the Nirnaya Sindhu, to be 
anes: fagey: cate According to the authorities, 
however, which are cited in that work, there seems 
to be some uncertainty about the character of the 
Nandimuhas; and they are addressed both as Pitrs 
and gods : being in the former case either the 
ancestors prior to the great grandfather, ancestors 
collectively or a certain class of them; and in the 
latter, being identified with the Visvadevas or a 
class of them called also Urddhavaktra. The term 
Nandimukha is also applied to the rite itself or to 
the Vrddhi Sraddha and to one addressed to 
maternal ancestors. Nirnaya Sindhu, p. 268. 


4. "An oblation of water must be next presented 
from the joined palm of the hand, naming; the 
deceased and the family from which he sprang and 


saying, ‘May this oblation reach you.” As. Res. VII. 
244, The text has, aa an feemraaaqarata anes: | 


5. The proper period of mourning is ten days, on 
each of which offerings of cakes and libations of 
water, are to be made to the deceased, augmenting 
the number of cakes each day, so that on the last 
day ten cakes are presented. When the period is 
shorter, the same number of ten cakes must be 
distributed amongst the several days or they may be 
presented on one day. Nirnaya Sindhu, p. 429. 


6. It should be, more correctly, on that day 
on which the mourning ceases or as previously 
mentioned, the first, third, seventh or ninth ; 
but the authorities vary and besides these, the 
second and fourth days and certain days of the 
fortnight or month, are specified. Nirnaya 
Sindhu, p. 432. 


7. They are no longer unclean. The Sapindas or 
those connected by offerings of cakes to common 
ancestors, extend to seven degrees, ascending or 
descending. The Samanodakas or those similarly 
connected by presentations of water, to fourteen 
degrees. 

8. That is, a mere guest or stranger is not to 
partake of it. The food directed to be given to 
Brahmanas is given in general only to the relatives 
of the deceased, who are already unclean. In this 
respect our text and the modern practice seem to 
differ from the primitive system, as described by 
Manu, III. 187. The eleventh or twelfth day is the 
term on which the Sraddha which crowns the whole 
of the funeral rites is to be performed and when 
Brahmanas are to be invited. Mirnaya Sindhu, p. 
437. 

9. The number of Pindas, however, is for each 
case the same or ten, Mirnaya Sindhu. p. 429. 

10. So Manu, III. 251. It may be doubted if the 
monthly Sraddha was part of the ancient system, 
although Kullika Bhatta supposes it to be referred 
to (v. 248) and supplies the fancied omission of the 
text. 

1}. Parva, ‘first’; 
Uttara, ‘last.' 


Madhyama, 'middle;' and 


KKK 


BOOK III, CHAP. 14 


CHAPTER 14 
ATe ISAM: 


(sragnety ta fersreatrgrner-fagiitnaarty) 
aid sara 


Tel F-GF-ATAT- TaN A-AY- ATE 
fadear fariony aaita Wa ITI I 
Sega say Versa 

Me agiraa: Hay Horaafaet Wn I 
Tifa wreatad wat ugerat Tat 
ANBATY Hala AMI wre F311 


Aurva  proceeded—"Let the devout 
performer of an ancestral oblation' propitiate 
Brahmi, Indra, Rudra, the Agvini, the sun, fire, 
the Vasus, the winds, the Visvadevas, the 
sages, birds, men, animals, _ reptiles, 
progenitors and all existent things, by offering 
adoration to them monthly, on the fifteenth 
day of the rioon's wane (or dark fortnight) or 
on the eighth day of the same period in certain 
months or at particular seasons, as I will 
explain. 

argent yet faferrarar fesry 

Me Hala fags cattarseayt TAT vl 
faq’ eft wom’ wet wie: 
arate ore! Usa a Tres 


TATMUSTY FRAT 
SOMATA Hell AATATA FAT G I 
staal Fer Hafagmarcareanthry 
ste: fagroregta aareiearsanfearyi 91 
SMTA Tat YI UE Bal PAA 
Blagnas wat da went faattsfaar cit 


"When a householder finds that any 
circumstance has occurred or a distinguished 
guest has arrived, on which account ancestral 
ceremonies are appropriate, he should 
celebrate them. He should offer a voluntary 
sacrifice upon any atmospheric portent, at the 
equinoctial and solstical periods, at eclipses of 
the sun and moon, on the sun's entrance into a 


275 


zodiacal sign, upon unpropitious aspects. of the 
planets and asterisms, on dreaming unlucky 
dreams and on eating the grain of the year's 
harvest. The Pitrs derive satisfaction for eight 
years from ancestral offerings upon the day of 
new moon when the star of the conjunction’ is 
Anuradha, Visakha or Svati; and for twelve 
years when it is Pusya, Ardra or Punarvasu. 
arrantantest faut gata 
STRUY MTA SATATAT Ser 8 HI 
TaRqaaareaN Terra | 
Tat Pare seg Faq yoy ATITAN got 
Tid GAHAN Bae Weer 
Yaad fags waaay Ai eI! 
AAHAR SarT 
AMAA BB Tilar 
TSTA sifreRyaeTe 
TATA TD HOTTA 
TAM THA A ATT YN 
Wat BEN: ala: Tat- 
TAU ATTTA: | 
SUS MANA TA 
fraparaags Al 2311 
urna facifatist 
wend Pager: Waal Ayer: 
TE Ha wt Ua: Wea 
WANA fara aati QSil 
It is not easy for a man to effect his object, 
who is desirous of worshipping the Pitrs or the 
gods on a day of new moon when the stars are 
those of Dhanistha. Pirvabhadrapada or Sata- 
bhisa. Hear also an account of another class of 
Sraddhas, which afford especial contentment 
to progenitors, as explained by Sanatkuméra, 
the son of Brahm4, to the magnanimous 
Purtravas, when full of faith and devotion to 
the Pitrs he inquired how he might please 
them. The third lunar day of the month 
Vaisakha (April, May) and the ninth of 
Kartika (October, November), in the light 


276 


fortnight; 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


the thirteenth of Nabha (July, offerings made on the day of new moon when 


August) and the fifteenth of Magha (January. Ardrd is the lunar mansion. 


February), in the dark fortnight; are called by 
ancient teachers the anniversaries of the first 
day of a Yuga or age (Yugddya) and are 
esteemed most sacred. On these days, water 
mixed with sesamun-seeds should be regularly 
presented to the progenitors of mankind; as 
well as on every solar and lunar eclipse; on the 
eighth lunations of the dark fortnights of 
Agrahayana, Magha and Phalguna 
(December—February); on the two days 
commencing the solstices, when the nights and 
days alternately begin to diminish; on those 
days which are the anniversaries of the 
beginning of the Manvantaras; when the sun is 
in the path of the goat; and on all occurrences 
of meteoric phenomena. A Sraddha at these 
seasons contents the Pitrs for a thousand years 
: such is the secret which they have imparted. 


arenfad Taseyt cather- 
safe art ate arecrt 
MAT areat: A ue: frau 
qT weTgoAse! SAASAT Ve 11 
aret attar ate are afery 
Water wort! ver fag: 
ad Wea wearfe fa 
oe eee 


Tg wT Teyquear a 
at wast frat: TUT B91 
The fifteenth day of the dark half of the 
month Magha, when united with the 
conjunction of the asterism over which Varuna 
presides (Satabhisa), is a season of no little 
sanctity, when offerings are 


aad Afar an 
TATA TATA TATE LUT 

gear fagui eftntr ean ec 
rater way frat: HET 7 

ARTAAT GATT 8TeT: | 
arenfaared ype 

arent ofa ararfeart: 1 29 
fora fads quit fares 

wees alert: afar fafaan 
Ura Fah WaT a aie- 

FO We ATAT SSAA 2 0 I 
fapitaretara yetrenretter syoper 21 
TAT TAT UAT VTE AT SAAT 2 2 
aie at: Het ANTS AAATAT: | 
spay farmed a: frosrat Frafteatan 2 211 
wi ai wet a Tavifes agi 
fava aft fassar arseagfave ereafan 231 
STAT AT GATRTaRAT carers Ta, MATTE: | 
vitae famaarertafatat AT Bvt 
MAAASAeATA AIG Tagen: | 
Werata fara: cacaeat art seroma 24h 
TATA: HUTA aa eA 
wore fyena wets yo! area eeu 
fact: aereftratfa anad weneferqi 
WHAT: AAPA Yoo WereaAH 2 
Ma Tt AAT HATTA: | 
Galfactanreratraqeafacaten 2 eu 


"He whe, after having offered food and 


especially libations to the Pitrs, bathes in the Ganges, 


graceful to the progenitors. Food and water Sutlej, Vipasaia (Beyah), Sarasvati or the 
presented by men who are of respectable Gomati at Naimisa, expiates all his sins. The 
families, when the asterism Dhanistha is Pitrs also say, "After having received 
combined with the day of new moon, content satisfaction for a twelve month, we shall 
the Pitrs for ten thousand years; while they further derive gratification by libations offered 
rcpose for a whole age when satisfied by by our descendants at some place of 


BOOK III, CHAP. 14 


277 





pilgrimage, at the end of the dark fortnight of 
Magha.' The songs of the Pitrs confer purity of 
heart, integrity of wealth, prosperous seasons, 
perfect rites and devout faith; all that men can 


desire. Hear the verses that constitute those 


songs, by listening to which all those 
advantages will be secured, oh prince, by you. 
'That enlightened individual who begrudges 
not his wealth, but presents us with cakes, 
shall be born in a distinguished family. 
Prosperous and affluent shall that man ever be, 
who in honour of us gives to the Brahmanas. if 
he is wealthy, jewels, clothes, land, 
conveyances, wealth or any valuable presents; 
or who, with faith and humility, entertains 
them with food, according’ to his means, at 
proper seasons. If he cannot afford to give 
them dressed food, he must, in proportion to 
his ability, present them with unboiled grain or 
such gifts, however trifling, as he can bestow. 
Should he be utterly unable even to do this, he 
must give to some eminent Brahmana, bowing 
at the same time before him, sesamum-seeds 
adhering to the tips of his fingers and sprinkle 
water to us, from the palms of his hands, upon 
the ground; or he must gather, as he may, 
fodder for a day and give it to a cow; by which 
he will, if firm in faith, yield us satisfaction. If 
nothing of this kind is practicable, he must go 
to a forest and lift up his arms to the sun and 
Other regents of the spheres and say aloud— 


a Usha fad 3 at a are. 
erga Tafaarants Tar 
garg warm frat watt 
Hal YS AA ATA 3 ott 


"I have no money, nor property, nor grain, 
nor anything whatever fit for an ancestral 
offering. Bowing therefore to my ancestors, I 
hope the progenitors will be satisfied with 
these arms tossed up in the air in devotion.’ 


atte Jaret 
saa faehaiht srarrawarsrry 
a: Hla Fa AA ares afer ara 3 VK 
ofa sifrapyeret qdlaisey wgayitseara:u geil 


These are the words of the Pitrs 
themselves; and he who endeavours, with such 
means as he may possess, to fulfil their 


wishes, performs the ancestral rite called a 
Sraddha.' 


NOTES 

1. We may here take the opportunity of inquiring 
who are meant by the Pitrs; and generally speaking, 
they may be called a, race of divine beings, 
inhabiting celestial regions of their own and 
receiving into their society the spirits of those 
mortals for whom the rite of fellowship in 
obsequial cakes with them, the Sapindikarana, has 
been duly performed. The Pitrs collectively 
therefore, include a man’s ancestors; but the 
principal members of this order of beings are .of a 
different origin. The Vayu, Matsya and Padma 
Puranas and Hari VarhSa, profess to give an 
account of the original Pitrs. The account is much 
the same and for the most part in the same words, 
in all. They agree in distinguishing the Pitrs into 
seven classes; three of which are without form 
(aqd4:) or composed of intellectual, not 
elementary substance and assuming what forms 
they please; and four are corporal (@4d4:), When 
they come to the enumeration of the particular 
classes they somewhat differ and the accounts in all 
the works are singularly imperfect. According to a 
legend given by the Vayu and the Hari Varhsa, the 
first Pitrs were the sons of the gods. The gods 
having offended Brahma, by neglecting to worship 
him, were cursed by him to become fools; but upon 
their repentance he directed them to apply to their 
sons for instruction. Being taught accordingly the 
rites of expiation and penance by their sons. They 
addressed them as fathers; whence the son of the 
gods were the first Pitrs. @ Yarqay vt wera 
fedioe:) ga a fitiscah dea sfrahfirn: 11 So the 
Matsysa has Farey wreard fea eaqaa: | 'The Pitrs 
are born in the Manvantaras as the sons of the 
gods.' The Hari Varhsa makes the sons assume the 
character of fathers, addressing them, ‘Depart, 
children:' Tai Grarsfa :| Again; the Vayu 
Purana declares the seven orders of Pitrs to have 
been originally the first gods, the Vairajas, whom 
Brahma, with the eye of Yoga, beheld in the eterna! 
spheres and who are the gods of the gods ‘tia 
Sahar We aa fasta ea: 1 a caer eft ware Sart 


278 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





fefa cact:1 smfe car sft waa Wai Va AAEM TMA 
Megha: | seers sear Uda: 11 Again; in 
the same work we have the incorporeal Pitrs called 
Vairajas, from being the Prajapati Viraja; 3474: 
fagrm: Waret ot word: 1 farses fen: Fer ae ea 
faa: || The Matsya agrees with this latter statement 
and adds that the gods worship them, aya: fag 
FRR WII: | Baa UY Sao San ea aaa: | The 
Hari Varnsa has the same statement, but more 
precisely distinguishes the Vairajas as one class 
only of the incorporeal Pitrs. The commentator 
states the same, calling the three incorporeal Pitrs, 
Vairajas, Agnisvattas and, Varhisads; and the four 
corporeal orders, Sukdlas, Angirasas, Susvadhas 
and Somapas. The Vairajas are described as the 
fathers of Mend, the mother of Uma. Their abode is 
variously termed the Santanika, Sanatana and Soma 
loka. As the posterity of Viraja, they are the 
Somasads of Manu. The other classes of Pitrs the 
three Puranas agree with Manu in representing as 
the sons of the patriarchs and in general assign to 
them the same offices and posterity. They are the 
following : 

Agnisvattas—sons of Marici and Pitrs of the gods 
(Manu-Matsya, Padma) : living in Soma-loka and 
parents of Achchoda (Matsya, Padma, Hari 
Varnsa). The Vayu makes them residents of Viraja- 
loka, sons of Pulastya, Pitrs of the demigods and 
demons and parents of Pivari; omitting the next 
order of Pitrs, to whom these circumstances more 
accurately refer. The commentator on the Hari 
Varnsa derives the name from Agnisu (29), 'in or 
by oblations to fire.! and Atta (s7m:), ‘obtained,' 
‘invoked.’ 

Varhisads-sons of Atri and Pitrs of the demons 
(Manu) : sons of Pulastya. Pitrs of the demons, 
residents in Vaibhraja, fathers of Pivari (Matsya, 
Padma. Hari V). 

These three are the formless or incorporeal Pitrs. 

Somap4s—descendants of Bhrgu or sons of Kavi 
by Svadha, the daughter of Agni; and Pitrs of the 
Brahmanas (Manu and Vayu Purana). The Padma 
calls them Usmapas. The Hari Varnsa calls the 
Somap4s to whom it ascribes the same descent as 
the Vayu, the Pitrs of the Siidras; and the Sukdlas 
the Pitrs of the Brahmanas. 

Havismantas—in the solar sphere, sons of Angiras 
and Pitrs of the Ksatriyas (Manu, Vayu. Matsya, 
Padma, Hari VarhSa). 


Ajyapas—sons of Kardama, Pitrs of the Vaisyas 
Kamaduhaloka (Manu); but the law giver calls 
them the sons of Pulastya. The Pitrs of the Vaisyas 
are called Kavyas in the Nandi Upapurana; and in 
the Hari Varhsa and its comment they are termed 
Susvadhas, sons of Kardama, descended from 
Pulaha. 

Sukélins—~sons of Vasistha and Pitrs of the 
Stdras (Manu and Vayu Purana). They are not 
mentioned in the Padma. The Matsya inserts the 
name and descent, but specifies them as amongst 
the incorporeal Pitrs : ama@fias: fart ahieer gare: 
Tey 8 ara a4 F wha: i! It may be suspected that 


‘the passage is corrupt. The Hari Varhsa makes the 


Sukalas sons of Vasistha, the Pitrs of the 
Brahmanas; and gives the title of Somap4s to the 
Pitrs of the Sidras. In general this work follows the 
Vayu; but with omissions and transpositions, as if it 
had carelessly mutilated its original. 

Besides these Pitrs or progenitors, other 
heavenly beings are sometimes made to adopt a 
similar character; thus Manu says, "the wise call 
our fathers Vasus; our paternal grandfathers, 
Rudras; our paternal great grandfathers, Adityas; 
agreeably to a text of the Vedas:" that is, these 
divine beings are to be mediated upon along with 
and as not distinct from, progenitors. Hemadri 
quotes the Nandi Upapur4na for a different practice 
and directs Visnu to be identified with the father, 
Brahma with the grandfather and Siva with the 
great grandfather. This, however, is Saivya 
innovation. The Vaisnavas direct Aniruddha to be 
regarded as one's-self and Pradyumna, Sankarsana 
and Vasudeva as the three ancestors. Again, they 
are identified with Varuna, Prajapatya and Agni; or 
again with months, seasons and years. Nirnaya 
Sindhu, p. 284. It may be doubted how far any of 
these correctly represent the original notions 
inculcated by the texts of the Vedas, from which, in 
the most essential particulars, they are derived. 

2. When the Yogatara or principal star seen, 1s 
the chief star or stars of these asterisms or lunar 
mansions respectively, see the table given by 
Colebrooke. As. Res. IX. P. 346. The first three 
named in the text are stars in Scorpio, Libra and 
Arcturus; the second three are stars in Cancer, 
Gemini and Orior; and the third are stars in the 
Dolphin, Pegasus and Aquarius. 

KKK 


BOOK ITI, CHAP. 15 


CHAPTER 15 
Uses: 
(sreifa-farcerontcaary afisrgrar =) 
ata sara 
MAO TAHT S Aa EMT aATT A 
funfackakamaferqact: wegfaqu eu 
aefaeaaiar ari wn a ssa: 
efcerey TaAA-Stea-STMTA-A ATTA 2 
MGeNSa AUS: Tara eTET 
ferent: wrafersya areaifagcasy a1 30 
Urry Prareragrg yaiarg wet za! 
MIG EEC EOU RE Carrie (Bd) 


Aurva proceeded—"Hear next, oh prince, 
what description of Brahmana should be fed at 
ancestral ceremonies. He should be one 
studied in various triplets of the Rk and Yajur 
Vedas ;' one who is acquainted with the six 
supplementary sciences of the Vedas;* one 
who understands the Vedas; one who practises 
the duties they enjoin;? one who exercises 
penance; a chanter of the principal SAamaveda,* 
an officiating priest, a sister's son, a daughter's 
son, a son-in-law, a father-in-law, a maternal 
uncle, an ascetic, a Brahmana who maintains 
the five fires, a pupil, a kinsman; one who 
reverences his parents. A man should first 
employ the Brahmanas first specified in the 
principal obsequial rite; and the others 
(commencing with the ministering priest) in 
the subsidiary ceremonies instituted to gratify 
his ancestors. 


ragga ara acita: yrraacdtean fe: 
agua afederat: arafarretin 4 i 
spree ta: fay areas: | 
FARAH RSS YAH Ts GI 
UTarafasta Braiearearsars | 
qactafrarar a qaciafata ao 

AM SaAHHA ATS Arehet HAAN CI 


279 


"A false friend, a man with ugly nails or 
black teeth, a ravisher, a Brahmana who 
neglects the service of fire and sacred study, a 
vendor of the Soma plant, a man accused of 
any crime, a thief, a calumniator, a Brahmana 
who conducts religious ceremonies for the 
vulgar: one who instructs his servant in holy 


- writ or is instructed in it by his servant; the 


husband of a woman who has been formerly 
betrothed to another; a man who is undutiful to 
his parents; the protector of the husband of a 
woman of the servile caste or the husband of a 
woman of the servile caste; and a Brahmana 
who ministers to idols—are not proper persons 
to be invited to an ancestral offering.” 


waste ga: weary Farag 
wade waar Farm tarefeenrq <i 
wa: MlaeTaTarerared Aft: Wel 

AHA TA Hala SAAT WETATATN Qo 


On the first day let a judicious man invite 
emincnt teachers of the Vedas and other 
Braéhmanas; and according to their directions 
determine what is to be dedicated to the gods 
and what to the Pitrs. Associated with the 
Brahmanas, let the institutor of an obsequial 
rite abstain from anger and incontinence. 


are Feet yaar at ainferat frase a 
Sara Tear wet Teracaera: FIT ea 
Te yeaah freA FrAaonT 
sae fear Tearrary aes BATT 2H 
Tregienfeat WeAPTAry FI FEAT 

PCE RIAD IRUGIREE RCH POURED 


He who having eaten himself in a Sraddha 
and fed Brahmanas and appointed them to 
their sacred offices, is guilty of incontinence, 
theréby sentences his progenitors to shameful 
suffering. In the first place, the Brahmanas 
before described are to be invited; but those 
holy men who come to the house without an 
invitation are also to be entertained. The 
guests are to be reverendy received with water 
for their feet and the like; and the entertainer, 
holding holy grass in his hand, is to place 


280 


them, after they have rinsed their mouths, 
upon seats. An uneven number of Brahmanas 
is to be invited in sacrifices to the manes; an 
even or uneven number in those presented to 
the gods; or one only on each occasion.° 

faqurrgst yrary tarnftresa EAT 

careers aT fauna Pata ex 

TM Maes Sucawaaaq 

Hala aferaerst ar aarcfaraarn eh 

Wear were fry sararywaTTary| 

PATS ATTAIN 8G I 

WIR Aa: Mfaalg: saeger Beat zu! 

Wendehd Wet Gata AGTH VA 

"Then let the householder, inspired by 
religious faith, offer oblations to the maternal 
grandfather, along with the worship of the 
Vigvadevas’ or the ceremony called 
VaisSvadeva, which comprehends offerings to 
both paternal and maternal ancestors and to 
ancestors in general. Let him feed the 
Brahmanas who are appropriated to the gods 
and to maternal ancestors, with their faces to 
the north; and those set apart for the paternal 
ancestors and ancestors in general, with their 
faces to the east. Some say that the viands of 
the Sraddha should be kept distinct for these 
two sets of ancestors, but others maintain that 
they are to be fed with the same food, at the 
same time. 

fase ayer sear aaaredfaarad: | 

HPAlaaet Walt SA AaAHATN V0 11 

qarepy a wart weet feared 


BN-TI-gO-Aaiy Bay Tare aenfafe vei 


faquiraaed aq weRarTHSIAT 

SINS At: WT Sear SUT] HRITHFATN 2o Il 
waya fagorg Fararaet ga: 

forage wae caraeatadh FIN 2 VI 
aie aaa wear TIA 
SATNAT AT: AM TAT ATA 2 2 
art fafad etrorgventtar: | 

water ylrearatagreacaeairaar: 112 3 11 


concurrence of the 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


AeA We argTes aes Fa: | 
MRA Slat ALATA TAS TAT: VI 


Having spread KuSa grass for seats and 
offered libations according to rule, let the 
sensible man. invoke the deities, with the 
Brahmanas who are 
present.” Let the man who is acquainted with 
the ritual offer a libation to the gods with 
water ‘and barley, having presented to them 
flowers, perfumes and incense. Let him ofier 
the same to the Pitrs, placed upon his left; and 
with the consent of the Brahmanas, having 
first provided seats of Kuga grass doubled, let 
him invoke with the usual prayers the manes 
to the ceremony, offering a libation, on his left 
hand, of water and sesamum. He will then, 
with the permission of the Brahmanas, give 
food to any guest who arrives at the time or 
who is desirous of victuals or who is passing 
along the road; for holy saints and ascetics, 
benefactors of mankind, are traversing this 
earth, disguised in various shapes.’ On this 
account let a prudent man welcome a person 
who arrives at such a season; for inattention to 
a guest frustrates the consequences of an 
ancestral offering. 


Wgue AMAA Aisa 
arqaral fasteteg frepca: yeah 2411 
AY HMA raat TAUE!A: | 
aaa & fague seat ASAT 2G I 
daaara Barn sitar staat Aa: 
girafrencned fagaary Fatq 201 
asa froneniniienfadeary 

ara YRatreara areatatah TN Bo 
ane ty feat: Gy: Ga 
SHAT AAA SA AAT afeAT Vel 


"The sacrificer is then to offer food, 
without salt or seasoning, to fire.'° three 
several times, with the consent of the assistant 
Brahmanas; exclaiming first, 'To fire, the 
vehicle of the oblations; to the manes Svaha!' 
Next addressing the oblation to Soma, the lord 
of the progenitors; and giving the third to 


BOOK Ill, CHAP, 15 : 


Vaivasvata. He is then to place a very little of 
the residue of the oblation in the dishes of the 
Brahmanas; and next, presenting them with 
choice viands, well dressed and seasoned and 
abundant, he is to request them civilly to 
partake of it at their pleasure. The Brahmanas 
are to eat of such food I attentively, in silence, 
with cheerful countenances and at their ease. 
The sacrificer is to give it to them, not 
churlishly, nor hurriedly, but with devout 
faith. 

wWrerraad ye fet: 

Pal AAT: TaATET Wat FRAT: 3 of 

"Having next recited the prayer of the 
discomfiture of malignant spirits'' and 
scattered sesamum-seeds upon the ground, the 
Brahmanas who have been fed are to be 
addressed, in common with the ancestors of 
the sacrificer, in this manner: 


faa foarmasia aaa ita: 
Tey ate warcaferarnrenfarergrat: 1h 3 QU 
fuer frrrmasia ata wftarre: | 
ata wary frusa war eat yeTeH 3 8 


‘May my father, grandfather and great 
grandfather, in this persons of these 
Brahmanas, receive’ satisfaction! May my 
father, grandfather and great grandfather 
derive nutriment from these oblations to fire! 


foar framasta ada vitae: 
ofa warg 3 war wartafeeraearqii 3 31 


May my father, grandfather and great 
grandfather derive satisfaction from the balls 
of food placed by me upon the ground! May 
my father, grandfather and great grandfather 
be pleased with what I have this day offered 
them in faith! 

mrarmerghryty Te 

cen Teeter FAA ALTAT: | 
fad a tat: wat way 

Oe WOyy MW AGAMA 3 wh 
AHA FATA 

TATSTATE STASI 


281 


AaAMNTaY TE 
TH AATVARUT Wa 3 Ht 


May my maternal grandfather, his father 
and his father, also enjoy contentment from 
my offerings! May all the gods experience 
gratification and all evil beings perish! May 
the lord of sacrifice, the imperishable deity 
Hari, be the acceptor of all oblations made to 
the manes or the gods! and may all malignant 
spirits and enemies of the deities, depart from 
the rite.' 


ahrany fafated fate aach 

CEMETARY Mat ANT WH WHT 3 Ut 

Bote: alors wae 

Uhtert ad: Frosry weary cera TaTfSaT: 1 I 

Feryeiters aaery ceed WHEN 

area fiveratea Ratq 3c 

SMAI WASNT A 

aay way werdhy dar feu3eu 

afer ety yuTfagiaery 

wafer word faud cengfaswafrati vol 

rraraera TATA aay a TAIT] 

auger CNP: MOTaCe TTT: 11 ¥ 2H 

"When the Brdhmanas have been 
sufficiently, the worshipper must scatter some 
of the food upon the ground and present them 
individually with water to rinse their mouths; 
then, with their assent, he may place upon the 
ground balls made up of boiled nce and 
condiments, along with sesamum-seeds. With 
the part of his hand sacred to the manes he 
must offer sesamum-seeds and water from his 
joined palms; and with the same part of his 
hand he. must present cakes to his maternal 
ancestors. He should in lonely places, 
naturally beautiful and by the side of sacred 
streams, diligently make presents (to the 
manes and the Brahmanas).'* Upon Kuga grass 
the tips of which are pointed to the south and 
lying near the fragments of the meant, let the 
householder present the first ball of food, 
consecrated with flowers and incense, to his 


282 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





father; the second to his grandfather; and the 
third to his great grandfather; and let him 
Satisfy those who are contented with the 
Wipings of his hand, by wiping it with the 
roots of Kusa grass. ' 


fqusulamenasa rermreafadgd: | 
Gaara ANT SAMAR AUS 
faq: werd ween Tarrear Aart! 


Geena Get cares a afer ya 
Seat UT thant wat arerdegaefaar 
Wernite & farearaa satraqu xvii 

cata ates dfan: weltrarerenfere: | 
untgag tar ya tearardtat x4 
MMS BE Sat: HA: BA 

WAY F aE FT at age fase 


smear ya Haig Safer 


faastrg went tanrareg au xt 

fam wifraa: aamnafaatera: | 

PAMAAT HT STEN METANAU ¥ 6 Ut 

way dycanent galfacieat aa: 

AAT AT URI ATATIATT HY 8 Ut 

After presenting balls of food to his 
maternal ancestors in the same manner, 
accompanied by perfumes and incense, he is to 
give to the principal Brahmanas water to rinse 
their mouths; and then, with attention and 
piety, he is to give the Bradhmanas gifts, 
according to his power, soliciting their 
benedictions, | accompanied with the 
exclamation 'Svadha'l'’* Having made presents 
to the Brahmanas, he is to address himself to 
the gods, saying, ‘May they who are the 
Visvadevas be pleased with this oblation!' 
Having thus said and the blessings to be 
solicited having been granted by the 
Brahmanas, he is to dismiss first the paternal 
ancestors and then the gods. The order is the 
same with the maternal ancestors and the gods 
in respect to food, donation and dismissal, 
Commencing with the washing of the feet, 
until the dismissing of the gods and 


Brahmanas, the ceremonies are to be 
performed first for paternal ancestors and then 
for ancestors on the mother's side. Let him 
dismiss the Brahmanas with kindly speeches 
and profound respect and attend upon them at 
the end of the Sraddha, until permitted by 
them to return. The wise man will then 
perform the invariable worship of the 
ViSvadevas and take is own meal along with 
his friends, his kinsmen and his dependants 

Ud arg Ga: Hale tet ara aa 

ASTANA SY: Baty BATT FATT: 14 0 

Tfn are afasrfr ates: srateret:| 


| TRAST NAT eA TTT & VU 
amit Raat arg BISeTs aT 
WALA TR! TANAA PAIN VU 
farce: afrareaat AratAet FT! 
FASTA Yat Aa Als WHAT 4 3 


"In this manner an enlightened householder 
will cerebrate the obsequial worship of his 
paternal and maternal ancestors, who, satisfied 
by his offerings, will grant him all! his desires. 
Three things are held pure at obsequies, a 
daughter’ s son, a Nepal blanket and sesamum- 
seeds;’” and the gift or naming or sight of 
silver is also propitious.'° The person offering 
a Sraddha should avoid anger, walking about 
and hurry; these three things are very 
objectionable. The Visvadevas and paternal 
and maternal ancestors and the living members 
of a man's family are all nourished by the 
offerer of ancestral oblations. 


are: Pepto aeeENeg AAT: | 
AAMT TANTS YO! PTAA 4 Vit 
agente faut anit aq geet: Fert: 
Sa Wea AST AAT FTG GU 
ster sitfereny gery yererigt THATS TAT: 1 RY UI 


The class of Pitrs derives support from the 
moon and the moon is sustained by acts of 
austere devotion. Hence the appointment of 
one who practises austerities is most desirable. 


‘A Yogi set before a thousand Brahmanas 


BOOK Ill, CHAP. 15 


283 





enables the institutor of obsequial rites to 
enjoy all his desires.""’ 


NOTES 

1. The Brahmanas here particularised are termed 
Trinaciketa, Trimadhu and Trisuparna; and are so 
denominated, according to the commentator, from 
particular parts of the Vedas. The first is so called 
from studying or reciting three Anuvakas of the Kat 
haka branch of the Yajurveda, commencing with 
the term Trinaciketa; the second,, from three 
Anuvakas of the same Veda, beginning Madhuvita; 
and the third, from a similar portion, commencing 
Brahmavan namémi. The first and third terms occur 
in Manu, III. 185; and Kullika Bhatta explains 
Trinaciketa to mean a portion of the Yajurveda and 
the Brahmana who studies it and Trisuparna, a part 
of the Rk and the Brahmana who is acquainted with 
it. The Nirnaya Sindhu explains the terms in a like 
manner, but calls the Trisuparna ‘as well as the 
Trinaciketa prayers, portions of the Yajus. The 
Trimadhu it assigns to the Rk. Other explanations 
are also given to the terms Trinaciketa and 
Trisuparna : the first being explained a Brahmana 
who thrice performs the ceremony called Cayana; 
and the last, one who, after the seven ascending 
generations, worships the Pitrs termed Somapis. 
These explanations are however considered less 
correct than the preceding and which are thus given 
in the authority cited : fronfasaaqrt 
aear Tee ray: seraeHeer- Teer | 

2. For the six Angas, see Bk. III. Ch. VI. 


3. So the commentator distinguishes the Vedavit, 
the Brahmana who understands the meaning of the 
text of the Vedas, from the Srotriya, who practises 
the rites he studies. 

4. Portions of the Saman contained in the 
Aranyaka are called the Jyestha, 'elder' or ‘principal’ 
Saman. 

5. Manu, II. 150. 

6. As two or five at a ceremony dedicated to the 
gods; three at the worship of the Pitrs. (Nirzaya 
Sindhu, p. 311). 


7. The worship of the Visvadevas (see Bk.III. 
Ch. XIV) forms a part of the general Sraddhas and 
of the daily sacrifices of the householder. 
According to the Vayu this was a privilege 
conferred upon them by Brahma and the Pitrs, as a 
reward for religious austerities practised by them 


upon Himalaya. Their introduction as a specific 
class seems to have originated in the custom of 
sacrificing to the gods collectively or to all the 
gods, as the name Visvadevas implies. They 
appear, however, as a distinct class in the Vedas 
and their assumption of this character is therefore 
of ancient date. The daily offering to them’ is 
noticed by Manu, II. 90, 172; and offerings to ‘the 
gods' are also enjoined at the beginning and end of 
a Sraddha. Kullika Bhatta understands here the 
Visvadevas and it probably is so; but in another 
verse different divinities are specified : "First 
having satisfied Agni, Soma, Yama with clarified 
butter, let him proceed to satisfy the manes of his 
progenitors." See As. Res. VII. 265, 271, etc. 

8. The text is 74a ‘with their assent’; but no 
noun occurs in the sentence with which the relative 
is connected. It must mean the Brahmanas, 
however, as in this passage of Vrddha Parasara; 
‘Let the sacrificer place his left hand on the 
Brahmana's right keen and say, "Shall I invoke the 
Visvadevas?" and being desired to invoke them, let 
him address them with the two mantras, 
"Visvedevas, he is comc! Visvadevas, hear him!" 
a: wet we fay efeongh tarraetreassttia 
Ta saeaeaqard faxeat a sna: faaear 
smaatata Haga Ted 

9. This notion occurs more than once in the 
Vayu, in nearly the same words : fast fe fayetr 
aera gfereatrargy | wearers Hester: 

10. This places the initiatoty oblations noticed by 
Manu (see Supra note 7) subsequent to the 
offerings to the Visvadevas. 

11. The Raksoghna mantra : the extinguishing of 
a lamp, lighted to keep off evil spirits, which is 
accompanied by a mantra or prayer. As. Res. VII. 
274. 

12. Part of this passage is in the words of Manu, 


Ill. 207 : xaanrsrg Mary cerdity Wate! It is omitted in 


‘ the MSS. in the Bengali character. 


13. Manu, III. 216. 

14. "Then let the Brahmanas address him saying, 
'Svadha!’ for in all ceremonies relating to deceased 
ancestors, the world Svadh is the highest benison.” 
Manu, III. 252. 

15. We have here the words of Manu : aif ag 
fant deat aaa: 1 Il. 235. 'Three things are 
held pure at such obsequies, the daughter's son, the 
Nepal blanket and sesamum-seed.' Sir Wm. Jones's 
translation of these terms rests upon the explanation 


284 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





of Kulltika Bhatta of this and the verse preceding; 
arate cet ars wa a aaa Sad Uy eM! ‘Let 
him give his daughter's son, though a religious 
student, food at a Sraddha and the blanket for a 
seat.’ The commentator on our text says that some 
understand by Dauhitra, clarified butter. made from 
the milk of a cow fed with grass gathered on the 
day of new moon; and some explain it a plate or 
dish of buffalo horn. Kutapa he interprets by Ast 
ama Muhirta, the eighth hour of the day or a little 
afternoon, although he admits that some render it a 
blanket made of goats' wool. These explanations 
are also noticed in the Nirnaya Sindhu, p. 302; and 
upon the authority of the Matsya Purana, Kutapa is 
said to mean eight things, which equally consume 
(Tapa) all sin (Ku) or noon, a vessel of rhinoceros’ 
horn, a Nepal blanket, silver, holy grass, sesamum, 
kine and a daughter's son : Atle: Tagurt 4 aM 
aera: | tet cuiferen meat cteaawa: ea: WG 
Haas SATS: | ETA AAAS Patt sha 
fasyen “hy 

16. So the Matsya Purana has ‘the gift, sight and 
name of silver are desired:' ATS AN A Bt AA 
Id 1 The notion originates with Manu, III. 202. 

17. The same doctrine is inculcated by the Vayu 
Purana; but 1t appears to be a Pauranik innovation, 
for Manu places the Brahmana intent on scriptural 
knowledge and on austere devotion on a level and 
makes no mention of the Yogi, IIT. 134. 

eK 


284 


CHAPTER 16 


QISoNSeaT: 


(srg AQaTaeeraeel aciafegrngesreaes 
a qty) 


sia Jaret 
Biaer-ARI- MAY VT HHT UI 
Vlatearretantataat A eI 
aiteumretey qa Wrage Prarrer: | 
wetter oft Arey Fret aretorenfrt:n ai 
GSMA AA HTM TAT A 
wens adoaerd-gaara ALT BN 


Aurva continued—"Ancestors are satisfied 
for a month with offerings of rice or other 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


grain, with clarified butter,' with fish or the 
flesh of the hare, of birds, of the hog, the goat, 
the antelope, the deer, the gayal or the sheep 
or with the milk of the cow and its products.” 
They are forever satisfied with flesh (in 
general) and with that of the long-eared white 
goat in particular. The flesh of the rhinoceros, 
the Kalasaka potherb and honey, are also 
especial sources of satisfaction to those 
worshipped at ancestral ceremonies. 


TATU a: srg Hofer yfarraa 

wae Tea aT Set fagghwaAn vi 
weiatel: Watant: yarn fEfaare 
SRT TRIE: TREAT & 
wat: fragal Yat MT Preateret: | 
Prorat: aalfaercey PUTT PIAA GN 


The birth of that man is the occasion of 
satisfaction to his progenitors who performs at 
the due time their obsequial rites at Gaya. 
Grains that spring up spontaneously, rice 
growing wild, panic of both species (white or 
black), vegetables that grow in forests, are fit 
for ancestral oblations; as are barley, wheat, 
rice, sesamum, various kinds of pulse and 
mustard. 

APATAT BT MAT ALT! 
TTS AT faatraq on 
seg Tersa wens frvsyerar 
TRI BUTT aU Bn cit 
area Fata: saarcrauntt a 
SRI F Mrs Aa AAT FA VAAN SU 
whet T Me Tat A a aa Th 
Sie Grersng argard 7 ufean go 


On the other hand, a householder must not 
offer any kind of grain that is not consecrated 
by religious ceremonies on its first coming 
into season; nor the pulse called R4jam4sa nor 
millet nor lentils nor gourds nor garlic nor 
onions nor nightshade nor camels’ thorn nor 
salt nor the efflorescence of salt deserts nor 
red vegetable extracts nor anything that looks 


BOOK Ill, CHAP. 16 


like salt nor anything that is not commendable; 
nor is water fit to be offered at a Sraddha that 
has been brought by night or has been 
abandoned or Is to little as not to satisfy a cow 
or smells badly or is covered with froth. 


aimaarat aleafaaia a 

anit wfeasta aattrearegenaforn 9 aii 
AOSTA feARMUSTATMTAUS TATA: | 
PHAH-LA-AMT TATA I V1 
SRA TCHT HTT T AT ATT 

SMS OU 7 feet TAA TeTAT: 1 23 0 
aa Ud Habasrg segrantaa:| 
seatg frefaararg agar Farad evi 
a Ufa tatoust aeraterfetrya 

aq vararattisrrst wefat Aa eh 1 
Headed FGA ATTA: | 
ACEI MATAR AT 26 


The milk of animals with undivided hoofs, 
of a camcl, a ewe, a deer or a buffalo, is unfit 
for ancestral oblations. If an obsequial rite 1s 
looked at by a eunuch, a man ejected from 
society, an outcast, a heretic, a drunken man or 
one diseased, by a cock, a naked ascetic,’ a 
monkey, a. village hag, by a woman in her 
courses or pregnant, by an unclean person or 
by a carrier of corpses, neither gods nor 
progenitors will partake of the food. The 
ceremony should therefore be performed in a 
spot carefully enclosed. Let the performer cast 
sesamum on the ground and drive away 
malignant spirits. Let him not give food that is 
fetid or vitiated by hairs or insects or mixed 
with acid gruel or stale. Whatever suitable 
food is presented with pure faith and with the 
enunciation of name and race, to ancestors, at 
an obsequial oblation, becomes food to them 
(or gives them nourishment). 


srt ate faghettea mean weed 
SOMATA BOMATAT FAT! V9 

ary ret afacafa Her WANT: | 
WAAU Y USL AAAS BC I 


285 


oft 4: Tagnel Bare at AY eee Waves 
Uae Agafeeal aary aT WAY AN Ve 
Te arqaRd Sat atet at FAVA 
aa arate faferrefarorraatn 2 01 

gta sitfeangerat Fitais yt VrSyiseATTT: REM 


In former times, O king of the earth! this 
song of the Pitrs was heard by Iksvaku, the son 
of Manu, in the groves of Kalapa (on the skirts 
of the Himalaya mountains) : 'Those of our 
descendants shall follow a righteous path who 
shall reverently present us with cakes at Gaya. 
May he be born in our race who Shall give us, 
on the thirteenth of Bhadrapada and M4gha, 
milk, honey and clarified butter; or when he 
matries a maiden or liberates a black bull* or 
performs any domestic ceremony agreeable to 
rule, accompanied by donations to the 
Brahmanas!"° 

kKK* 
NOTES 

1. See Manu, III. 266. The articles are much the 
same; the periods of satisfaction somewhat vary. 

2. The expression Gavya (T&) implies all that is 
derived from a cow, but in the text it is associated 
with 'flesh;' and as the commentator observes, some 
consider the flesh of the cow to be here intended : 
TMATATS AAAs | but this, he adds, relates to 
other ages. In the Kali or present age it implies milk 
and preparations of milk. The sacrifice of a cow or 
calf formed part of the ancient Sraddha. It then 
became typical or a bull was turned loose, instead 
of being slaughtered; and this is still practised on 
some occasions. In Manu, the term Gavya is 
coupled with others, which limit its application : 
dacet J We Tae wWaaa a'A whole year with the 
milk of cows and food made of that inilk." III. 271, 

3. Nagna is literally 'naked’, but, as explained in 
the following chapter, means a Jain mendicant. No 
such person is included by Manu (III. 239) amongst 
those who defile a Srdddha by looking upon it. The 
Vayu contains the same prohibition : Fea 4 
Wag: | 

4. Nila vrsa; but this animal is not altogether or 
always black. In the Brahma Purana, as quoted in 
the Nirnaya Sindhu, it is said to be of a red colour, 
with light face and tail and white hoofs and horns; 


286 


or a white bull, with black face; or a black bull, 
with white face, tail and feet. 

5. Very full descriptions of the Sraddha occur in 
almost all the Puranas, especially in the Vayu, 
Kirma, Markandeya, Vamana and Garuda. The 
Matsya and Padma (Sristi Khanda) contain 
descriptions which are much the same as that of the 
Vayu. The accounts of the Brahma, Agni and 
Varaha are less full and regular than in some of the 
othcrs; and in none of them is the subject so fully 
and perspicuously treated as in our text. For 
satisfactory information, however, the Sraddha 
Mayitikha and the Nirnaya Sindhu should be 
consulted. 

see 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


286 


CHAPTER 17 
CAST SEATA: 


(are, de-aforsdare:, fasuyegic: 
| TEA sy) 


TUG SarT 
Sale Wramla Ana Wares 


MATIN FUT eS Aer! ufePavtn et 

Taraaeyraor salert wat fg! 

AYA Werat aAfrarchfe STAT IH 

-Paragara said— Thus, in former days, spoke 
the holy Aurva to the illustrious monarch 
Sagara, when he inquired concerning the 
usages proper to be practised by mankind; and 
thus I have explained to you the whole of 
those observances against which no one ought 
to transgress. 


WAT sara 


qwenagrya fafa way! wan 
seat F wd amir afeqau an 
at aq: fee waradt Aaa A eT 
aSaeatrse Batag Ted aA 
(ae chyat se! a weafafed qa)u si 


Maitreya said—You have told me, venerable 
sir, that an ancestral rite is not to be looked 
upon by certain persons, amongst whom you 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


mentioned such as were apostates. J am 
desirous to learn whom you intended by that 
appellation; what practices bestow such a title 
upon a man; and what is the character of the 
individual to whom you alluded. 


UUIyIt Sara 
MAy- Aaa zat anita fefest! 
WaTASSHA A We A AA: Weta STAG 
wat unraniat fat) Pact aa: 
TAY TaRPAATATAAT TT TAG: 1G 
Soe FAAS aie YAS 
SMATTS THAY APABYS SUAS: 9 tt 


ParaSara replied— The Rk, Yajur and Sama 
Vedas constitute the triple covering of the 
several castes and the sinner who throws this 
off is said to be naked (or apostate). The three 
Vedas are the raiment of all the orders of men 
and when that is discarded they are left bare.’ 
On this subject hear what I heard my 
grandfather, the pious Vasistha, relate to the 
magnanimous Bhisma : 


wate ae Tet: AANA: | 

waerata Axa! aq yslsefte wara ¢ i 

cargrayg ye freed yu fea! 

afer wafer Far SeteragaTa: 1 8 

aie Het Waa J AT: 

FONTAN BPN WS TAT ot 

BIA Mart fants at firey 

STAY MTATATETeTaT Faw: walragu ean 

Tat seraSTioT WEA Ae: | 

afer creameaka wet wlaheat: eet 

AUTEN aera era ATS: | 

wai Memearart ware Fa Tray 3 

There was formerly a battle between the 

gods and demons, for the period of a divine 
year, in which the gods were defeated by the 
demons under the command of Hrada.* The 
discomfited deities fled to the northern shore 


of the milky ocean, where engaging in 
religious penance they thus prayed to Visnu : 


BOOK ITI, CHAP. 17 


287 





"May the first of beings, the divine Visnu, be 
pleased with the words that we are about to 
address to him, in order to propitiate the lord 
of all worlds; from which mighty cause all 
created things have originated and into whom 
they shall again dissolve! Who is able to 
declare his praise? We, who have been put to 
shame by the triumph of our foes, will glorify 
you, although your true power and might be 
not within the reach of words. 


wayat afer afgatqransma a 
CART HU TAA AT: FATT Wil 
Wea Tag YET! Wary ay: 
MANA WAATANTAT I BI 


You are earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, 
crude matter and primeval soul: all this 
elementary creation, with or without visible 
form, is your body; all from Brahma to a 
stock, diversified by place and time. 


axe! aa aa waalhraaciaa 

Be fears Te TENT AT VE 
YoRTd- BF-Aag- Wea aeNeay| 
AAIa TST UL AA Saray AA: 1 Vol 


Glory to you, who are Brahm4, your first 
form, evolved from the lotus springing from 
the navel, for the purpose of creation. Glory to 
you, who are Indra, the sun, Rudra, the Vasus; 
fire, the winds an even also ourselves. 


STMT Tae Ferferent- area TT 

aga aa Mifare! wet Seat AA cl 
afgmast afer area: featrrafa 
PANT AST PRE ATA TAH VV 


Glory to you, Govinda, who are ll 
demons, whose essence is arrogance and want 
of discrimination, unchecked by patience or 
self-control. Glory to you, who are the Yaksas, 
whose nature is charmed with sounds and 
whose frivolous hearts perfect knowledge 
cannot pervade. 

maa at wa eM aaa 
Proereay TSt ANA TERRA 201 


Aa ASN- HATH Tal 
TUS TMT WE ANKTSY TATE! 2 21 


Glory to you, who are all fiends, that walk 
by night, sprung from the quality of darkness, 
fierce, fraudulent and cruel. Glory to you, 
Janardana, who are that piety which is the 
instrument of recompensing the virtues of 
those who abide in heaven. 


etoraatatt afare weanfegi 

fagret wa age cet Pergrery TA 2 2 
afatanert RTT gt! 

fafag Wa Age at ATT AA 23 


Glory to you, who are one with the saints, 
whose perfect nature is ever blessed and 
traverses unobstructed all permeable elements. 
Glory to you, who are one with the serpent 
race, double-tongued, impetuous, cruel, 


Insatiate of enjoyment and abounding with 


wealth. 
Saale UW ATA TTT| 
mefeeareyt wet fact Sars F AAU Vv 
VATIT HURT YT Acarieary 
wage Qustenal! aes Sarees AT VGH 


Glory to you, who are one with the Rsis, 


whose nature is free from sin or defect and is 


identified with wisdom and tranquillity. Glory 
to you, oh lotus-eyed, who are one with time, 
the form that devours, without remorse, all 
created things at the termination of the Kalpa. 


Weer ways arerafayrad: | 
FOI BT UE TA VA AT EI 


Glory to you, who are Rudra, the being that 
dances with delight after he has swallowed up 
all things, the gods and the rest, without 
distinction. 


WITT Wal Aa HaUT arene 
WATEA! ANTS AGU ATA! VII 
Glory to you, Janardana, who are man, the 


agent in developing the results of that activity 
which proceeds from the quality of foulness. 


288 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





seared Ad ad Aa 

sarin watery Tet! WaT AAC 

Glory to you, who are brute animals, 
universal spirit that tends to perversity, which 
proceeds from the quality of darkness and is 
encumbered with the twenty-eight kinds of 
obstructions.” 

aad Ags saat: Fahgarerry 

ganfasdante Tet YEA TANI 

Glory to you, who are that chief spirit 
which is diversified in the vegetable world and 
which, as the essence of sacrifice, is the 
instrument of accomplishing the perfection of 
the universe. 

fragrseanfe aiagrenfeas aA 

BU Age: WA THY Da TAZ ott 

Glory to you, who are everything and 
whose primeval form is the objects of 
perception and heaven and animals and men 
and gods. 


WAH A SAT SaTS, 
SoA UT WITT T! 
pea 
A AM: AUCOTAHTOTAN 3 2H 


Glory to you, who are the cause of causes, 
the supreme spirit; who are distinct from us 
and all beings composed of intelligence and 
matter and the like and with whose primeval 
nature there is nothing that can be compared. 


mat aa fasreorany 
Waray wufagra 
SUT ASL Wa! AAT: SATS VU 
We bow to you. O lord, who has neither 
colour nor extension nor bulk nor any 


predicable qualities; and whose essence, purest 
of the pure, is appreciable only by holy sages. 


aa: Wey AeAAee- 
TATA AI 

qa AReeatahnated 
TARAS AAT: ST TST 3 tl 


We bow to you, in the nature of Brahman, 
uncreated, undecaying; who are in our bodies 
and in all other bodies and in all living 
creatures and besides whom there is nothing 
else. 


Wate Tea BA 
UU: WATT) 
aaa 


WAT WAT: TA TACT 3 Vl 
We glorify that Vasudeva, the sovereign 
lord of all, who is without soil, the seed of all 
things, exempt from dissolution, unborn, 
eternal, being in essence the supreme 
condition of spirit and in substance the whole 
of this universe." 


WI Jara 

MAISMATGAM FT AY: WHAT! 

VGA WEST YU STAN 34M 

ay: Ween cat: wforaTaye AAT 

wate da: ! dedvaeardifer preomfert: ne & it 

Actas BTA eeaeleyaTe: 

Gat Tt TAOS MATIC ST UAT 3 

TIANA FF Ty Aaya: | 

TUT firs UPATAS BATT 3 Cit 

wanemifara AeaMTTaHT: | 

A TRAST SPARTA AAT: 13 8 I 

AUT AaT STP eral 

Wl IAM Fy WAT WaT AMT oll 

Upon the conclusion of their prayers, the 
gods beheld the sovereign deity Hari, armed 
with the shell, the discus and the mace, riding 
on Garuda. Prostrating themselves before him, 
they addressed him and_ said, "Have 
compassion upon us, O lord, and protect us, 
who have come to you for succour from the 
Daityas. They have seized upon the three 
worlds and appropriated the offerings which 
are our portion, taking care not to transgress 


the precepts of the Veda. Although we, as well 
as they, are parts of you, of whom all beings 


BOOK III, CHAP. 18 


289 





consist, yet we behold the world impressed by 
the ignorance of unity, with the belief of its 
separate existence. Engaged in the duties of 
their respective orders and following the paths 
prescribed by holy writ, practising also 
religious penance, it is impossible, for us to 
destroy them. Do you, whose wisdom is 
immeasurable, instruct us in some device by 
which we may be able to exterminate the 
enemies of the gods." 


UUM Jara 
So MAA wraaS Baa: | 
ayers cat fay: wre We ATTN y a 


Pardsara continued— “When the mighty Vis 
nu heard their request, he emitted from his 
body an illusory form, which he gave to the 
gods and thus spoke” : 


sMTayara 
Tameiswmaar satearatretaeata 
dat aeat wfacata genntateegan: i ¥ UN 
ferit flares 8 cen urert: uftafer:| 
TaN Astras eacenfeat: FMI 
AS Wea: Tt: Hla ALATA SAAT: | 
TIANA UAT TAT HUT UY vl 


Visnu said— "This deceptive vision shall 
wholly beguile the Daityas, so that, being Iced 
astray from the path of the Vedas, they may be 
put to death; for all gods, demons or others, 
who shall be opposed to the authority of the 
Veda, shall perish by my might, while 
exercised for the preservation of the world. Go 
then and fear not; let this delusive vision 
precede you; it shall this day be of great 
service to you, oh gods!" 


WR sargq 
Sat: Worst aqgar Aaa 
arararersfe ¢: args Tat at WETgT wal 
sia stfaengerar Taraigt BASSETT: tt Wott 


Having thus spoken by Visnu, gods saluted 
him and proceeded to that place wherefrom 


they came. The deceptive vision also returned 
with them. 


ke* 
NOTES 
1. This idea is expressed in nearly the same 
terms in the Vayu p. : HearyaAsa Yar Tat Paret eat! 


uRema 3 Aer a Aaa SAI: 'The three Vedas 
are the covering of all beings and they who throw it 
off through delusion are called Nagnas, naked.’ The 
notion is probably original with neither of the 
Puranas and the metaphorical sense of the term is 
not that in which it was first employed; ascetics, 
whether of the Bauddha or of the Digambara order 
of Jains, being literally Nagnas or going naked. The 
qualified application of it, however, was rendered 
necessary by the same practice being familiar to 
ascetics of the orthodox faith. To go naked was not 
necessarily a sign of a heretic and therefore his 
nudity was understood to be, rejecting the raiment 
of holy writ. Thus the Vayu Purana extends the 
word to all ascetics, including naked Brahmanas, 
why practise austerities fruitlessly, that is, 
heretically or hypocritically; qe evel get ArSt get 
wag a ar) gar adt ger art Fa Aeneat Ar 'The 
Brahmana who unprofitably bears a staff, shaves 
his head, goes naked, makes a vow or mutters 
prayers, al} such persons are called Nagnas and the 
like.’ 
2. A son of Hiranyakasipu (Bk. I. Ch. XV). 
3. See Bk. I. C. Vn. 3. 
KKK 


BOOK III, CHAP. 18 


289 


CHAPTER 18 
SBTEMNSEATA: 


(sTgual wraMigenreyrerny ageateate: , 
THAT: , THA VAT SUA) 


UUM SaraA 


aaa USAT ATATASY AETATA 
Aaa! sagt Tear Ades faa aH 
amt fered yust afer fea! 
TAMAS HUT VHS TAAATATTN 2 UI 


ParaSara said— After this, the great 
delusion, having proceeded to earth, beheld 


290 


the Daityas engaged in ascetic penances upon 
the banks of the Narmada river;’ and 
approaching them in the semblance of a naked 
mendicant, with his head shaven and carrying 
a bunch of a peacock's feathers,” he thus 
addressed them in gentle accents : 


araae sare 


@ araaaay! qa aed wera TT: 
Uiged arr ured ara: wert 311 
"Ho, lords of the Daitya race! Wherefore is 
it that you practise these acts of penance? Is it 
with a view to recompense in this world or in 
another?" 


TAHT Taal Waa! 
sTenturaarcen fer at asa faaterru xi 
"Sage," replied the Daityas, "we pursue 
these devotions to obtain a rcward hereafter; 
why should you make such an inquiry?" 


Tras Sara 

Hed aa aah ate yaad 

sent eat aRngrragayn & tt 

amt fagenraisd Aaeet Ut: WT: 

aia diferent: went faghes ar 3 Aer 

seed ease Ast Bet Hever: 1G I 

"If you are desirous of final emancipation," 

answered the seeming ascetic, "attend to my 
words, for you are worthy of a revelation 
which is the door to ultimate felicity. The 
duties that I will teach you are the secret path 
to liberation ; there are none beyond or 
superior to them : by following them you shall 
obtain either heaven or exemption from future 
existence. You, mighty beings, are deserving 
of such lofty doctrine." 


UU SaTT 
Ud wartdgirafmarrratart:| 
BraTaet F Seat AenaarsHea4r: 19 
anitacanta wera aferaf, 
faq ftaé Fae faqite wraetanci 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


umratsanradt arareat + aera 
NACH Wed TRE frac 
ferarranad aat qnisa agarrarqn <i 
SAAR ATA AaeEM 

at aplaat een: warateenfater fet go 1 
ead werd araates J aa: 

MRATAAT TAT THATSATRAA ASMEALN 2AM 


By such persuasions and by many specious 
arguments, did this delusive being mislead the 
Daityas from the tenets of the Vedas; teaching 
that the same thing might be for the sake of 
virtue and of vice; might be and might not be; 
might or might not contribute to liberation; 
might be the supreme object and not the 
supreme object; might be effect and not be 
effect; might be manifest or not-be manifest, 
might be the duty of those who go naked or 
who go clothed in much raiment : and so the 
Daityas were seduced from their proper duties 
by the repeated lessons of their illusory 
preceptor, maintaining the cqual truth of 
contradictory tenets;? and they .are called 
Arhatas,’ from the phrase he had employed of 
"You are worthy (4rhatha) of this great 
doctrine;" that is, of the false doctrines which 
he persuaded them to embrace. 


rhatagent waar ASAT: 

UAT TAT ATTRA AY ATA 1 OA 

aay OY dey ATaRA ut a as 

SCOTT: Ga Ase: WTP 83 11 

TAT TAMAS Araraters fara ferar: | 

TAMAR TAT ROTA TAT 8S 

The foes of the gods being, thus induced to 

apostatise from the religion of Vedas, by the 
delusive person sent by Visnu, became in their 
turn teachers of the same heresies and 
perverted others; and __ these, again, 
communicating their principles to others, by 


whom they were still further disseminated, the 
Vedas were in a short time deserted by most of 


' the Daitya race. Then the same deluder, 
‘putting on garments of a red colour, assuming 


BOOK III, CHAP. 18 


a benevolent aspect and speaking in soft and 
agreeable tones, addressed others of the same 
family and said to him, 


WATE Sara 


vane afe at acer Fatonemarga: | 
dest Uyperanfegurntrareranl Bt It 
faqPTat are eTaTse 


gare WN aga: MANY GaraySeaq V6 I 


"If, mighty demons, you cherish a desire 
either for heaven or for final repose, desist 
from the iniquitous massacre of animals (for 
sacrifice) and hear from me what you should 
do. Know that all that exists 1s composed of 
discriminative knowledge. Understand my 
words, for they have been uttered by the wise. 

TSA MITTAL 

TMA UAT TTATSI VI 

This world subsists without support and 
engaged in the pursuit of error, which it 
mistakes for knowledge, as well as vitiated by 
passion and the rest, revolves in the straits of 
existence." 


WI Sava 
Ua qed gered Geadateritcay) 
arms: a dda ada TAN 8c I 
ARTA Baa Bray 
TAT TAT A AH ART FMT AAMT VI 
asa Marry aanfea: | 
Wa! aaueht aeerafedt we Ron 


ParaSara said— In this manner, exclaiming 
to them, "Know!" (Budhyadvam) and they 
replying, "It is known" (Budhyati), these 
Daityas were induced by the arch deceiver to 
deviate from their religious duties (and 
become Bauddhas), by his repeated arguments 
and variously urged persuations.” When they 
had abandoned their own faith, they persuaded 
others to do the same and the heresy spread 
and any deserted the practices enjoined by the 
Vedas and the laws. 


291 


SATUS aga EwT 
SAAT ASAT WATS HAATSH TI 2 VN 
waeita f% arert Tamed ASAT: 


Wiereay: Tat Tahara BATT 2 2M 

wfafefret aarti tara: faa! 

AAHASATITS TPA FT AAT 2311 

The delusions of the false teacher paused 
not with the conversion of the Daityas to the 
Jaina and Bauddha heresies, but with various 
elroneous tenets he prevailed upon others to 
apostatise, until the whole were led astray and 
deserted the doctrines and observances 
inculcated by the three Vedas. Some then 
spoke evil of the sacred books; some 
blasphemed the gods; some treated sacrifices 
and other devotional ceretnonies with scorn; 
and others calumniated the Brahmanas. 

aweahhae aad fear sara Aer 

CATA HEART 2 YI 

TAT AAT eT 

weante ae dems Tal ATH UYU 

Frecer usted cartonferetdtera 

after aamart fay cera FAA 2 EI 


"The precepts," they cried, "that lead to the 
injury of animal life (as in sacrifices) are 
highly reprehensible. To say that casting butter 
into flame is productive of reward, is mere 
childishness. If Indra, after having obtained, 
godhead by multiplied rites, is fed upon the 
wood used as fuel in holy fire, he is lower than 
a brute, which feeds at least upon leaves. If an 
animal slaughtered in religious worship is 
thereby raised to heaven, would it not be 
expedient for a man who instritutes a sacrifice 
to kill his own father for a victim? 


Tad Wad Tar yeas AAT: 
PAarge AeA A aey: Waar: Vol 
TANGA TA TT: 

Shey Hae ates Traat aaa Ve 
7 aearer war Frater Aerga:| 


292 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





gine aart wal Warder wafgt:n ee 

arareiet & Sea wenttarghereta 

Sqenitar gear sat wat pfyetreTaq 3 ot 

If that which is eaten by one at a Sraddha 
gives Satisfaction to another, it must be 
unnecessary for one who resides at a distance 
to bring food for presentation in person." 
“First, then let it be determined what may be 
(rational) believed by mankind and then," said 
their preceptor, "you will find that felicity may 
be expected from my instructions. The words 
of authority do not, mighty Asuras, fall from 
heaven : the text that has reason is alone to be 
acknowledged by me and by such as you are."” 
By such and similar lessons the Daityas were 
perverted, so that not one of them admitted the 
authority of the Vedas. 


sayantary ety ag ASAT: 

SINT UTS HAT TST AAT: 3 vi 

at cargt Fe PRamag few! 

Sas Asge ea: Weantahar er: 13 2A 

Ta ETAT a: Tat FET! 

at Wad Vs APAE a aa A331 

When the Daityas had thus declined from 
the path of the holy writings, the deities took 
courage and gathered together for battle. 
Hostilities accordingly were renewed, but the 
demons were now defeated and slain by the 
gods, who had adhered to the righteous path. 
The armour of religion, which had formerly 
protected the Daityas, had been discarded by 
them and upon its abandonment followed their 
destruction. * 


adt Waa! aaanlafaat Aswasat: | 

WA aaah TATA Fail 3 vil 
TAA YET AAA ITAT: | 
Ufag at agatsa WHAT ATTA 3 4 I 
Ae TRY Teed AAT A WI 
uftarg anf Aaa! GA: OAT BEI 


Thus, Maitreya, you are to understand that 
thosc who have seceded from their original 


belief are said to be naked, because they have 
thrown off the garment of Vedas. According to 
the law there are four conditions or orders of 
men (of the three first castes), the religious 
student, the householder, the hermit and the 
mendicant. There is no fifth state; and the 
unrighteous man who relinquishes the order of 
the householder and does not become either an 
anchorite or a mendicant, is also a naked 
(seceder). 


fram adut far! wer afaretrer 
aay fated ad grea: watt afer 390 


Wat HEM YEA IATA 
uel Freafmarent: art AAT! Aa 31 


The man who neglects his permanent 
observances for one day and night, being able 
to perform them, incurs thereby sin for one 
day; and should he omit them, not being in 
trouble or a fortnight, he can be purified only 
by arduous expiation. 

Gacnt frararerer dais 
Teac Tat Pret: AAA: WANs VM 
SBD EA MAMET YReGtEra | 

Gar wale weir A Big: WATT sol 


aafafagyart aa fare agakn 
WARaAIAaa Tes AAT WTF A{II ¥ 2 


The virtuous must stop to gaze upon the 
sun after looking upon a person who has 
allowed a year to elapse without the 
observance of the perpetual ceremonies; and 
they must bathe with their cloths on should 
they have touched him : but for the individual 
himself no expiation has been declared. There 
is nO sinner upon earth more culpable than one 
in whose dwelling the gods, progenitors and 
spirits, are left to sigh unworshipped. 


aaah aed Tt Ter AVA TT 

44 Ug Gale Vereraftese: ny 2 
AMTRUTGNPe AERA Va Hera: | 
STAT Feu TA ata FET! ATTN 3 
AY Yoh Ys TA RUT TATA 


BOOK Hl, CHAP. 18 


293 





Vea AA AT MATA AAT XXII 
cadifagyarst aarvaed atshraty 
Yeth W Ud Yarn Peplrees ASV sy tt 


Let not a man associate, in residence, 
sitting or society, with him whose person or 
whose house has been blasted by the sighs of 
the gods, progenitors and __ spirits. 
Conversation, interchange of civilities or 
association with a man who for are a twelve 
month has not discharged his religious duties, 
is productive of equality of guilt; and the 
person who eats in the house of such a man or 
sits down with him or sleeps on the same 
couch with him, becomes like him 
instantaneously. Again; he who takes his food 
without showing reverence to the gods, 
progenitors, spirits and guests, commits sin. 


TMM A ant: weanieaanya 
Ut & aaa YF Srenaar ere: 1 SE I 


How great is his sin! The Brahmanas and 
men of the other castes, who turn their faces 
away from their proper duties, become 
heretics and are classed with these who 
relinquish pious works. 


Aga aa aU AAAI: | 

SATA UY FAUST TAA ¥'9 
area ea tary Fay yenfaviierem 

SY ARH TAT WTA UAT AL AAT YC 


Remaining in a place where there is too 
great an intermixture of the four castes is 
detrimental to the character of the righteous. 
Men fall into hell who converse with one who 
takes his food without offering a portion to the 
gods, the sages, the manes, spirits and guests. 


TAMA Takers hear 
Maal AHA WH SeTTSITSA TAA ¥ Vil 
REAR: Fa AeTeAry, fagrarrery| 

T roa regres Aah TaCT PATTI Y oN 


Let therefore a prudent person carefully 
avoid the conversation or the contact and the 
like, of those heretics who are rendered impure 


by their desertion of the three Vedas. The 
ancestral rite, although performed with zeal 
and faith, pleases neither gods nor progenitors 
if it be looked upon by apostates. 


TAA A YT GA Ta Vey all 
Uelt & vrear weanefeertaerrom & 8 
afta HEMT BephaeEATAT 
WAIT AT FT AT ANG VI 
OY UM wa Ure Cad WaTeAy 
STAT Feat UOT UTAH & 3 I 
Sristieren atararder aft: | 
Tarengead TAT AATTT HG GH 


It is related that there was formerly a king 
named Satadhanu, whose wife Saivya was a 
woman of great virtue. She was devoted to her 
husband, benevolent, sincere, pure, adorned 
with every female excellence, with humility 
and discretion. The Raja and his wife daily 
worshipped the god of gods, Janardana, with 
pious meditations, oblations of fire, prayers, 
gifts, fasting and every other mark of entire 
faith and exclusive devotion. 


Teel J At Etat at y wratadt Ten 

Uni: AAO arrest waquifeeh 
TEfSTqURaAMTarT ANTS FET G GI 
ATA TATA AGT Wa ETAT: | 


HATA ARTA TATA 4 19 1 
TT TW arraar sat Ter Tet farsa 
sHfearantt wa afery eB cast ay cl 


On one occasion, when they had fasted on 
the full moon of Kartika and had bathed in the 
Bhagirathi, they beheld, as they came up from 
the water, a heretic approach them, who was 
the friend of the Raja's military preceptor. The 
Raja, out of respect to the latter, entered into 
conversation with the heretic; but not so did 
the princess; reflecting that she was observing 
a fast, she turned from him and cast her eyes 
up to the sun. 


Barrel aaa aera at aafeafer 
fact: qonfees ae Geet feRTT Gel 


294 


On their arrival at home, the husband and 
wife, as usual, performed the worship of Vis 
nu, agreeably to the ritual. 


AT TST WaT TATA BUA 
srarede feat fararet sqaft Uf g of 
After a time the Raja, triumphant over his 


enemies, died; and the princess ascended the 
funeral pile of her husband. 


a g aaa at aA TQTfTT: | 
SHAT WOSHCNU BT: HelSMAT g Vl 
AUF WaT Te ATTA FAT 
afar YeteraToTaHStATN & 2 It 

at frat argenratsy awe fatrarter: | 
aaa wom fara faarercsrat FTG 3 


In consequence of the fault committed by 
Satadhanu, by speaking to an infidel when he 
was engaged in a solemn fast, he was born 
again as a dog. His wife was born as the 
daughter of the king of K4si, with a knowledge 
of the cvents of her _ prc-existence, 
accomplished in every science and endowed 
with every virtue. Her father was anxious to 
giver her in marriage to some suitable 
husband, but she constantly opposed his 
design and the king was prevented by her from 
accomplishing her nuptials. 


aad: AT eer SM Sst aM Fast wy 

faferret ot meat aeaed cast WANE YI 

af Ba vet ayer’ wit Ta 

cal AH BUEN WHat PPT G & Il 

WH Se Ta Asaahryeniiarny 

saftetet Hay ag Ue WaT Ag GI 

sila stfsat aren Haat Ue At a 

wormage cfad Ft Hale oi 

With the eye of divine intelligence she 

knew that her own husband has _ been 
regenerate as a dog and going once to the city 
of Vidis4 she saw the dog and recognised her 


former lord in him. Knowing that the animal 
was her husband, she placed upon his neck the 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


bridal. garland, accompanying it with the 
marriage rites and prayers : but he, eating the 
delicate food presented to him, expressed his 
delight after the fashion of his species; at 
which she was much ashamed and bowing 
reverently to him, thus spoke to her degraded 
spouse : 
Usgqara 

waat waar! arfaoaeferdt waa 

aa sarrarcat WA AH WANE <I 

unsfted Gane dere 

wretsfa aafeaat att fa a era qari! ng ei 

Spouse said— "Recall to memory, 
illustrious prince, the ill-timed politeness on 
account of which you have been born as a dog 
and are now fawning upon me. In consequence 
of speaking to a heretic, after bathing in a 


sacrcd river, you have been condcmned to this 
abject birth. Do you not remember it?" 


SMUT Sara 


aaa anita afer gente Fen 
aeat Farcaorara frefanfergenryiis o 1 
fafavurfert: a aat Prber are afe: 
TENT Hear MA ATTA: iio Vi 


Parasara said— Thus reminded, the Raja 
recollected his former condition and was lost 
in thought and felt deep humiliation. With a 
broken spirit he went forth from the city and 
falling dead in the desert, was born a new as a 
jackal. 


tate faa cere at feelt aazati 
Wea ITM A AE Tat arotect fro 21 
cate opr at wre VrTeh ara 
TARAS AAT Bsa raa i 9 3 


In the course of the following year the 
princess knew what had happened and went to 
the mountain Koladhala to seek for her 
husband. Finding him there, the lovely 
daughter of the king of the earth said to her 
lord, thus disguised as a jackal, 


BOOK III, CHAP. 18 


ueqara 
afta ante wr! saifrera garam 
Wr A yah wavs 9 XII 
TAMA HAA Ue AIAA AT: | 
IAT AW ATA TS HAT 9 I 


Spouse said— “Do you not remember, oh 
king, the circumstance of conversing with a 
heretic, which I called to your recollection 
when you was a dog?" The Raja, thus 
addressed, knew that what the princess had 
spoken was true and thereupon desisted from 
food and died. 

WA Fh Sd Tat Tt FRA aA 
CAAT ATL WaT SATIN 9 & A 

a a geal WaT! eT waar 

MT YAN wa PTS yaa At WN Volt 

He then became a wolf; but his blameless 
wife knew it and came to him in the lonely 
forest and awakened his remembrance of his 
Original state. "No wolf are you," she said, 
"but the illustrious sovereign Satadhanu. You 
was then a dog, then a jackal and are now a 
wolf." 


WU Jara 
SURAT Bal AHA WAT AT: | 
sag TT PAS Aaaara sfc 
AZ! Vda Bei A Wear 
UMTS AAA SS SG ATTA MAT VI 
AT: HAAN WHAT 
SAT AA MATA: 1 C0 
ae yya: Ye ave at afer aye 
Ua HHA GA Weatser afer wt c vt 


Upon this, recollecting himself, the prince 
abandoned his life and became a vulture; in 
which form his lovely queen still found him 
and aroused him to a knowledge of the past. 
"Prince," she exclaimed, "recollect yourself; 
away with this uncouth form, to which the sin 
of conversing with a heretic has condemned 
you!" The Raj4 was next born as a crow; when 


295 


the princess, who through her mystical powers 
was aware of it, said to him, "You are now 
yourself the eater of tributary grain, to whom, 
in a prior existence, all the kings of the earth 
paid tribute.”” 


WU SaraT 
Vata Farad Vhs: A YU! 
TAT YOA: WO ATLAAATT AN 2 VI 
aad wat: A A wargaia ye 
ad: Mago gelkegd dares: io 3 
AY Waa UST aT Waray! 

Wan Ways Taaarara df Aeatli c¥i 
Welt way O Pag waaaa ait aq 
AUT MTT BAAS UTS GA 


ParaSara said~ Having abandoned his body, 
in consequence of the recollections excited by 
these words, the king next became a peacock, 
which the princess took to herself and petted 
and fed constantly with such food as is 
agreeable to birds of its class. The king of Kasi 
instituted at that time the solemn sacrifice of a 
horse. In the ablutions with which it 
terminated the princess caused her peacock to 
be bathed, bathing also herself; and she then 
reminded Satadhanu how he had _ been 
successively born as various animals. 


SAHA: BSA AI A HEAT y 

Ga WT WAHala YASH YAS CEI 

aa: Ot fat wat faareritareaq 

OB Ut AAMT TAT WT AAAI 2 Il 

waar Fa TW F Bond vasa: | 

aware warshe saduraa aftr ¢ cu 

On recollecting this, he resigned his life. 
He was then born as the son of a person of 
distinction and the princess now assenting to 
the wishes of her father to see her wedded, the 
king of Kasi caused it to be made known that 
she would elect a bridegroom from those who 
should present themselves as suitors for her 


hand. When the election took place, the 
princess made choice of her former lord, who 


296 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





appeared amongst the candidates and again 
invested him with the character of her 
husband. 


HY T TA WS WATTS: | 

faretars wee faeeg WHT ACS 

SAT UA Wa Vat arf fear 

FATA FAN A ASAT Fol 

WHT Yar Varah UrekAar TPCT! 

AAT Be APL MOT AA TAY TI g Ail 

aatararet of yay wae GT Bere 

sTareve faferag aarge yet Batlle 2H 

They lived happily together and upon her 
father's decease Satadhanu ruled over the 
country of Videha. He offered many sacrifices 
and gave away many gifts and begot sons and 
subdued his enemies in war; and having duly 
exercised the sovereign power and cherished 
benignantly the earth, he died, as became his 
warrior birth, in battle. His queen again 
followed him in death and conformably to 


sacred preccpts, once more mounted 
cheerfully his funeral pile. 


aaSATY TAT MS TUM T unfera: 

Candia & crear crear HMgetserarqii ¢ 3 
Tanaaange erareanfagenrg 

We Guam wer dyfs at fee ev 

We USUSAsTaEe: weAT aT fest! 

AMT VAN AYATAATETAAN ATS & Il 


The king then, along with his princess, 
ascended beyond the sphere of Indra to the 
regions where all desires are forever gratified, 
obtaining ever-during and unequalled 
happiness in heaven, the perfect felicity that is 
the rarely realised reward of conjugal 
fidelity."° Such, Maitreya, is the sin of 
covering with a heretic and such are the 
expiatory effects of bathing after the solemn 
sacrifice of a horse, as I have narrated them to 
you. 


ae Uafesht: wT aT 
fasted: frarenret agrat anf Start: 11 ¢ 


frais Tal wads Waa 


caer Ga wea Vary AT 89 
fa Greteg wera Tat water fea! 
UTA: ardeaereferafeaer: 11 ec it 
Aerenany wat: Berea arfrarfot 
Waseca: UT ATI 8 8 
waftert fratenry dercrafrarsarti 
AGH AHIMA ARON AAA Yo ol 
qUeUer: AI: Vee a UTA: | 
wafvstrceanteraind: UAT Ro gi 


Let therefor a man carefully avoid the 
discourse or contact of an _ unbeliever, 
especially at seasons of devotion and when 
engaged in the performance of religious rites 
preparatory to a sacrifice. If it be necessary 
that a wise man should look at the sun, after 
beholding one who has neglected his domestic 
ceremonies for a month, how much greater 
need must there be of expiation after 
encountering one who has wholly abandoned 
the Vedas? One who is supported by infidels 
or who disputes the doctrines of holy writ? Let 
not a person treat with even the civility of 
speech, heretics, those who do forbidden acts, 
pretended saints, scoundrels, sceptics’! and 
hypocrites. Intercourse with such iniquitous 
wretches, even at a distance, all association 
with schismatic, defiles; let a man therefore 
carefully avoid them. 

Ud TARTANA SHAT ATSYT TART: | 

Aa AAT Gat ferqua worgafail go 21 

These, Maitreya, are the persons called 
naked, the meaning of which term you desired 
to have explained. Their very looks vitiate the 
performance of an ancestral oblation; speaking 
to them destroys religious merit for a whole 
day. 

Ua WatoSa: WET A Maree FA: I 

qua aaft MSTeTeAaT APSARA! Yo 3 I 

gat semrorehvaet ate 

Trenferarahtacretter erga 


BOOK III, CHAP. 18 


297 





araverfagtusafeparn 
ARTGUTAT AM ATH WaThertt Qo XII 
afar sitfeawapyaret gabe Srereyseaea: WTA 


These are the unrighteous heretics to whom 
a man must not give shelter and speaking to 
whom effaces whatever merit he may that day 
have obtained. Men, indeed, fall into hell as 
the consequence of only conversing with those 
who unprofitably assume the twisted hair and 
shaven crown; with those who feed without 
offering food to gods, spirits and guests; and 
whose who are excluded from the presentation 
of cakes and libations of water, to the manes. 

xa 


NOTES 

1. The situation chosen for the first appearance 
of the heresy agrees well enough with the great 
prevalence of the Jain faith in the west of India in 
the eleventh and twelfth centuries (As. Res. XVI. 
318) or perhaps a century earlier and is a 
circumstance of same weight ‘in investigating the 
date of the Visnu Purana. 

2. A bunch of peacock's feathers is still an 
ordinary accompaniment of a Jain mendicant. 
According to the Hindi poem, the Prthu Rai Caritra, 
it was borne by the Buddhist Amara Sinha; but that 
work is not, perhaps, very good authority for 
Bauddha observances, at least of an ancient date. 

3. In this and the preceding contradictions it is 
probable that the writer refers, although not with 
much precision, to the sceptical tenets of the Jains, 
whence they are called commonly Syadvadis, 
assertors of probabilities or of what may be. These 
usually form seven categories or |. A thing is; 2. It 
is not; 3. It is and it is not; 4. It is not definable; S. 
It is, but is not definable; 6. It is not, neither is it 
definable; 7. It is and it is not and is not definable. 
Hence the Jains are also termed Saptavadis and 
Saptabhangis, assertors and oppugners of seven 


propositions. As. Res. XVII. 271; and Trans. Royal 
As. Soc. 1. 555. 

4. Here is further confirmation of the Jains being 
intended by our text, as the term Arhat is more 
particularly applied to them, although it is also used 
by the Buddhists. 

5. We have there the Bauddhas noticed as a 
distinct sect. If the author wrote from a personal 
knowledge of Buddhists in India, he could not have 
written much later than the 10" or 11" century. 

6. That is, according to the commentator, a 
Sraddha may be performed for a man who is 
abroad by any of his kinsmen who are tarrying at 
home; it will be of equal benefit to him as if he 
offered it himself; he will equally eat of the 
consecrated food. 

7. We have in these passages, no doubt, allusion 
to the Varhospatyas or followers of Brhaspati, who 
seem to have been numerous and bold at some 
period anterior to the 14" century. As. Res. XVI. 5. 

8. We may have in this conflict of the orthodox 
divinities and heretical Daityas some covert 
allusion to political troubles, growing out of 
religious differences and the final predominance of 
Brahmanism. Such occurrences seem to have 
preceded the invasions of India by the 
Mohammedans and prepared the way for their 
victories. 

9. There is a play upon the word Bali, which 
means 'tribute', or ‘fragments of a meal scattered 
abroad to the birds’. 

10, The legend is peculiar to the Visnu Purana, 
although the doctrine it inculcates is to be found 
elsewhere. 

11. Haitukas, ‘causalists'; either the followers of 
the Nydya or ‘logical’ philosophy or Bauddhas, 
those who take nothing upon authority and admit 
nothing that cannot be proved; or it is explained, 
those who by argument cast a doubt upon the 
efficacy of acts of devotion. 

kek 


END OF THE THIRD BOOK 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 
BOOK IV 


CHAPTER I TAT wat: = Waate:, 

WIA SAAT: TTT fete: , ’ faqracad Wy:, 

-FT-gp- TCI - HIST - ATT - : 

Ccofrearcar, Teoh carétrsteaht:, oa gsc sella een 
gaara oy, Tae we Tere faces) sfesy fraraquraty yarerasrantn & Il 

aaa Jara aaTTSa STAT eT AM AT DAT 9 1 
wraq! Gat: art agavraferd: | aq a faracrmere, yas ay at: gat 
TS Terread Fretitrarerarn gi Tariq eam at ait wT 
aurea at J asa, ah Greet sy él 
siqftraraé apr area wafe F aM aye RT FLATT 


Maitreya said-Venerable preceptor, you SGU ATaRI 
have explained to me the perpetual and ad a dheaternnie: amiduincs seat 


occasional ceremonies which are to be aquia: ammaismena: wauat wat wat 
performed by those righteous individuals who saqgisfarral war ye Yr 
are diligent in their devotions; and you have qeaafieaieiaraten: Neon 

also described to me the duties which devolve ee: 

upon the several castes and on the different  Waratetfaen Gree Y_Rtswaq Va 

orders of the human race. I have now to wengqaet-waq-fardagreaa: Yat ay: 


request you will relate to me the dynasties of Listen therefore, Maitreya, to the entire 


the kings who have ruled over the earth. series of the princes of this family, by which 
Wy sara all sin shall be effaced. Before the evolution of 
; — ae the mundane egg, existed Brahma, who was 

Teel at 3h rt Hiranyagarbha, the form of that supreme 
wer ayraasel T eTfersafarcater 3 1 Brahma which consist of Visnu as identical 


Paragara replied-I will repeat to you, with the Rk, Yajur and Sama Vedas; the 
Maitreya, an account of the family of Manu, primeval, uncreated cause of all worlds. From 
commencing with Brahma and graced by a the right thumb of Brahma was born the 
number of religious, magnanimous and heroic patriarch Daksa;* his daughter was Aditi, who 
princes. Of which it is said, "The lineage of was the mother of the sun. The Manu 
him shall never be extinct, who daily calls to Vaivasvata was the son of the celestial 
mind the race of Manu, originating with luminary; and his sons were Iksvaku, Nrga, 
Brahma."” Dhrsta, Saryati, Narisyanta, Pransu, Nabhaga, 


way donaqydiusiaumencara waat yoy az eee yainen and iemnde ; eee eae 
aw Teenie =| eT arenfznat irth, the Manu being desirous of sons, offere 


a sacrifice for that purpose to Mitra and 
wafer Teo yet feat FENIst Varuna: but the rite being deranged, through 
War Teal Waal 11 an irregularity of the ministering priest, a 


BOOK IV, 1 


299 





daughter [la, was produced.” Through the 
favour of the two divinities, however, her sex 
was changed and she became a man, named 
Sudyumna. At a _ subsequent period, in 
consequence of becoming subject to the 
effects of a malediction once pronounced by 
Siva, Sudyumna was again transformed to a 
woman in the vicinity of the hermitage of 
Budha, the son of the deity of the moon. 
Budha saw and espoused her and had by her a 
son named Purtiravas. After his birth, the 
illustrious Rsis, desirous of restoring 
Sudyumna to his sex, prayed to the mighty Vis 
nu, who is the essence of the four Vedas, of 
mind, of everything and of nothing; and who is 
in the form of the sacrificial male; and through 
his favour [l4 once more became Sudyumna, 
in which character he had three sons, Utkala, 
Gaya and Vinata.° 


Gaerg date WRT TA VM 
aq for gq afasaen wast amt aM YET 


aa 
wae «yaad wed ye Jean 
RAAT 23 1 


In consequence of his having been formerly 
a female, Sudyumna was excluded from any 
share in his paternal dominions; but his father, 
at the suggestion of Vasistha, bestowed upon 
him the city Pratisthana’ and he gave it to 
Purtravas, Of the other sons of the Manu, Prs 
adhra, in consequence of the crime of killing a 
cow, was degraded to the condition of a 
Sidra.’ 


HEMT BAT Weraen: AAA ATT: 11 Wil 

AMIN ATESTART APTA VGN 

wee «Mee: «= Yatsaq) «=—- WeraTaraf- 
eereald:, aay: wigewaq, warhrey 
WieaASAad, Ady Whta:, Aer Qa:, gured 
sfaacadisfatasnisvad! adt fafagr, acre 
Gara, acentafayia:,  sifafayediracrm: 
arn: yisvaql weneafater:, sifaerafract: 
Ya Wealstaq i VE 1 


HST GMT AAEM Hea Yia: | 

aa feud wear as aKa 

smrafeg: aaa afeonfafssrda: (a) 

Wed: Uae: weeny feta: Voit 

Tea AIA BARAT! TSI aH:, 
eT Ut Wee we Wea Gator 


qa A:, Ted hae: Rate IA, TAT 
Ata, Aad GI:, Wd: Goias:, TeaTelal HAT 
sfefaen Ara warergar ara area gues Ast 
wea faget aa; a: ya agret aa Frekh 
tress fame Yalsvaq) Tes Yas, TTA 
qaa:, Tet Betsy! PHM Weda:, Ad: 
MN AT ys) dad: qynee; at 
SUVA ATA SATA: SATA. BARA: | 
Ut AMAT PIT I 


From Karitisa descended the mighty 
warriors termed K4riisas (the sovereigns of the 
north).” The son of Nedistha, named Nabhaga, 
became a Vaisya;'° his son was 
Bhalandana;''whose son was the celebrated 
Vataspri’?; Pransu; whose son was Prajani;!° 
whose son was Khanitra;'* whose son was the 
very valiant Caksupa;"° whose son was 
Virnsga;'* whose son was Vivirnsati;'’ whose 
son was Khaninetra; whose son was the 
powerful, wealthy and valiant Karandhama;"* 
whose son was Aviksi (or Aviksit)'’; whose 
son was the mighty Marutta, of whom this 
well known verse is recited; "There never was 
beheld on earth a sacrifice equal to the 
sacrifice of Marutta: al the implements and 
utensils were made of gold. Indra was 
intoxicated with the libations of Soma juice 
and the Brahmanas were enraptured with the 
magnificent donations they received. The 
winds of heaven encompassed the rite as 
guards and the assembled gods attended to 
behold it."’° Marutta was a Cakravartti or 
universal monarch : he had a son named Naris 
yanta;*' his son was Dama; his son was 
Rajyavardhana; his son was Sudhrti; his son 
was Nara; his son was Kevala; his son was 


300 


Bandhumat; his son was Vegavat; his son was 
Budha;” his son was Trnavindu, who had a 
daughter named Ilavila.”* The celestial nymph 
Alambusa becoming enamoured of Trnavindu, 
bore him a son named Visala, by whom the 
city Vaisali was founded.” The son of the first 
king of Vaisali was Hemacandra; his son was 
Sucandra; his son was Dhiimrasva; his son was 
Srfijaya;”° his son was Sahadeva;”’ his son was 
Kris4sva; his son was Somadatta, who 
celebrated ten times the sacrifice of a horse; 
his son was Janamejaya; and his son was 
Sumati.”* 


Gast: Warer Wa AEH FUT: | 
atatgat wera atelercts frente: 1 ee 


These were the king of Vaisali; of whom it 
is said, "By the favour of Trnavindu all the 
monarchs of Vaisali, were long lived, 
magnanimous, equitable and valiant." 


Wald: HAM YHA AAMT; ATTY waa: | 
ars AM asta: waayaswad setae 
taal AMT Yat WA, Asaarfart qyst, qa 
wet weitreqaral tarente taq: ya: HH aM 
AUT WIGMATAS SAA AeT aT Yad AMT aw 
aM HAAS MAST WE Teles 
SANT Weel Tens tach eeeeaai 
Teahaataart ane feet MTT TTI 2 0 


wad fonioitaicaanatat fieatt tara: 
sua Yedfta WAN 2 Vil 


Saryati, the fourth son of the Manu, had a 
daughter named Sukanya, who was married to 
the holy sage Cyavana;”? he had also a 
righteous son, Called Anartta. The son of the 
latter was Revata,*’ who ruled over the country 
called after his father Anartta and dwelt at the 
capital denominated Kuéasthali.*’ The son of 
this prince was Raivata or Kakudmin, the 
eldest of a hundred brethren. He had a very 
lovely daughter and not finding any one 
worthy of her hand, he repaired with her to the 
region of Brahma to consult the god where a 
fit bridegroom was to be met with. When he 
arrived, the quiristers Haha, Hoh and others, 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


were singing before Brahma and Raivata, 
waiting till they had finished, imagined the 
ages that elapsed during their performance to 
be but as a moment. 


Waaaa wean wre tad: 
SIs ane! we Wan, aw 
astra at eft! ye wort wad 
Tate: FT AY aaa, wal 
Madistaad: 2? wea aha wees aa: 
fafsearafort: afar wary store Fran 2 2 1 


At the end of their singing, Raivata 
prostrated himself before Brahma and 
explained his errand, "Whom should you wish 
for a son-in-law?” demanded Brahma; and the 
king mentioned to him various persons with 
whom he could be well pleased. Nodding his 
head gently and graciously smiling, Brahma 
said to him, 


a owt wads: Fae areanenw- 
aaataerircsten agit fe damaq ord 
swags wilt aert wacrswrfagrieerres 
Tigger, area fe acafers: arret 
SIs Hatchet SAT 2 3 

vadiste  faa-afr-yer-aer-ay-aer-alerea: 
HAA ATTA AAT MK 


"Of those whom you have named the third 
or fourth generation non longer survives, for 
many successions of ages have passed away 
while you were listening to our songsters; now 
upon earth the twenty-eighth great age of the 
present Manu is nearly finished and the Kali 
period is at hand, You must therefore, bestow 
this virgin gem upon some other husband, for 
you are now alone and your friends, your 
ministers servants, wife, kinsmen, armies and 
treasures, have long since swept away by the 
hand of time." 


WRyaaeda: A UT Wad POT Wye, 
way! wana wad wet Wal aa: TW wa 


TS Vall 


BOOK IV, 1 


Overcome with astonishment and alarm, 
the Raja then said to Brahm, "Since I am thus 
circumstanced, do you, lord, tell me unto 
whom the maiden shall be given:" and the 
creator of the world, whose throne Is the lotus, 
thus benignantly replied to the prince, as he 
stood bowed and humble before him : 


gerara 


A MUCHAS UT 
faquy ae WelTaeT aq: 
Ta Wer FT Wt Ma 
Ada Ot WATT 26 I 
"The being of whose commencemcnt, 
course and termination, we are ignorant; the 
unborn and omnipresent essence of all things, 
he whose real and infinite nature and essence 
we do not know-—is the supreme Visnu. 


HARA Bet 
4 ag faud: uftonmeg: 
SAAT TET 
THTART ET GAIA TET! 219 I 
He is time, made up of moments and hours 
and years; whose influence is the source of 
perpetual change. He is the universal form of 
all things, birth to death. He is eternal, without 
name or shape. 


TET WaTeTe CAI ey 
Yt: WATE AS Aaa 
salar eR: Feafrequar 
TTT HAL OST; TTA VEU 
Through the favour of that imperishable 
being am I the agent of his power in creation : 
through his anger is Rudra the destroyer of the 
world; and the cause of preservation, Purusa, 
proceeds also from him. 
UEUAR Baa F: 


feat a aiset yearend 
eRaeun a aisha fay 


Gt AMTATAT: WAST Rl 


301 


The unborn having assumed my person 
creates the world; in his own essence he 
provides for its duration; in the form of Rudra 
he devours all things; and with the body of 
Ananta he upholds them. 


ventas afta faag- 


Tareeae THT fearen 
WaT ASTRA CA, 


farit WeataqTeTaTATII 3 0 1 
Impersonated as Indra and the other gods 
he is the guardian of mankind; and as the sun 
and moon he disperses darkness. Taking upon 
himself the nature of fire he bestows warmth 
and maturity; and in the condition of the carth 
nourishes all beings. 
Vet Hitt sat 
ae Wear Weraatt 
aalte faateafrarerry 
MATAR AT: TABU 3 I 
As one with air he gives activity to 
existence; and as one with water he satisfies 
all wants; while in the state of ether, 
associated with universal aggregation, he 
furnishes space for all objects. 


a: Grad Wineesa 
a: Wedd Wefan a ears 
fanaa: digaasaaaret 
GUS A ARNT ST ASAT 3 PII 
He is at once the creator, and that which is 
created; the preserver and that which is 
preserved; the dcstroyed and as one with all 
things, that which is destroyed; and as the 


indestructible, he is distinct from these thrce 
vicissitudes. 


afer ae At smeaarelt 
aaieratsfary wafer Tara: | 
a Vayamar afta 
ear fawppodsadiat:13 31 


In him is the world, he is the world; and he, 
the primeval self-born, 1s again present in the 
world. That mighty Visnu, who is paramount 


302 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





over all beings, is now in a portion of himself 


upon the earth. 
HUUet M ca yo! Tar 
yet Geert 
OW Biter Taft aa aret 
AW HMAM AALTATAT 3 ¥ 1 
TA aA At ATz! 
Was MAMA TANT! 
VOT GUSH WAM Waa 
ETT BEET FF APTA 


That city Kusasthali which was formerly 
your capital and rivalled the city of the 
immortals, is now known as Dvaraka®’ and 
there reigns a portion of that divine being in 
the person of Baladeva; to him, who appears 
as a man, present her as a wife; he is a worthy 
bridegroom for this excellent damsel and she 
is a Suitable bride for him. 


WU Tare 
sataisat aaciear 
Ye VATA Ut: WAAL 
eae BAL YORE 
ware: racufadandrearyn 361 


Being thus instructed by the lotus-born 
divinity, Raivata returned with his daughter to 
earth, where he found the race of men 
dwindled in stature, reduced in vigour and 
enfeeoled in intellect. 


Krai we yigT 
qurrant weal Har 
areas Tafesrearewn- 
ST ATA AMAT IL 3 
seararonafa araed 
PANFAT A AAT: | 
YT MeN Aa TATA 3 6 
aragqarsat fatten 


eM UT Seat BTN 
fenract a aes gare 3 811 
usta faroyqerot agaist wa: SteIT: 


Repairing to the city of Kusathali, which he 
found much altered, the wise monarch 
bestowed his unequalled daughter on the 
wielder of the ploughshare, whose breast was 
as fair and radiant as crystal. Beholding the 
damsel of excessively lofty height, the chief, 
whose banner is a palm-tree, shortened her 
with the end of his ploughshare and she 
became his wife. Balarama having espoused, 
agreeably to the ritual, Revati, the daughter of 
Raivata, the king retired to the mountain 
Himalaya and ended his days in devout 


e . 3 
austerities. : 
eke & 


NOTES 

1. The complete series of the different dynasties 
is found elsewhcre only in the Vayu, the 
Brahmanda (which is the same), the Matsya and the 
Bhagavata Puranas. The Brahma Purana and the 
Hari VarhSa, the Agni, Linga, Kirma and Garuda 
Puranas have lists of various extent, but none 
beyond the families of Péndu and Krsna. The 
Markandeya contains an account of a few of the 
kings of the solar dynasty alone; and the Padma, of 
a part of the solar and lunar princes only, besides 
accounts of individuals. In the Ramayana, 
Mahabharata and in the other Puranas, occasional 
short genealogies and notices of individual princes 
occur. In general there is a tolerable conformity, 
but this is not invariably the case, as we shall have 
occasion to observe. 

2. In the historical passages of all the Puranas in 
which such occur and especially in the Visnu and 
Vayu, verses, apparently the fragments of a more 
ancient narrative, are frequently cited. Jt may also 
be noticed, as a peculiarity of this part of the 
Puranas, that the narration is 1n prose. 

3. Daksa 1s elsewhere said to have been one of 
the mind-born sons of Brahma or to have been the 
son of the Pracetasas : See Bk. I. Ch. XV. n. 5. 

4. According to the nomenclature sometimes 
followed and as we shall have reason to conclude 
intended in this place, there are ten sons of Manu. 


BOOK IV, 1 


303 





The commentator regards them, however, as but 
nine, considering Nabhaga-nedista but one name or 
Nedista the father of Nabhaga. The number is 
generally stated to be nine, although there is some 
variety in the names, particularly in this name, 
which occurs Nabhagadista, Nabhagaristha; and 
also separated, as Nabhaga, Nabhaga or Nabhaga; 
Nedista, Dista and Arista : the latter, as in the 
Karma, distinctly stated, TT ORs: 1 Again, Ae: 
aay: Fa: | Brahma p. The commentator on the Hari 
VarhSa quotes the Vedas for Nabhagadista : aries 
a arafafa afi: 1 but the name occurs as Nabhanedist 
ha in the Aitareya Brahmana of the Rgveda, where 
a story is told of his being excluded from all share 
of his inheritance, on the plea of his being wholly 
devoted to a religious life : Wwe A aR saat 
aad watt Pe See also As. Res. VIII. 384. The 
name as ordinarily written, Nabhaga, 'no-share', has 
nevertheless an obvious connection with the 
legend. The name of Nrga is found only in our text, 
the Padma and the Bhagavata : the Vayu has 
Najava. Prangu is also the reading of the Vayu and 
Agni, but not of the rest, which have Vena, Vanya, 
Danda, Kusandbha or Kavi, in its place. The 
Mahabharata, Adi Parva, p. 113, has Vena, Dhrsnu, 
Narisyanta, Nabhaga, Iksvaku, Karissa, Saryati, 114, 
Prsadhra and Nabhagjaristha. The Padma Purana, in 
the Patala Khanda, says there were ‘ten' and names 
them Iksvaku, Nrga, Dista, Dhrsta, Karfsa, Saryati, 
Narisyanta, Prsadhra, Nabhaga and Kavi. 

5. wae BATA! ‘That sacrifice being 
wrongly offered, through the improper invocations 
of the Hotri.' It is also read S984 ‘frustrated’. This is 
rather a brief and obscure allusion to what appears 
to be an ancient legend and one that has undergone 
various modifications. According to the Matsya, no 
change of sex took place in the first instance. The 
eldest son of Manu was Ida or Ia (8S: or ¥et:), 
whom his father appointed sovereign of the seven 
Dvipas. In his progress round his dominions, Ia 
came to the forest of Sambhu or Siva; entering into 
which, he was changed to a female, Ila, agreeably 
to a promise made formerly by Siva to Parvati, who 
had been once unseasonably broken in upon by 
some sages, that such a transformation should be 
inflicted on every male who trespassed upon the 
sacred grove. After a season, the brothers of Ia 
sought for him and_ (finding him _ thus 
metamorphosed, applied to Vasistha, their father's 


priest, to know the cause. He explained it to them 
and directed them to worship Siva and his bride. 
They did so, accordingly; and it was announced by 
the deities, that, up on the performance of an 
ASvamedha by Iksvaku, Ila should become a 
Kimpurusa, named Sudyumna and that he should 
be a male one month and female another month, 
alternately. The Vayu, which is followed by most 
of the other authorities states that upon Manu's 
offering their share of the sacrifice to Mitra and 
Varuna, instead of a boy, a girl was born : 
according to the Vedas. gst aa eq afa:1 Manu 
desired her to follow him; aMfermaeerara AqevsR: 
Sa: | Ape we a after years @1) whence her 
name 114 (from Ila or ida, 'come'). There, however, 
Manu propitiates Mitra and Varuna and the girl [la 
or Sudyumna by their favour : as the Markandeya; 
aie aa As YT taal Saez ge eH: Paya 
yaar sfa faz: 11 Sudyumna's subsequent change to 
a female again, is told much as in the Matsya; but 
his being alternately male and female is not 
mentioned in the Vayu any more than it is in our 
text. The Bhagavata ugrees in that respect with the 
Matsya, but it has evidently embellished the earlier 
part of the legend by the introduction of another 
character, Sraddha, the wife of the Manu. It is said 
that it was by her instigation, as she was desirous of 
having a girl, that the ministering Brahmanas 
altered the purpose of the rite, in consequence of 
which a girl, instead of a boy, was born. The 
similarity of the name has induced the learned 
author of the Origin of Pagan Idolatry to conceive 
that he has found the Ila of the Hindus in the II or 
Ilus of the Phoenicians. "The Phoenician II 1s the 
masculine Ila of the Hindus and Indo Scythae and 
Ilia was a title of Manu or Buddha, who was 
preserved in the ark at the time of the dcluge:" I. 
156 : and the thence concludes that Ila must be 
Noah; while other circumstances in his Phoenician 
history identify him with Abraham. I. 159, Again; 
"Ilus or Il is a regular Cuthic name of Buddha, 
which the Phoenicians, I have no doubt, brought 
with them; for Buddha or Manu, 1n the character of 
Ila, is said to have married his own daughter, who 
is described as the offspring of an ancient 
personage that was preserved in an ark at the time 
of the deluge." I. 223. Now whatever connection 
there may be between the names of lla, Il, Mus, 
Ilium, [a ‘the earth’ and Ilos ‘slime’, there is no very 


304 


obvious resemblance between the Paurinik legends 
of Ila and the Mosaic record; nor do the former 
authorise the particulars of Ila stated by Faber, on 
the authority probably of Wilford. The Manu 
Satyavrata, who was preserved in the ark, is never 
called Ila nor is he the father of 114. Buddha was not 
so preserved nor is Ila ever a title of Buddha. 
Budha (not Buddha), the husband of Ila, never 
appears as her father nor is he a Manu nor is she the 
daughter of any ancient personage prescrved in an 
ark. There is not therefore, as far as J] am aware, 
any circumstance in the history of Ila or Ila which 
can identify either with Abraham or Noah. 

6. The Matsya calls the name of third Haritasva; 
the Vayu, VinataSva; the Markandeya, Vinaya; and 
the Bhagavata, Vimala. All but the last agree in 
stating that Uktala (Orissa) and Gaya in Bihar are 
named after the two first. The Matsya calls the third 
the sovercign of the east, along with the Kauravas; 
the Vayu makes him king of the west. The 
Bhagavata calls them all three rulers of the south. 

7. The authorities agree in this location of 
Sudyumna. Pratisthana was situated on the eastern 
side of the confluence of thc Ganges and Yamuna; 
the country between which rivers was the territory 
of the direct male descendants of Vaivasvata. In the 
Hari VarhSa it is said that he reigned in Pratisthana, 
having killed Dhrstaka, Ambarisa and Danda : 
Gera: era was sera yonseaties aaa 
eda: 11 M. Langlois had no doubt qq74: in his 
copy, as he renders it, ‘Il donna naissance 4 trois 
enfans;’ though, as he observes, Hamilton and 
called these the sons of Iksvaku. The Brahma 
Purana has not this passage nor does the 
commentator on the Harn Varhsa give any 
explanation; neither does any thing of the kind 
occur elsewherc. We have however, subsequently 
in the text, Danda named as a son of Iksvaku; and 
in the Padma Purana, Sristi Khanda and in the 
Uttara Khanda of the Ramayana, we have a detailed 
narrative of Danda, the son of Iksvaku, whose 
country was laid waste by an imprecation of 
Bhargava, whose daughter that prince had violated. 
His kingdom became in consequence the Dandaka 
forest. The Mahabharata, Dana Dharma, alludes to 
the same story. If therefore the preferable reading 
of the Hari Varnsa be Sita, ‘son’, it is at variance 
with all other authorities. At the same time it must 
be admitted, that the same work is singular in 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


asserting any collision between Danda and his 
brothers and Sudyumna and the passage seems to 
have grown out of that careless and ignorant 
compilation which the Hari Varhsa so perpetually 
presents. It is not improbably a gratuitous 
perversion of this passage in the Matsya; 
AT RArARITe] YeLay Yass! 'Ambarisa was the 
son of Nabhaga; and Dhrsta had three sons.' 

8. This story has been modified apparently at 
different periods, according to a progressive horror 
of the crime. Our text simply states the fact. The 
Vayu says he was hungry and not only killed, but 
ate the cow of his spiritual preceptor, Cyavana. In 
the Markandeya he is described as being out a 
hunting and killing the cow of the father of 
Babhravya, mistaking it for a Gavaya or Gayal. The 
Bhagavata, as usual, improves upon the story and 
says that Prsadhra was appointed by his Guru Vasis 
tha to protect his cattle. In the night a tiger made his 
way into the fold and the prince in his haste and the 
dark, killed the cow upon which he had fastened, 
instead of the tiger. In all the authorities the effect 
is the same and the imprecation of the offended 
sage degraded Prsadhra to the caste of Sidra. 
According to the Bhagavata, the prince-led a life of 
devotion and perishing in the flame of a forest, 
Obtained final liberation. The obvious purpose of 
this legend and of some that follow, is to account 
for the origin of the different castes from one 
common ancestor. 

9. The Bhagavata also places the K4risas in the 
north; TAINAN: | but the country of the K4risas is 
usually placed upon the Paripatra or Vindhya 
mountains (See Bk, JJ. Ch. WI. n. 13). 

10. The Vayu has Nabhaga, the son of Arista; 
ararmReqaeq | the Markandeya has, the son of Dista; 
fesyaetqawt: | the Bhagavata also calls him the son 
of Dista. According to that authority, he became a 
Vaisya by his actions. The other Puranas generally 
agree that the descendants of this person became 
Vaisyas; but the Matsya and Vayu do not notice it. 
The Markandeya details a story of Nabhaga's 
carrying off and marrying the daughter of a Vaisya; 
in consequence of which he was degraded, it is 
said, to the same caste and deprived of his share of 
the patrimonial sovereignty, which his son and 
successor recovered. The Brahma Purana and Hari 
VarhSa assert that two sons of Nabhagarista again 
became Brahmanas; but the duties of royalty imply 


BOOK IV, 1 


305 





the Ksatriya caste of his posterity; and the 
commentator on our text observes that the son of 
Nabhaga was born before his father's degradation 
and consequently the race continued Ksatriya; an 
assertion unsupported by any authority and it must 
therefore appear that a race of Vaisya princes was 
recognised by early traditions. 

1]. Bhanandana : Bhagavata. 

12. WVatsapriti Bhagavata, Vatsasri 
Markandeya. The latter has a story of the 
destruction of the Daitya Kujambha by Vidiratha, 
the father of Sunandra, the wife of Vatsasri. The 
Vayu has Sahasrari. 

13. Pramati : Bhagavata. 

14. According to the Markandeya, the priests of 
the royal family conspired against this prince and 
werc put to death by his ministers. 

15. Caksusa : Bhagavata. 

16. Vira : Markandeya. 

17. Rambha precedes VivirhSati : Bhagavata. 

18. BalaSva or Balakasva or Subalasva, 
according to the Markandeya, which explains his 
name Karandhama to denote his creation of an 
army, when besieged by his revolted tributaries, by 
breathing on his hands (&& + 24:), 

19. Both forms occur, as the commentator 
observes; sifaata wfaefafaiaceatt! The Markandeya 
has a long story of this prince's carrying off the 
daughter of Visala, king of Vaidisa. Being attacked 
and captured by his confederated rivals, he was 
rescued by his father, but was so much mortified by 
his disgrace, that he vowed never to marry nor 
reign. The princess, also becoming an ascetic, met 
with him in the woods and they were finally 
espoused; but Aviksit kept his other vow and 
relinquished his succession in favour of his son, 
who succeeded to the kingdoms of both 
Karandhama and Visala. 

20. Most of our authorities quote the same 
words, with or without addition. The Vayu adds, 
that the sacrifice was conducted by Sarhvartta, 
whom the Bhagavata terms a Yogi, the son of 
Angiras; and that Brhaspati was so jealous of the 
splendour of the rite, that a great quarrel (Hey 
faate:) ensued between him and Sarhvartta. How it 
involved the king is not told, but apparently in 
conscquence, Marutta, with his kindred and friends, 
was taken by Sarhvartta to heaven : Wada fed +a: 
aed. AIPA: | According to the Markandeya, 


Marutta was so named from the paternal 
benediction, ‘May the winds be yours,’ or ‘be 
propitious to you’ (4eq da). He reigned, agreeably 
to that record, 85000 years. 

21. Omitted in the Bhagavata. 

22. A rather chivalric and curious story is told of 
Dama in the Markandeya. His bride Suman, 
daughter of the king Dasarha, was rescued by him 


> from his rivals. One of them, Bapusmat, afterwards 


killed Marutta, who had retired into the woods, 
after relinquishing his crown to his son. Dama in 
retaliation killed Bapusmat and made the Pinda or 
obsequial offering to his father, of his flesh; with 
the remainder he fed the Brahmanas of Raksasas 
Origin : such were the kings of the solar race. 
ayy Wid feed werk 81 Te Yea 
Wa Peas i WS foe fF Wa ayYq: GeaaaT: 11 

23. The Bhagavata has Bandhavat, Oghavat and 
Bandha. 

24. The Vayu and Bhagavata both add that she 
was the wife of Visravas and mother of Kubera. In 
the Linga Purana, she is said to have been the wife 
of Pulastya and mother of Visravas. The weight of 
authority is in favour of the former statement. See 
BR Ch xn, 

25. The Bhagavata names three sons, Visala, 
Sinyabandhu and Dhimaketu. Vaisali is a city of 
considerable renown in Indian tradition, but its site 
is a subject of some uncertainty. Part of the 
difficulty arises from confounding it with Visala, 
another name of Ujjain, saft wafeenen 
Hemacandra. Also in the Meghadita, were 
year sfaenct ‘Having arrived at Avanti, 
proceed to the illustrious city before indicated, 
Visala. farmenttargqsstaat Gti To the city Ujjayini 
named Visala. Comment. Vaisili however appears 
to be very differently situated. According to the 
Buddhists, amongst whom it is celebrated as a chief 
seat of the labours of Sakhya and his first disciples, 
it is the same as Prayaga or Allahabad; but the 
Ramayana (I. 45) places it much lower down, on 
the north bank of the Ganges, nearly opposite to the 
mouth of the Sone; and it was therefore in the 
modern district of Séran as Hamilton (Genealogies 
of the Hindus) conjectured. In the fourth century it 
was known to the Chinese traveller Fa-hian as Phi- 
She-li, on the right bank of the Gandaka not far 
from its confluence with the Ganges. Account of 
the Foekue-ki : Trans. R. As. Soc. no. IX, p. 128. 


306 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





26. Dhumraksa and Samyama : Bhagavata. 

27. The text is clear enough; Gwar Weeaeia: 
HM: | but, as elsewhere noticed (Hindu Theatre, II. 
296), the commentator on the Bhagavata interprets 
the parallel passage, GaAcreaty FM: Weta: 1 very 
differently or Weta: Cas Bea: 1 'Krisasva with 
Devaja' or as some copies read, Devaka or Daivata, 
as if there were two sons of Samyama. 

28. The Bhagavata changes the order of these 
two, making Janamejaya the son of Sumati; or 
Pramati, Vayu, Sumati, king of Vaisali, is made 
contemporary with Rama : Ramayana, I. 47. 17. 
The dynasty of Vaisala kings is found only in our 
text, the Vayu and Bhagavata. Hamilton places 
them from 1920 to 1940 B.C.; but the latter is 
incompatible with the date he assigns to Rama, of 
1700 B.C. The contemporary existence of Sumati 
and Rama, however, is rather unintelligible, as, 
according to our lists, the former is the thirty-fourth 
and the latter the sixtieth, from Vaivasvata Manu. 

29. The circumstances of their marriage, of 
Cyavana's appropriating a share of offerings to the 
ASvinikumaras and of his quarrel with Indra in 
consequence, are told in detail in the Bhagavata and 
Padma Puranas. 

30. In most of the other Puranas, Reva or Raiva. 
The Linga and Matsya insert a Rocamana before 
him; and the Bhdgavata adds to Anartta, 
Uttanavarhis and Bhirisena. 

31. The Bhagavata ascribes the foundation of 
Kusasthali to Revata, who built it, it is said, within 
the sea : 3%: Wei The subsequent legend shows 
that it was the same or on the some spot, as 
Dvaraka; and Anartta was therefore part of Kutch 
or Gujarat. See Bk. IT. Ch. III. n. 77. 

32. So called from its many Dvaras or gateways : 
Ud aad ATA ACERT FARA —Vayu. 

33. The object of this legend, which 1s told by 
most of the authorities, is obviously to account for 
the anachronism of making Balarama contemporary 
with Raivata; the one early in the Tret4 age and the 
other at the close of the Dvapara. 

kee 


306 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


CHAPTER 2 

fardtatseara: 
(SRST: HPMayeT Ya 

areas) 


QUIS Jara 
Wad weleren, wat tadt ammaft dat 
QOIATART TAA YT HOMIE SET 11 2H 
ParaSara said~ While Kakudmin, surnamed 
Raivata, was absent on his visit to the region 


of Brahma, the evil spirits or Raksasas named 
Punyajans destroyed his capital Kusasthall. 

ware «owed «yaaa «fag ah 
qaqa afaar: adfey smaq geenia awa ar 
Saag «TARTS TTT: «9 Tea: 
sratwents fatisuaq feud yreut stl Tey 
THe was Yas: 

His hundred brothers, through dread of 
these foes, fled in different directions; and the 
Ksatriyas, their descendants, settled in many 
countries.’ 

From Dhrsta, the son of the Manu, sprang 
the Ksatriya race of Dharstaka.’ 

The son of Nabhaga was Nabhaga;” his son 
was Ambarisa; his son was Virtipa;” his son 
was Prsadasva; his son was Rathinara, of 
whom if is sung, 

Ud AANA SF Yas: THAT: 

Tiamat yaar: eater fasmaa:t 211 

"These, who were Ksatriyas by birth, the 
heads of the family: of Rathinara, were called 
Angirasas (or sons of Angiras) and were 
Brahmanas as well as Ksatriyas."® 


gare Maleate: Yat WN) TET YAMA 
fagiahia-qustearead: Gat:| SHAS: TET 
Yat sree aya: | aanfigrast a aferorrad 
OTT | 

Iksvaku was born from the nostril of the 


Manu, as he happened to sneeze.’ He had a 
hundred sons, of whom the three most 


BOOK IV, 2 


307 





distinguished were Vikuksi, Nimi and Danda. 
Fifty of the rest, under Sakuni, were the 
protectors of the northern countries. Forty- 
cight were the princes of the south.® 

UU aH wa seeders 
fampferrarrararan x it 

a waft Welt aa ya Rar 
afrardstaet fears were, ses 
aera = faa) FRaearmrea «= pean 
Sane af: welfeq: wWe- 
See «= UT 20 aA 
wararaguedd, sara prorat fara: carat 
fap: era: weredamam, fenft a 
Uftern:) fread waearat wet eta: greta 
WMT MT UTA AMT YAS TAI 4 

Upon one of the days called Astvaka,’ Iks 
vaku being desirous of celebrating obsequies, 
ordered Vikuksi to bring him flesh suitable for 
the offering. The prince accordingly went into 
the forest and killed many deer and other wild 
animals, for the celebration. Being weary with 
the chase and being hungered, he sat down and 
ate a hare; after which, being refreshed, he 
carried the rest of the game to his father. Vasis 
tha, the family priest of the house of Iksvaku, 
was summoned to consecrate the food; but he 
declared that it was impure, in consequence of 
Vikuksi's having eaten a hare from amongst it 
(making it thus, as it were, the residue of his 
meal). Vikuksi was in consequence abandoned 
by his offended father an the epithet Sasada 
(hare eater) was affixed to him by the Guru. 
On the death of Iksvaku, the dominion of the 
carth descended to Sasada,'\° who was 
succeeded by his son Parafjaya. 


qeaniq at uldafatigian: waa weasd 
FaOTAT TEATS | 11 & 
waas «0 taraneifefa: «= WaenTTTaT 


In the Treta age a violent war’! broke out 
between the gods and the Asuras, in which the 
former were vanquished. They consequently 
had recourse to Visnu for assistance and 
propitiated him by their adoration. The eternal 
ruler of the universe, Narayana, had 
compassion upon them and said, "What you 
desire is known unto me. Hear how your 
wishes shall be fulfilled. 


Tat fe aa ener a Ine: afrrad:| 
Teitse waamaade Aas 
frefenta, wevafe: werisqmaeta 
crate: ered Sirk UagraT WOR Tat 
fa: WAT ATTATTA: HCN 

Sash a: a: ata! srenfireafeies vat 
STATHAU A ANAT Olea FATA: 11 8 

THAT SHS MAMTA TOT ST A ATT: | 

There is an illustrious prince named 
Parafijaya, the son of a royal sage; into his 
person I will infuse a portion of myself and 
having descended upon earth I will in his 
person subdue all your enemies. Do you 
therefore endeavour to secure the aid of 
Paraftjaya for the destruction of your foes." 
Acknowledging with reverence the kindness of 
the deity, the immortals quitted his presence 
and repaired to Parafjaya, whom they thus 
addressed : 

"Most renowned Ksatriya, we have come to 
you to solicit your alliance against our 
enemies : it will not become you to disappoint 
our hopes.” 


Saw: Waa: We,- wader asa 
qararg: waehd:, se Uae ere 
amauta: We aes, ale wai wera 
sarauy Neeser ts aT FHIM- 
TAA RoI 

wy YeMgTET: Ape etanhadt 


ARTA: «We, Weta wa gorfitetietsay WRNaET, Per aay gavage Tal 
Prefer gracry 


aadas SAAT 


, TAT HHCTAATAATTI VAI 


) 


308 


The prince replied, "Let this your Indra, the 
monarch of the spheres, the god of a hundred 
sacrifices, consent to carry me upon his 
shoulders and I will wage battle with your 
adversaries as your ally." The gods and Indra 
readily answered, "So be it"; and the latter 
assuming the shape of a bull, the prince 
mounted upon his shoulder. Being then filled 
with delight and invigorated by the power of 
the eternal ruler of all movable and immovable 
things, he destroyed in the battle that ensued 
all the enemies of the gods; and because he 
annihilated the demon host while seated upon 
the shoulder (or the hump, Kakud) of the bull, 
he then obtained the appellation Kakutstha 


(seated on the hump’’). 

HPMAAT: YAS Baa: W:, 
yaaa: Ta Usisa, aka yas: Ta 
aae:, a: meet yt Pagerere sneer 


wa AT WN wa WAT erempafitsarantia feareqer 
IcoMAIE SA 

. Forg-aary- Alaa: Haag aa: | 
qerag arate: Teng Faer:, feed decw:, 
AAT HUT: , THM WaAhtd, wal Fares vad 


The son of Kakutstha was Anenas,'? whose 
son was Prthu, whose son was Visvagasva, 
whose son was Ardra,’° whose son was 
Yuvanasva, whose son was Sravasta, by whom 
the city of Sravasti'® was founded. The son of 
Sravasta was Brhadasva, whose son was 
Kuvalayasva. This princc, inspired with the 
spirit of Visnu, destroyed the Asura Dhundhu, 
who had harassed the pious sage Uttanka; and 
he was then entitled Dhundhumara.’’ In his 
conflict with the demon the king was attended 
by his sons, to thc number of twenty-one 
thousand; and all these, with the exception of 
only three, pcrished in the engagement, 
consumed by the fiery breath of Dhundhu. The 
three who survived were Drdhasva, Candrasva 


vaussdiq- wad aren 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


and Kapilasva; and the son and successor of 
the elder of these was HaryyasSva; his son was 
Nikumbha; his son was SanhataSva; his son 


was KrsaSva; his son was Prasenajit; and his 
son was another Yuvaniéva.'® 


@ WAM: FFT VBI 

ay a Gay site qeutla: A wore 
faa, Gags agar Aarearecararan ex 

qa acre wag wl waaEy 
mea: UTe:, Stara aft way? orm fe wa 
UR Fa Ui Wea YX safaeah 
SNH FT UAT SAAT WaT ThahaeaNn v4 I 

mY Faaetsvaq WOT WU aged WATT 
aint aimaimfitia fem a aedt cet 
FATT 8G II 

Stat Ae & arenifa F qrza: wry: srarmey 
aay | WPA 
aMmaSad, ath, UT weet caus We, ai 
wah Aargrafaviaraa war aga saga WT 
ara anadt wag wel ays) waht aa 
FONE :— 

mea yet sth wa aaa widest wd ac 
eT APNG: VATA VII 

Yuvanasva had no son, at which he was 
deeply grieved. While residing in the vicinage 
of the holy Munis, he inspired them with pity 
for his childless condition and they instituted a 
religious rite to procure him progeny. One 
night during its performance the sages having 
placed a vessel of consecrated water upon the 
altar had retired to repose. It was past 
midnight, when the king awoke, exceedingly 
thirsty; and unwilling to disturb any of the 
holy inmates of the dwelling, he looked about 
for something to drink. In his search he come 
to the water in the jar, which had been 


sanctified and endowed with prolific efficacy 
by sacred texts and he drank it. When the 


BOOK IV, 2 


Munis rose and found that the water had been 
drunk, they inquired who had taken it and said, 
"The queen that has drunk this water shall give 
birth to a mighty and valiant son." “It was I," 
exclaimed the Raja, "who unwittingly drank 
the water!" and accordingly in the belly of 
YuvandSva was conceived a child and it grew 
and in due time it ripped open the right side of 
the Raja and was born and the Raja did not 
die. Upon the birth of the child, "who will be 
its nurse?" said the Munis; when Indra, the 
king of the gods, appeared and said, "He shall 
have me for his nurse” (mam dhiasyati); and 
hence the boy was named M4andhiatri. Indra put 
his forefinger into the mouth of the infant, 
who sucked it and drew from it heavenly 
nectar; and he grew up and became a mighty 
monarch and reduced the seven continental 
zones under his dominion. And here a verse is 
recited; "From the rising to the going down of 
the sun, all that is irradiated by his light, is the 
land of Mandhatri, the son of Yuvanasva."”” 

Treat «ot oMeferggfert = fargudtquan, 
Foals Yay AeaMuarayaaal 
UMA Sfanrerey FATA VSI 

Mandhata married Bindumati, the daughter 
of Sagabindu and had by her three sons, 
Purukutsa, Ambarisa and Mucukunda; he had 
also fifty daughters.”° 


aegaya dicta wfacaiet wegre are- 
FATT 83 
a 0 Oe WTeNTfcaguansfesrmon 


aerfarranta eferaraenfaataal 2 01 

set aetsuiesaiy smite amare 
Urea aah: we || TAATOSdarens 
wergareata aarad yaraty: we wwe: | 


309 


The devout sage Saubhari, learned in the 
Vedas, had spent twelve years immersed in a 
piece of water; the sovereign of the fish in 
which, named Sammada, of large bulk, had a 
very numerous progeny. His children and his 
grandchildren were wont to frolic around him 
in all directions and he lived amongst them 
happily, playing with them night and day. 
Saubhari the sage, being disturbed in 
devotions by their sports, contemplated the 
patriarchal felicity of the monarch of the lake 
and reflected, "How enviable is this creature, 
who, although born in a degraded state of 
being, is ever thus sporting cheerfully amongst 
his offspring and their young. Of a truth he 
awakens in my mind the wish to taste such 
pleasure and IJ also will make merry amidst my 


children.” 

sania =| Ms aT oIfaeneT: 
Fragen: Set MMA UAT 2 VI 

Having thus resolved, the Muni came up 
hastily from the water and desirous of entering 
upon the condition of a householder, went to 
Mandhaté to demand one of his daughtcrs as 
his wife. 


SUT ae aT UT ARNT 
steaifer fra: paraaufae: aaftearan 
Rdparnistta a aut 
wees Fat wore faut: | 
4 afer: maa TAT: 
apes faqar: warn 2 
srasia waa gor: yfreat 
Nate Aet AAA: WAT: | 
faraferrafecrerdian- 
Saad Voreas Het ANI 
Wareagaera UAT BAM- 
Sarat AHaat za! wares 
aq meameaare fair 
TMATSS Weta Mag: 2 VN 
As soon as he was informed of the arrival 
of the sage, the king rose up from his throne, 


310 


offered him the customary libation and treated 
him with the most profound respect. Having 
taken a seat, Saubhari said to the Raja, "I have 
determined to marry : do you, king, give me 
one of your daughters as a wife : disappoint 
not my affection. It is not the practice of the 
princes of the race of Kakutstha to turn away 
from compliance with the wishes of those who 
come to them for succour. There are, O 
monarch, other kings of the earth to whom 
daughters have been born, but your family is 
above all renowned for observance of 
liberality in your donations to those who ask 
your bounty. You have, O prince, fifty 
daughters; give one of them to me, so that I 
may be relieved from the anxiety I suffer 
through fear that my suit may be denied." 


When Mandhaté heard this request and 
looked upon the person of the sage, emaciated 
by austerity and old age, he felt disposed to 
refuse his consent; but dreading to incur the 
anger and imprecation of the holy man, he was 
much perplexed and declining his head, was 
lost awhile in thought. 


ePTSATET 
AT! HAT A*afa farn- 
aaah T War fats) 
Asayaeal TAT Wa 
Hare A ate fer a MAN BGI 


The Rsi, observing his hesitation, said, "On 
what, O Raja, do you meditate? I have asked 
for nothing which may not be readily accorded 
: and what is there that shall be unattainable to 
you, if my desires be gratified by the damsel 
whom you must needs give to me?" 


QUYt Sara 


BY TA PTA: WAAAyaATaa TT 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


weaara 

way! srepeafiay, F Va Haat 
ahrefatsierar at:, wat ae wela 
Wes WEAR Apel 
Vara deanafedt a faa: fa at sfa, aaa 
fara srafifer aa ye yfefaca stet 
SAS ASTM: | aaelsaaafad: Tatu 
faqa axarnfats snpr afercanfitearn 2 6 11 

wang oma oafeamnift afar arena 
FATA VI 

ade 9 delfevadmenh «way | TUT 
ALATA ICU 


To this, the king, apprehensive of his 
displeasure, answered and said, "Grave sir, it 
is the established usage of our house to wed 


_ our daughters to such persons only as they 


shall themselves select from suitors of fitting 
rank; and since this your request is not yet 
made known to my maidens, it is impossible 
to say whether it may be equally agreeable to 
them as it is to me. This is the occasion of my 
perplexity and I am at a loss what to do." This 
answer of the king was fully understood by the 
Rsi, who said to himself, "This is merely a 
device of the Raj4 to evade compliance with 
my suit : he has reflected that 1 am an old man, 
having no attractions for women and not likely 
to be accepted by any of his daughters : even 
be it so; I will be a match for him:" and he 
then spoke aloud and said, "Since such is the 
custom, mighty prince, give orders that I be 
admitted into the interior of the place. 


aie aaa aifaanatresit, aed arated 
se UAT Waal 
BTCA FATT 


Should any of the maidens your daughters 
be willing to take me for a bridegroom, I will 
have her for my bride; if no one be willing, 
then let the blame attach alone to the years that 
I have numbered." Having thus spoken, he was 
silent. 


BOOK IV, 2 


31 





aaa ARTE yrnigisdl aT grasa: 
WAT: SITY waa warfacafag- 
THATS as BIT) yaya a 
apf: YTauaTeT:; HAG: We, Wadiat wafaar 


“Away, away, sister!" said each to the 
other; "this is my election, he is my choice; he 
is not a meet bridegroom for you; he has been 
created by Brahma on purpose for me, as I 
have been created in order to become his wife 


Wanna: Wararaate, TIT Gey: waif : he has been chosen by me before you; you 


arard:, War arer witad, Bae war 
aifae wast arafd, dase ae ue 
aftentt; sernud weal Ua at: Hee: ATT 
we: « twa gargeofe aghreneftrenar 
FTA RTA 2 3 1 


Mandhata, unwilling to provoke the 
indignation of the Muni, was accordingly 
obliged to command the eunuch to lead the 
sage into the inner chambers; who, as he 
entered the apartments, put on a form and 
features of beauty far exceeding the personal 
charms of mortals or even of heavenly spirits. 
His conductor, addressing the princesses, said 
to them, "Your father, young ladies, sends you 
this pious sage, who has demanded of him a 
bride; and the R4jé has promised him, that he 
will not refuse him any one of you who shall 
choose him for her husband." When the 
damsels heard this and looked upon the person 
of the Rsi, they were equally inspired with 
passion and desire and like a troop of female 
elephants disputing the favours of the master 
of the herd, they all contended for the choice. 

ae aftreantsefad gona 
qa War Ae AATAT: | 
ava wat afte gp: 


GREAT WATE 3 oN! 

wé fasta fagara farm 
Tar wate fafa 

ceerreqeenfera yar 3 21 
wat J Walfiredta erate 

Sa: A areata: | 
aera aeferpat FWA 

aaraeras farrart: 3 21 


have no right to prevent his becoming my 
husband." In this way arose a violent quarrel 
amongst the daughters of the king, each 


‘ insisting upon the exclusive election of the Rs 


i; and as the blameless sage was thus 
contended for by the rival princess, the 
superintendent of the inner apartments, with a 
downcast look, reported to the king what had 
occurred. 


Taig ae wR 
piqgecaaesy weft: wae wa at: wean: 


a 


weyrarat = UTeeT: «= WT aTeT: 
Taeeatn 3 311 
adarqfeaasratyreatasrararal easy 


wa 
afgrerarqi 3 x1 

aa wafion dhiongeayg Wasa 
TST ERATED I 3 4 1 

TAS ATTRACT TAT TATRA TE 
Tey at: fertiersferay wTaTATy: 11 3 & Ut 


Perplexed more that ever by _ this 
information, the Raja exclaimed, "What is all 
this! and what am I to do now! What is it that I 
have said!” and at last, although with extreme 
reluctance, he was obliged to agree that the Rs 
i should marry all his daughters. Having then 
wedded, agreeably to law, all the princesses, 
the sage took them home to his habitation, 
where he employed the chief of architects, 
Visvakarman, equal in taste and skill to 
Brahma himself, to construct separate palaces 
for each of his wives; he ordered him to 


312 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





provide each building with elegant couches 
and seats and furniture and to attach to them 
gardens and groves, with reservoirs of water, 
where the wild-duck and the swan should sport 
amidst beds of lotus flowers. The divine artist 
obeyed his injunctions and_ constructed 
splendid apartments for the wives of the Rst; 
in which by command of Saubhari, the 
inexhaustible and divine treasure called 
Nanda”! took up his permanent abode and the 
princesses entertained all their guests and 
dependants with abundant viands of every 
description and the choicest quality. 


wnat gy gleqeemeeca: a vetofafi 
gta: gan a sit fafa wea 
Teta arayraii Bnfearah 
WATS TATATHN MTA SEH 319 11 

Wasa Wh wrorement uftesr pdreufiae: 
WAAC AAAS TANT 3 CII 

aT at wae: Ward fafyeqay sft a 
Tet: Wear, st Werkiseqygarna? sept 
caver firercare- ara! atfrgraccoita: cl 


Wars Wat: 
waa «| MeRAY, «aie at a 
ayes areata? ASTATSACASa- 


afTSNTA 3 eI 


After some period had elapsed, the heart of 
king Mandhatri yearned for his daughters and 
he left solicitous to know whether they were 
happily circumstanced. Setting off therefore 
on a visit to the hermitage of Saubhari, he 
beheld upon his arrival a row of beautiful 
crystal palaces, shining as brilliantly as the 
rays of the sun and situated amidst lovely 
gardens and reservoirs of pellucid water. 
Entering into one of these magnificent palaces, 
he found and embraced a daughter and said to 
her, as the tears of affection and delight 
trembled in his eyes, "Dear child, tell me how 
it 18 with you. Are you happy here? Or not? 


Does the great sage treat you with tenderness? 
or do you revert with regret to your early 
home?" The princess replied, "You behold, my 
father, how delightful a mansion I inhabit, 
surrounded by lovely gardens and lakes, where 
the lotus blooms and the wild swans murmur. 
Here I have delicious viands, fragrant 
unguents, costly ornaments, splendid raiment, 
soft beds and every enjoyment that affluence 
can procure. Why then should I call to 
memory the place of birth? To your favour am 
I indebted for all that I possess. 


fag wrath geno, aceranbaaien 
faa ata aaemiicar aitvert, araai 
weir, was wm wen ¢:fam 
sean: Gary, samen fart werequer 
wera wtesifaredta yar aay we 
qatay Waeguirgenem! wa tac 
wad wRramesitairerane gar 
VATA, TT wade wat wre wae, 
aie aafiea:  uftdufaaratrnfaarecat 
Aad UafWartahaagquar KHUENS TaN ¥ o 


I have only one cause of anxiety, which is 
this; my husband is never absent from my 
dwelling : solely attached to me, he is always 
at my side; he never goes near my sisters; and 
I am concerned to think that they must feel 


mortified by his neglect; the only 
circumstance that gives me uneasiness." 
Proceeding to visit another of his 


daughters, the king, after embracing her and 
sitting down, made the same inquiry and 
received the same account of the complaint, 
that the Rsi was wholly devoted to her and 
paid no attention to her sisters. In every place 
Mandhatri heard the same story from each of 
his daughters in reply to his questions; and 
with a heart overflowing with wonder and 
delight he repaired to the wise Saubhari, 
whom he found alone and after paying homage 
to him, thus addressed him : 


qa wie qrene fatigued Jafar 


BOOK IV, 2 


313 





farttanaea: weft agit ata a 
arent we fafsq anemia gy, 
TANTS SATII & VI 

"Holy sage, I have witnessed this your 
marvellous power; you like miraculous 
faculties I have never known any other to 
possess. How great is the reward of your 
devout austerities! Having thus saluted the 
sage and been received by him with respect, 
the Raja resided with him for some time, 
partaking of the pleasures of the place and 
then returned to his capital. 


aay Tes A Wey ag gay 
agtaq| «86 deadfaqracete: «sree 
WAMNHVESAS AAT ¥ 2 

VaIsMAT: Hens: TaN wady:1 seat 
aarat wagq:, sft arena wea, saat 
Gat May:, se aA yranfany way? 
Waar rerg feranrer aa hag itera 


USTATATATAT & 3 11 
Bal HASAN: | 


In the course of time the daughters of 
Mandhatri bore to Saubhari a hundred and 
fifty sons and day by day his affection for his 
children became more intense and his heart 
was wholly occupied with the sentiment of 
self.* "These my sons," he loved to think, 
"will charm me with their infant prattle; then 
they will learn to walk; they will then grow up 
to youth and to manhood : J shall see them 
married and they will have children; and I may 
behold the children of those children." By 
these and similar reflections, however, he 
perceived that his anticipation’s every day 
outstripped the course of time and at last he 
exclaimed, "What exceeding folly is mine! 


wala + aarfater 
autgenia aarexerat: | 
yorg yulg Parry 
SUNT: AT AAAI & ¥ II 


There is no end to my desires. Though all I 
hope should come to pass for ten thousand or a 
hundred thousand years, still new wishes 
would spring up. 

Usa WaT Baa Sa 
alter Warnfaa: Wy: | 
Gel: Garena 
BB Prasat ASAT YG II 

When I have seen my infants walk; when I 
have beheld their youth, their manhood, their 
marriage, their progeny; still my expectations 
are unsatisfied and my soul yearns to behold 
the descendants of their descendants. 


weata aerate aq walt 
TA A faa AAIS=T: | 

quite Aare AAT 
Frareaia that Warren ¥ & I 


Shall I even see them some other wish will 
be engendered; and when that is accomplished, 
how is the birth of fresh desire to be 
prevented? 


at Bega Aa Waar- 
Tanster fagrafre war a 
TaRarakaarer fei 
Tad & WETeTaSII vel! 


1 have at last discovered that there is no end 
to hope, until it terminates in death; and that 
the mind which is perpetually engrossed by 
expectation, can never be attached to the 
supreme spirit. 


@ 9 wafesierarafis- 
WTA UE Weds ATs 
Uae: UPA AAs 
ufererensy Terie: Xo 


My mental devotions, while immersed in 
water, were interrupted by attachments to my 
friend the fish. The result of that connection 
was my marriage; and insatiable desires are 
the consequences of my married life. 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





Qavadgcitad ALN eI 


The pain attendant upon the birth of my 
single body, 1s now augmented by the cares 
attached to fifty others and is _ further 
multiplied by the numerous children whom 
the princesses have borne to me. 


dan 


The sources of affliction will be repeatedly 
renewed by their children and by their 
espousals and by their progeny and will be 
infinitely increased : a married life is a mine 
of individual anxiety. 

Sof aah ag erst 

aeafter aTaSATT: | 
We UsiataT a 7 

Gerfearn yfsetster Ty Vl 

My devotions, first disturbed by the fish of 
the pool, have since been obstructed by 
temporal indulgence and I have been beguiled 
by that desire for progeny which was 
communicated to me by association with 
Sammada. Separation from the world is the 
only path of the sage to final liberation : from 
commerce with mankind innumerable errors 
proceed. 

Raga yard att 

agree: wrafer eter: | 
SMBSAMSHT FUTAAST: 

Fer art faqereafafe: ny 2 


The ascetic who has accomplished a course 
of self-denials falls from perfection by 
contracting worldly attachments : how much 
more likely should one so _ fall whose 
observances are incomplete? 


are Uftenty aarerlse 
Ufeereare Tera es: 
aan fe ya: aftérorerat 
wre gaia A eet & all 
wae araITAferTETT- 
UnNotaraafaraITy| 
faataarsadiatron- 
areata arate faa & XII 


My intellect has been a pray to the desire of 
married happiness; but I will now so exert 
myself for the salvation of my soul, that, 
exempt from human imperfections, I may be 
exonerated from human sufferings. To that 
end I will propitiate, by arduous penance, Vis 
nu, the creator of the universe, whose form is 
inscrutable, who is smaller than the smallest, 
large than the largest, the source of darkness 
and of light, the sovereign god of gods. 

dha wean. 
VIA HAART | 
waract forrataele 
Bary FAOVaTayy WANG GI 

On his everlasting body, which both 
discrete and indiscreet substance, illimitably 
mighty and identical with the universe may 


my mind, wholly free from sin, be ever 
steadily intent, so that I may be born no more. 


Rope Csubs Gl (ote (ei rete Boal ta 
Ae TSAT HAT 

were faery TAs Watt 
Te ye Was Fay € 1 

neta faaygaet agaist faite: sara: 

To him I fly for refuge; to that Visnu, who 
is the teacher of teachers, who is one wiil all 
beings, the pure eternal lord of all, without 
beginning, middle or end and besides whom is 
nothing." 

NOTES 


1. According to the Vayu, the brothers of 
Raivata founded a celebrated race called Saryata, 


BOOK IV, 2 


315 





from Saryati. The Brahma Purana says they took 
refuge in secret places (gahana); for which the Hari 
Varhsa substitutes (parvata gana) mountains. Thc 
Vayu has neither and says merely that they were 
renowned in all regions : faera fay eata | 

2. So the Vayu, Linga, Agni, Brahma and Hari 
Vamsa. The Matsya names three sons of Dhrsta, 
Dhrstaketu, Citranitha and Ranadhrsta. The 
Bhagavata adds, that thc sons of Dhrsta obtained 
Brahmanhood upon earth, though born Ksatriyas : 
TRISTAN, art Tes Ae fara 

3. But who is Nabhaga ? for, as above observed, 
e. I. n. 2, the son of the Manu is Nabhaga-nedista 
and there is in that ease no such person as Nabhaga 
: on the other hand, if Nabhaga and Nedista be 
distinet names, we have ten sons of Vaivasvata, as 
in the Bhagavata. The deseendants of Nedista, 
through his son Nabhaga, have been already 
specified; and aftcr all, therefore, we must consider 
the text as intending a distinct person by the name 
Nabh4ga; and such a name does occur in the lists of 
the Agni, Kirma, Matsya and Bhagavata, 
unquestionably distinet from that with whieh it is 
also sometimes compounded. The Bhagavata 
repeats the legend of the Aitareya Brahmana with 
some additions and says that Nabhaga having 
protracted his period of study beyond the usual age, 
his brothers appropriated his share of the 
patrimony. On his applying for his portion, they 
consigned their father to him, by whose advice he 
assisted the descendants of Angiras in a sacrifice 
and they presented him with all the wealth that was 
left at its termination. Rudra claimed it as his; and 
Nabhaga aequiescing, the god eonfirmed the gift, 
by which he became possessed of an equivalent for 
the loss of territory. Most of the authorities 
recognise but one name here, variously read either 
Nabh4ga or Nabh4ga, the father of Ambarisa. The 
Vayu, as well as the Bhagavata, concurs with the 
text. 

4. The Bhagavata eonsiders Ambarisa as a king, 
who reigned apparently on thc banks of the 
Yamuna. He is more celebrated as a devout 
worshipper of Visnu, whose discus protected him 
from the wrath of Durvasas and humbled that 
cholerie saint, who was a portion of Siva : a legend 
whieh possibly reeords a struggle between two 
seets, in which the votaries of Visnu, headed by 
Ambarisa, triumphed. 


5. The Agni, Brahma and Matsya stop with 
Ambarisa. The Vayu and Bhagavata proceed as in 
the text, only the latter adds to Virtpa, Ketumat and 
Sambhu. 

6. The same verse is cited in the Vayu and 
affords an instance of a mixture of eharaeter, of 
whieh several similar eases oeeur subsequently. Ks 
atriyas by birth, become Brahmanas by profession; 
and such persons are usually eonsidered as 
Angirasas, followers of deseendants of Angiras, 
who may have founded a sehool of warrior-priests. 
This is the obvious purpose of the legend of 
Nabhaga's assisting the sons of Angiras to complete 
their saerifice, referred to in a former note, 
although the same authority has devised a different 
explanation. Rathinara (or Rathitara, as read in 
some eoplies, as well as by the Bhagavata and 
Vayu) being childless, Angiras begot on his wife 
sons radiant with divine glory, who as the sons of 
the monarch by his wife were Ksatriyas, but were 
Brahmanas through their aetual father. . This 
however is an after thought, not warranted by the 
memorial verse eited in our text. 

7. So the Bhagavata : Yaceq FANS Zearputom: 
aa: | 

8. The Matsya says that Indra (Devarat) was 
bor as Vikuksi and that Iksvaku had one hundred 
and fourtcen others sons, who were kings of the 
countries south of Meru; and as many who reigned 
north of that mountain. The Vayu and most of the 
other authoritics agree in the number of one 
hundred, of whom fifty, with Sakuni at their head, 
are placed in the north; and forty-eight in the south, 
according to the Vayu, of whom Vimati was the 
chief. The same authority specifies also Nimi and 
Danda as sons of Iksvaku, as does the Bhagavata, 
with the addition of their reigning in the central 
regions. The distribution of the rest in that work is 
twenty-five in the west, as many in the east and the 
rest elsewhere; that is, the commentator adds, north 
and south. It seems very probably that by these 
sons of Iksvaku we are to understand eolonies or 
settlers in various parts of India. 

9. See Bk. HI. Ch. XIV. 

10. The Vayu states that he was king of 
Ayodhya, after the death of Iksvaku. The story 
Oeeurs in all the authorities, more or less in detail. 

Il. The Vayu says it was in the war of the 
starting and the stork; 3mélae 4S! a confliet 


316 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





between Vasistha and Visvadmitra, metamorphosed 
into birds, according to the Bhagavata; but that 
work assigns it to a different period or the reign of 
Hariscandra. If the tradition have any import, it 
may refer to the ensigns of the contending parties; 
for banners, with armorial devices, were, as we 
learn from the Mahabh4rata, invariably borne by 
princes and leaders. 

12. The Bhagavata adds, that he captured the city 
of the Asuras, situated in the west; when his name 
Parafijaya, ‘victor of the city:' he is also termed 
Paranjaya, ‘vanquisher of foes;' he is also called 
Indravaha, ‘borne by Indra’. 

13. Suyodhana : Matsya, Agni, Karma. 

14. Visvaka : Linga, Visvagandhi; Bhagavata 
Vistarasva; Brahma Purana and Hari Varhsa. 

15. Andhra; Vayu, Ayu; Agni, Candra; 
Bhagavata. 

16. Savasta and Savasti : Bhagavata, Sravasti; 
Matsya, Linga and Kitirma, which also say that 
Sravastl was in the country of Gaura, which is 
Eastern Bengal; but it is more usually placed in 
Kosala by which a part of Avadha is commonly 
understood. In my Dictionary I have inserted 
Sravantl, upon the authority of the Trikanda Sesa, 
but it is no doubt an error for Srivasti; it is there 
also called Dharmapattana, being a city of some 
sanctity in the estimation of the Buddhists. It is 
termed by Fa-Hian, She-wei; by Hwan Tsang, She- 
lo-va-si-ti; and placed by both nearly in the site of 
Faizabad in Avadha. Account of the Foe-kue-ki. 

17. This legend is told in much more detail in the 
Vayu and Brahma Puranas. Dhundhu hid himself 
beneath a sea of sand, which Kuvalydsva and his 
sons dug up, undeterred by the flames which 
checked their progress and finally destroyed most 
of them. The legend originates probably in the 
occurrence of some physical phenomenon, as an 
earthquake or volcano. 

18. The series of names agrees very well to 
Sanhatasva, called Varhnasva in the Bhagavata. We 
have there some variations and some details not 
noticed in our text. The Vayu, Brahma, Agni, 
Linga, Matsya and Karma, ascribe two sons to 
Sanhatasva, whom the two first name Krisasva and 
Akrisasva and the rest Krisaésva and Randasva. 
Senajit or Prasenjit is generally, though not always, 
termed the son of the younger brother; but the 
commentator on the Hari VarhSa calls him the son 


of Sanhatasva, while the Matsya, Agni, Linga and 
Kirma omit him and make Mandhatri the son of 
Ranasva. The mother of Prasenyit and the wife of 
Akrsasva or Sanhatasva, according to the different 
interpretations, was the daughter of Himavat, 
known as Drsadvati, the river so termed (Bk. II. Ch. 
III. n. 7). The wife of Yuvandsva, according to the 
Vapu or of Prasenajit, according to the Brahma, 
was Gauri, the daughter of Rantinara, who 
incurring the imprecation of her husband, became 
the Bahuda river (Bk. II. Ch. III. n. 6). The Brahma 
and Hari VamsSa ca]Jl Yuvanasva her son; but in 
another place the Hari Varsa contradicts itself, 
calling Gauri the daughter of Matimara, of the race 
of Puru, the mother of Mandhatri; here following 
apparently the Matsya, in which it is so stated. The 
Brahma Purana is not guilty of the inconsistency. 
The Vayu of course gives the title to Mandhatri, 
with the addition that he was called Gaurika, after 
his mother : Wag MWe: Yaswadl aya e1 AreM 
aera ot aerate a1 Mandhatri's birth from 
Gauri is the more remarkable, as it is incompatible 
with the usual legend given in our text and in the 
Bhagavata, which seems therefore to have been of 
subsequent origin, suggested by the etymology of 
the name. In the Bhagavata, M&ndhatri is also 
named Trasadasyu or the terrifier or thieves. 

19. The Vayu cites this same verse and another, 
with the remark, that they were uttered by those 
acquainted with the Puranas and with een 

Groftrent fast: | ara seat 
Wa Ta) Mewes APE: § aaa 
sarge veh awfael wa aad veer 
Taafadars | Arerant aa fare: yer: wWerera 

20. The Brahma and Agni omit Ambarisa, for 
whom the Matsya substitutes Dharmasena. The 
following legend of Saubhari occurs elsewhere 
only in the Bhagavata and there less in detail. 

21. The great Nidhi : a Nidhi is a treasure, of 
which there are several belonging to Kubera; each 
has its guardian spirit or is personified. 

22. Of Mamata, 'mineness' (S48); the notion that 
wives, children, wealth, belong to an individual and 
are essential to his happiness. 

eK 


BOOK IV, 3 


CHAPTER 3 


Tararseara: 


TAU Ul WaT TAIT AN 20 
STAM Tg eT AAMT 3 


asad daftahagents watt sureaarcate, 
TNS STA at Aas waa 


ayeag at aad 3 wad sit wren: 
Urea ere YN 


Having thus communed with himself, 
Saubhari abandoned his children, his home 
and all his splendour and accompanied by his 
wives, entered the forest, where he daily 
practised the observances followed by the 
ascetics termed Vaikhanasas (or anchorites 
having families), until he had cleansed himself 
from all sin. When his intellect had attained 
maturity, he concentrated in his spirit the 
sacramental fires’ and became a religious 
mendicant. Then having consigned all his acts 
to the supreme, he obtained the condition of 
Acyuta, which knows no change and is not 
subject to the vicissitudes of _ birth, 
transmigration or death. Whoever reads or 
hears or remembers or understands, this 
legend of Saubhari and his espousal of the 
daughters of Mandhatri, shall never, for eight 
successive births, be addicted to evil thoughts 
not shall he act unrighteously, nor shall his 
mind dwell upon improper objects, not shall 
he be influenced by selfish attachments. The 
line of Mandhata is now resumed. 


317 


ANT WANG Fa: Walsugy TANT 
Bite: , Basa ATLA GN 
The son of Ambarisa, the son of Mandhata, 
was Yuvanadsva; his son was Harita,’? from 
whom the Angiras Haritas were descended.’ 


Tardet Tra ama Teaqat: 


APART 9 I 


In the regions below the earth the 
Gandharvas called Mauneyas (or sons of the 
Muni Kasyapa), who were sixty millions in 
number, had defeated the tribes of the Nagas 
or snake-gods and seized upon their most 
precious jewels and usurped their dominion. 
Deprived of their power by the Gandharvas, 
the serpent chiefs addressed the god of the 
gods, as he awokc from his slumbers; and the 
blossoms of his lotus eyes opened while 
listening to their hymns. They said, "Lord, 
how shall we be delivered from this great 
fear?” Then replied the first of males, who is 
without beginning, I will enter into the person 
of Purukutsa, the son of Mandhatri, the son of 
YuvanaSva and in him will I quiet these 
iniquitous Gandharvas." 


serand Yad HANOI: = Yaareteaarne: 
UAT AHS VERMA BAAS: I é Il 


On hearing these words, the snake-gods 
bowed and withdrew and returning to their 
country dispatched Narmada to solicit the aid 


of Purukutsa.* 
mM owt wad 9 daadti camer 
WAMTAANAaAaRA; WHAT WaT, Tray 


USUI Weed aad at ae: 


318 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





aesTeUaad Ae ates, Ter AUfeaTs 
qt afaeratfai ei 
St Fors: 
aqalert AW: waders zat fate 
AMISee AHS Geet war Ut ferrarda: 
SHEA ATA BT A APTA Qo 
7 wit Hager faeata qyayoaas 


_ 
GQ Wad: Wafafaader 
Fh AEE Ye ON 


Narmada aecordingly went to Purukutsa 
and condueted him to the regions below the 
earth, where, being filled with the might of the 
deity, he destroyed the Gandharvas. He then 
returned to his own palaee; and the snake- 
gods, in acknowledgement of Narmada's 
serviees, conferred upon her as a blessing, that 
whosoever should think of her and invoke her 
name, should ncver have any dread of the 
venom of snakes. This is the invocation; 
"Salutation be to Narmada in the morning; 
salutation be to Narmada at night; salutation 
be to you, O Narmada! Defend me from the 
serpent's poison." Whoever repeats this day 
and night, shall never be bitten by a snake in 
the dark nor in entering a ehamber; nor shall 
be who ealls it to mind when he cats suffer my 
injury from poison, though it be mixed with 
his food. To Purukutsa also the snake-gods 
announced that the series of his dcscendants 
should never be eut off. 

THR Waa TAPAS 

waeyga: U:, adisawa:, ¢ Tart 
fefased Tal SWAT yae:, YA were: 


7 


qatswaq acer GAT: areata 
FRAT: 1 93 At 


Ta West sa fayeH daa, 
DUSTHAT aT Blavraneeranrarg wat 


Purukutsa had a son by Narmada& named 
Trasadasyu, whose son was Sambhiita,” whose 
son was Aranya, who was slain by Ravana in 
his triumphant progress through the nations. 
The son of Aranya was Prsadasva; his son was 
Haryyasva; his son was Sumanas;° his son was 
Tridhanvan; his son was Trayyaruna; and his 
son was Satyavrata, who obtained the 
appellation of Trisafku and was degraded to 
the condition of a Candala or outcast.’ During 
a twelve years’ famine Trisanku provided the 
flesh of deer for the nourishment of the wife 
and children of Visvamitra, suspending it upon 
a spreading fig-tree on the borders of the 
Ganges, that the might not subjeet them to the 
indignity of receiving presents from an 
outcast. On this aceount ViSvamitra, being 
highly pleased with him, elevated him in his 
living body to heaven." 


fayearenars:, wen wieary:, ar sftt:, 
hamgy:, watfara-gedht coat fas, wane 
a gm:, ad aes Asal seanentgrfaty- 
Tafadisatedoat aise ae at wereer 24 1 

TAM VIM whee wy sa: are mM: 
a waaniit wat wa wet aw a 


AEF SMAC AAMT ATT LE II 

a wa wat fart ger ater. 
Haryana sTATAdaraaar a eateraat 
Ward: Wenresmifatagdi, serdar 
ware, «= aifaenauserafarctadteratants 1a- 
aAaUiaata Adlet what fash da Aa 
memaaaant wat Wag, saw WA UW 
aerate aT Yo tt 


The son of Triganku was Harigcandra;” his 
son was Rohitagva;'° his son was Harita;'' his 
son was Cuncu,’? who had two sons named 
Vijaya and Sudeva. Ruruka'* was the son of 
Vijaya and his own son was Vrka, whose son 
was Bahu (or Bahuka). This prinee was 


Fan ftrreetaracattenned augreanfaxeuftezora wy Vanquished Dy the tribe of Haihayas and 


Baa He WTAATAGet TART Vv 
ukasa a fauritan were: eeifaa: | 


Talajanghas'* and his country was overrun by 
them; in eonsequenee of whieh he fled into the 


BOOK IV, 3 


319 





forests with his wives. One of these was 
pregnant and being an object of jealously to a 
rival queen, the latter gave her poison to 
prevent her delivery. The poison had the effect 
of confining the child in the womb for sever 
years. Bahu, having waxed old, died in the 
neighbourhood of the residence of the Muni 
Aurva, His queen having constructed his pile, 
ascended it with the determination of 
accompanying him in death; but the sage 
Aurva, who knew all things, past, present and 
to come, issued forth from his hermitage and 
forbade her, saying, “Hold! hold! This is 
unrighteous; a valiant prince, the monarch of 
many realms, the offerer of many sacrifices, 
the destroyer of his foes, a universal emperor, 
is in your womb; think not of committing so 
desperate an act!" Accordingly, in obedience 
to his injunctions she relinquished her 
intention. 

ata Waa Taian aftrateaant a Wea 
wt Tunas aetal Wa aeAlat aanmnifeat 
feat freer ant sfa am wan Hataasaatat 
am oymaneaanfir arasrmd anfare- 
HETTITATa | 

The sage then conducted her to his abode 
and after some time a very splendid boy was 
there born. Along with him the poison that had 
been given to his mother was expelled; and 
Aurva, after pcrforming the ceremonies 
required at birth, gave him on that account the 
name of Sagara (from Sa, 'with' and Gara, 
'poison'). The same holy sage celebrated his 
investiture with the cord of his class, 
instructed him fully in the Vedas and taught 
him the use of arms, especially those of fire, 
called after Bhargava. 


TUM AMMA, sta! aynA ay? aq 
al ad: ? adaiswaich G:? selante yasa: aaa 
wana! «odd: fagasaecorafda §=— dearer 
wgicanra wham wes tea wer 
BITTE ATs SH 


wa afgel saya Heat wa, aa! 
ar! sera frefttaagaa ga: 28H 


When the boy had grown up and was 
capable of reflection, he said to his mother one 
day, "Why are we dwelling in this hermitage? 
Where is my father? and who is he?" His 
mother, in reply, related to him all that had 
happened. Upon hearing which he was highly 
incensed and vowed to recover his patrimonial 
kingdom and exterminate the Haihayas and 
Talajanghas, by whom it had been over-run. 
Accordingly when he became a man he put 
nearly the whole of the Haihayas to death and 
would have also destroycd the Sakas, the 
Yavanas, Kambojas, Paradas and Pahnavas'>, 
but that they applied to Vasistha, the family 
priest of Sagara, (or protection Vasistha 
regarding them as annihilated (or deprived of 
power), though living, thus spoke to Sagara: 
"Enough, enough, my son, pursue no further 
these objects of your wrath, whom you may 
look upon as no more. 


GW Ww owe waiter fro 
AACA BILAT: th Bot 

a cafe daar dat ayraranana 
aaa Ufosafora: QUST, Wea 
Wer, wedi wey Pearamarceanrt 
Wray afaigen & a faechiteann 
wea our meat ag) =|6owTisfa 
wera «steaiotas: «= aaetradifrareaf 
WITS AH 2 QU 

sta faapgeot agaist gata: sears: | 

In order to fulfil your vow I have scparated 
them from affinity to the regenerate tribes and 
from the duties of their castes.'° Sagara, in 
compliance with the injunctions of his 
spiritual guide, contented himself therefore 
with imposing upon the vanquished nations 
peculiar distinguishing marks. He made the 
Yavanas shave (the upper) halt of their heads; 
the Paradas wore their hair long; and the 


Pahnavas let their beards grow. In obedience 
to his commands.'’ Then also and other Ks 


320 


atriya races, he deprived of the established 
usages of oblations to fire and the study of the 
Vedas; and thus separated from religious rites 
and abandoned by the Brahmanas, these 
different tribes became Mlecchhas. Sagara, 
after the recovery of his kingdom, reigned 
over the seven-zoned earth with undisputed 
dominion”. 
KE 


NOTES 


1. So Manu, "Having reposited, as the law 
directs, the holy fires in his breast," VI.25. 

2. The Vayu, Linga, Kirma and Bhagavata agree 
in this series; the others omit it. 

3. The words of the text are, TfEftal adisisral 
eta: | and the commentator explains the phrase, 
‘the Angiras Brahmanas, of whom the Harita family 
was the chief.' The Linga reads, Ra qaqraea BRA 
Gd ACM: | Ta areraqa erate festa: i! “Harita was 
the son of Yuvandasva, whose sons were the Haritas; 
they were on the part (or followers) of Angiras and 
were Brahmanas with the properties of Ksatrtyas.' 
The Vayu has, @Ral Gana el yaya: 1 wa 
aera: Tar: earrat fesmda: i "Harita was the son of 
Yuvanasva, from whom were many called Haritas; 
they were sons of Angiras and Brahmanas with the 
properties of Ksatriyas.' The Bhagavata has only, 
araqyat 41 These (Ambarisa, Purukutsa and 
Harita) were, according to Sridhara Svami's 
comments, the chiefs of Mandhatri's descendants, 
being founders of three several branches; or it may 
mean, he says, merely that they had Mandhatn for 
their progenitor, Mandhatri being by some also 
named Angiras, according to Asvalayana. It may be 
questioned if the compilers of the Puranas or their 
annotators, knew exactly what to make of this and 
similar phrases, although they were probably 
intended to intimate that some persons of Ksatriya 
origin became the disciples of certain Brahmanas, 
particularly of Angiras and afterwards founders of 
schools of religious instruction themselves. 
Mandhatri himself is the author of a hymn in the 
Rgveda. As. Res. VIII.385. Harita is the name of an 
individual sage, considered as the son of Cyavana 
and to whom a work on law is attributed. It is 
probably rather that of a school, however, than of 
an individual. 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


4, Narmada, the personified Narmada river, was 
according to the Bhagavata, the sister of the Nagas. 

5. We have some varieties here. Instead of 
Trasadasyu the Matsya has Dussaha, whom it 
makes the husband of Narmada and father of 
Sambhiti, the father of Tridhanvan. The Bhagavata 
omits Samhiiti; the Linga makes him the brother of 
Trasadasyu; and the Agni has in his place 
Sudhanvan. 

6. Vrsadasva : Vayu. The Matsya, Agni and 
Brahma omit all between Sambhita and 
Tridhanvan. The Bhagavata has a rather different 
series or Aranya, Haryyasva, Aruna, Tribandhana, 
Triganku. As Anaranya is famous in Hindu story 
and Trayyaruna is a contributor to the Rgveda, their 
Omission shows careless compilation. 

7. The Vayu states he was banished by his father 
for his wickedness (Adharama). The Brahma 
Purana and Hari Varhsa details his iniquity at 
Iength; and it is told more concisely in the Linga. 
He carried off the betrothed wife of another man, 
one of the citizens according to the two former of 
Vidarbha according to the latter : for this, his 
father, by the advice of Vasistha, banished him and 
he took refuge with Svapakas. The Ramayana has a 
different story and ascribes Triganku's degradation 
to the curse of the sons of Vasistha, to whom the 
king had applied to conduct his sacrifice, after their 
father had refused to do so. Before that, he is 
described as a pious prince (Actaral fardea:) and 
the object of his sacrifice was to ascend to heaven. 

8. The occurrence of the famine and Satyavrata's 
care of the wife and family of Visvamitra, are told, 
with some variations, in the Vayu, which has been 
followed by the Brahma and Hari Varhsa. During 
the famine, when game fails he kills the cow of 
Vasistha; and for the three crimes of displeasing his 
father, killing a cow and eating flesh not previously 
consecrated, he acquires the name of Trisanku (tri, 
‘three’, Sanku, 'sin'). Vasistha refusing to perform 
his regal inauguration, Visvamitra celebrates the 
rites and on his death elevates the king in his mortal 
body to heaven. The Ramayana relates the same 
circumstance, but assigns to it a different motive. 
Visvamitra's resentment of the gods to attend 
Triganku sacrifice. That work also describes the 
attempt of the gods to cast the king down upon 
earth and the compromise between them and 
Visvamitra, by which Trisanku was left suspended, 


BOOK IV, 3 


321 





head downwards, in mid-air, forming a 
constellation in the southern hemisphere, along 
with other new planets and stars formed by 
Visvamitra. The Bhagavata has an allusion to this 
legend, saying that Trnsarku is still visible in 
heaven : senfa fefa gzadi The Vayu furnishes some 


further information from an older source 
qaftrm: aan faarfaraea 

fargfefa wad @a: we yeensqrerea ina 

Walt... LAT ora aguitean weteal 


fifrattfereaueyii Both my copies leave a 


blank where it is marked and similar passage does 
not elsewhere occur; but the word should probably 
be fa9M and the whole may be thus rendered : 'Men 
aquatinted with the Puranas recite these two 
stanzas; "By the favour of Visvamitra the illustrious 
Trisanku shines in heaven along with the gods, 
through the kindness of that sage. Slowly passes the 
lovely night in winter, embellished by the moon, 
decorated with three watches and ornaments with 
the constellation Triganku." This legend is therefore 
clearly astronomical and alludes possibly to some 
reformation of the sphere by Visvamitra, under the 
patronage of Trisanku and in opposition to a more 
ancient system advocated by the school of Vasistha. 
It might be no very rash conjecture perhaps, to 
identify Triganku with Orion, the three bright stars 
of whose belt may have suggested the three Sankus 
(stakes or pins) which form his name. 

9. The Pauranik lists generally dismiss 
Hariscandra very summarily, but he makes a 
conspicuous figure in legends of an apparently later 
date. In the Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, it is stated 
that he resides in the court of Indra, to which he 
was elevated for his performance of the Rajasiya 
sacrifice and for his unbounded liberality. This 
seems to have served as the ground work of the tale 
told in the Markandeya and Padma Puranas, of his 
having given his whole country, his wife and son 
and finally himself, to Visvamitra, in satisfaction of 
his demands for Daksina. In consequence he was 
elevated with his subjects to heaven, from when, 
having been insidiously led by Narada to boast of 
his merits, he was again precipitated. His 
repentance of his pride, however, arrested his 
downward descent and he and his train paused in 
mid-air. The city of Hariscandra is popularly 
believed to be at times still visible in the skies. The 
indignation of  Vasistha at  Visvamitra's 


insatiableness produced a quarrel, in which their 
mutual imprecations changed them to two birds, the 
Sarali, a sort of Turdus and the Vaka or Crane. In 
these forms they fought for a considerable term, 
until Brahma interposed and reconciled them. The 
Bhagavata alludes to this story, in its notice of 


; Hariscandra; but the Vayu refers the conflict to the 


reign of a different prince : see c. 2.n.11. According 
to the Siva Purana, Hariscandra was an especial 
worshipper of that deity; and his wife Satyavati was 
form of Jaya, one of Durga's handmaids. 

10. Also read Rohita. Traces of his name appear 
in the strongholds of Rohtas, in Bihar and in the 
Punjab. The Bhagavata has a legend of his having 
been devoted to Varuna, before his birth, by his 
father, who having on various pleas deferred 
offering his son as promised, was afflicted by a 
dropsy. Rohita at last purchased Sunahgephas, who 
was offered as a victim in his stead : see hereafter, 
note on Sunagephas. 

11, Omitted : Agni, Liiga and Matsya. 

12. Omitted : Agni, Dhundhu : Linga and 
Kirma. Campa, founder of Campamialini 
Bhagavata. But all other authorities make Campa a 
different person, a descendant of Anga : see family 
of Anu, of the lunar race. | 

13. Kuruka : Linga and Kirma. Bharuk : 
Bhagavata. 

14. Descendants of Yadu. The first springs from 
a prince who is the twelfth and the second from one 
who is the eighteenth, 1n the lunar line and both are 
thus contemporary with a prince who is the thirty- 
fifth of the solar dynasty. The Vayu adds, that they 
were assisted by Sakas, Yavanas, Kambojas, 
Paravas and Pahlavas. 

15, The Haihayas we shall have further occasion 
to notice. The Sakas are, no doubt, the Sacae or 
Sakai of the classical geographers, Scythians and 
Indo-Scythians, Turk of Tartar tribes, who 
established themselves, about a century and half 
before our era, along the western districts of India 
and who are not improbably connected with our 
Saxon forefathers. The Yavanas are the Ionians or 
Greeks. The Kambojas were a people on the north- 
west of India, of whom it is said that they were 
remarkable for a capital breed of horses. There is 
an apparent trace of their name in the Caumogees 
of Kaferistan, who may have retreated to the 
mountains before the advance of the Turk tribes. 


322 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





(Elphinstone's Caubul, 619 : see also before 
Bk. JJ.Ch.1J.n.146). The Paradas and Pahlavas or 
Pahnavas may designate other bordering tribes in 
the same that follows, the Bhadgavata enumerates 
Barbars. The Vayu adds Mahisikas, Caulas, Darvas 
and Khasas : the two former of which are people on 
the Malabar and Coromandal coasts; the two latter 
are usually placed amongst the mountaineers of the 
Hindukusa, The Brahma Purana lengthens the list 
with the Kolas, the forest races of eastern 
Gondvan4; the Sarpas and the Keralas, who are the 
people of Malabara. The Hari VarhSa still further 
extends the enumeration with the Tusaras or 
Tokharas, the Turks of Tokharestan; the Chinas, 
Chinese; the between the Ramayana particularly 
and the works of the era of Vikramaditya. It would 
seem more likely that the latter appellations were 
interpolated. It must have been a period of some 
antiquity, when all the nations from Bengal to the 
Coromandal coast were considered as Mlecchhas 
and outcasts. 
nk 


322 
CHAPTER 4 
Uqatseanra: 
(GPRETAAaS: WRT SAAT, 
Wea sesitaryeatas) 
UU SAT 
avarice quinfaaiaar a afer % ref 
ATTA 21 
anareracaetarad sited: uror | -aarferr 
START 2 UI 


Tent arenas IH sat af Yragarion 
wafer, wear defied Team sae alert 
yaaa, te yaa ufs ag aft a 
afroniied settaelfitananed am agai 
qarga afer farang quer: ot: 
YAMTATVINST) TATAAARAS YA ATT HAT 
WM 3 
Sumati the daughter of KaSyapa and Kesini 
the daughter of Raja Vidarbha, were the two 


wives of Sagara.’ Being without progeny, the 
king solicited the aid of the sage Aurva with 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


great earnestness and the Muni pronounced 
this boon, that one wife should bear one son, 
the upholder of his race and the other should 
give birth to sixty thousand sons; and he left it 
to them to make their election. Kesini chose to 
have the single son; Sumati the multitude : and 
it came to pass in a short time the former bore 
Asamanijas,” a prince through whom the 
dynasty continued and the daughter of Vinara 
(Sumati) had sixty thousand sons. The son of 
Asamanjas was Ansumat. 


ay wale aaa aateavadt frat Aas v1 
aad oats: 3 garagatar = saasrasyii- 
WTTH Wal 

Taree: «| anrteareragne- 
wart osmit tat: anefaemandapaste- 
aie: gaan afte sone 


eT: 1 GA 

waq! uf: 3 anadaransrasitaaprad, 
SAMIR as =| a 
TANST WAVY seus way ‘sett 
fetta faagara’ samarqn oi 


Asamanjas was from his boyhood of very 
irregular conduct. His father hoped that as he 
grew up to manhood he would reform; but 
finding that he continued guilty of the same 
immorality, Sagara abandoned him. The sixty 
thousand sons of Sagara followed the example 
of their brother Asamanjas. The path of virtue 
and piety being obstructed in the world by the 
sons of Sagara, the gods repaired to the Muni 
Kalpa, who was a portion of Visnu, free from 
fault and endowed with all true wisdom. 
Having approached him with respect, they 
said, "O lord, what will become of the world, 
if these sons of Sagara are permitted to go on 
in the evil ways which they have learned from 
Asamanjas! Do you, then, assume a visible 
form, for the protection of the afflicted 
universe.” "Be satisfied," replied the sage, "in 
a brief time the sons of Sagara shall be all 
destroyed." 


BOOK IV, 4 


323 





wart oa aM RaTTH 
waters «=6oasemert «= at —SOséfaaaé 
waar 61 
AAT LATATIT qa 
ictteniihinincicmcnwete agqar- 
ae GS BSAA ATEN 8 

ue out ufaremedaitraared = aay: 
Thea way  ynesahiia 
RR EC LG CCL ESIB A CALES IES BSI 
HUTT TTPATI Yo I 

aa ‘sera 9 agfaacaat 
eaeal wat wae’ farang acer Aare waa 
fafsdtaquitattactat facitfena: 
Tartagernttr cara fare: Vat 


At that period Sagara commenced the 
performance of the solemn sacrifice of a horse, 
who was guarded by his own sons 
nevertheless some one stole the animal and 
carried it off into a chasm in the earth. Sagara 
commanded his sons to search for the steed; 
and they, tracing him by the impressions of his 
hoofs, followed his course with perseverance, 
until coming to the chasm where he had 
entered, they proceeded to enlarge it and dug 
downwards each for a league. Coming to 
Patala, they beheld the horse wandering freely 
about and at no great distance from him they 
saw the Rsi Kapila sitting, with his head 
declincd in meditation and illuminating the 
surrounding space with radiance as bright as 
the splendours of the autumnal sun, shining in 
an unclouded sky. Exclaiming, "This is the 
villain who has maliciously interrupted our 
sacrifice and stolen the horse! Kill him! Kill 
him!" They ran towards him with uplifted 
weapons. The Muni slowly raised his eyes and 
for an instant looked upon them and they were 
reduced to ashes by the sacred flame that 


darted from his person.’ 

WISH ATTA ad Gaara 
Taare seni: Gay 
WSATATAN 82 


am a 87 weMaMio aterars ufarwrea4 


aa A Yea, Wh wate, wat framers 
maa, at goiter a ya! wae a wnie 
TPTAMASA AN 83 

sige  gaeueedamafagu «canta 
SPATE B11 | 

When Sagara learned that his sons, whom 
he had sent in pursuit of the sacrificial steed, 
had been destroyed by the might of the great 
Rsi Kapila, he dispatched Ansumat, the son of 
Asamanjas, to effect the animals’ recovery. 
The youth, proceeding by the deep path which 
the princes had dug, arrived where Kapila was 
and bowing respectfully, prayed to him and so 
propitiated him, that the saint said, "Go, my 
son, deliver the horse to your grandfather; and 
demand a boon; your grandson shall bring 


- down the river of heaven on the earth." 


Ansumat requested as a boon that his uncles, 
who had perished through the  sage's 
displeasure, might, although unworthy of it, be 
raised to heaven through his favour. 


qale Ta,- Tarde uted fafeare agi 
yannfaeiia  dasrat  dapmfereand 
rartranieatat| fe 
waned wa hacmirahedds eraeoni- 
TORT, arifira Raqerreeeorentie-roheg.- 
AMES wie wayufad wa: wif wef 


wag: «= TT TS ATT 
PUATARAAATTATL 2 1 
ansemmmet ¢ af wanam 


ATTA FAA HOTTA VEU 


"T have told you," replied Kapila, "that your 
grandson shall bring down upon earth the 
Ganges of the gods; and when her waters shall 
wash the bones and ashes of your grandfather's 
sons, they shall be raised to Svarga. Such 1s 
the efficacy of the stream that flows from the 
toe of Visnu, that it confers heaven upon all 
who bathe in it designediy or who even 
become accidentally immersed in it; those 


324 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





even shall obtain Svarga, whose bones, skin, 
fibres, hair or any other part, shall be left after 
death upon the earth which is contiguous to 
the Ganges." Having acknowledged 
reverentially the kindness of the sage, 
Ansumat returned to his grandfather and 
delivered to him the horse. Sagara, on 
recovering the steed, completed his sacrifice; 
and in affectionate memory of his sons, 
denominated Sagara the chasm which they had 
dug." | 
Tera facia: yasvaq fectrenti 
wike:, asd ugh eaiterita antheisi 
AAI V9! 

WT Yt, AeA ATT: | adlseraree:, 
wend fayge:, Teaga:, a ya wut 
TAMAS ACSAM SAT 26 I 


mquul-ya: waar) wea: Bera: Yara 


Maat FTASATATN 89 I 


The son of Angumat was Dilipa’; his son 
was Bhagiratha, who brought Ganga down to 
earth, whence she 1s called Bhagirathi. The son 
of Bhagiratha was Sruta®; his son was 
Nabhaga’; his son was Ambarisa; his son was 
Sindhudvipa; his son was Ayutasva*; his son 
was Rituparna, the friend of Nala, skilled 
profoundly in dice’; the son of Rituparna was 
Sarvakama"’: his son was Sudasa; his son was 
Saudasa, named also Mitrasaha.!! 


, As araceat WIT ATTAIN VAT 2 011 


MAS Aq STATA FAAI 2 Il 
OT dh AAW AAPM 2 VI 


Frerrorrarafasitronrs fer fren creat 
TRAAISHATHN 2 311 


fatrasfa owfafeear a afteanicqmaral 
TATU BU 


The son of Sudasa having gone into the 
woods to hunt, fell in with a couple of tigers, 
by whom the forest had been cleared of the 
deer. The king slew one of these tigers with an 
arrow. At the moment of expiring, the form of 
the animal was changed and it became that of 


a fiend of fearful figure and hideous aspect. Its 
companion, threatening the prince with its 
vengeance, disappeared. 


Ser TM A era arg vfeaat 
arta fem wet  afseacee 
waa wT ants ae cay, aq dferadt 
AUTEUR PTT I BG 
=aeaq! «stearate «ofewane fed arene 
Sf rSrrerTdents aC 2 & UI 

arraa a afgera faferayq, a uarfeadad, 
set! URS sien Waaarenas wares 
fatag qeamafatearais yA, SUVA 
THAT «AT lr | Taraafe 
aarsae wary Hea eal weadaa cite 
gheavifaerdtfan 291 

After some interval Saudasa celebrated a 
sacrifice, which was conducted by Vasistha. 
At the close of the rite Vasistha went out; 
when the R4ksasa, the fellow of the one that 
had been killed in the figure of a tiger, 
assumed the semblance of Vasistha and came 
and said to the king, "Now that the sacrifice is 
ended, you must give me flesh to eat; let it be 
cooked and I will presently return." Having 
said this, he withdrew and _ transforming 
himself into the shape of the cook, dressed 
some human flesh, which he brought to the 
king, who, receiving it on a plate of gold, 
awaited the reappearance of Vasistha. As soon 
as the Muni returned, the king offered to him 
the dish. Vasistha surprised at such want .of 
prosperity in the king, as his offering him meat 
to eat, considered what it should be that was so 
presented and by the efficacy of his meditation 
discovered that it was human flesh. His mind 
being agitated with wrath, he denounced a 
curse upon the Raja, saying, "Inasmuch as you 
have insulted all such holy men as we are, by 
giving me what is not to be eaten, your 
appetite shall henceforth be excited by similar 
food." 


BOOK IV, 4 


325 





sree afr unatafetetisaiens: fe 
qaartafeny sf gare weet weit 2c 


TSA TaN, ATA, 
Bape Wat aart afaerdifan 211 


"It was yourself," replied the Raja to the 
indignant sage, "who commanded this food to 
be prepared." "By me!" Exclaimed Vasistha; 
"how could that have been?" and again having 
recourse to meditation, he detected the whole 
truth. Foregoing then all displeasure towards 
the king, he said, "The food to which I have 
sentenced you shall not be your sustenance 
forever; it shall only be so for twelve years." 


srarafa og owyelearefe «6 afremoneratent 


Vasistha, the Raja became a cannibal every 
sixth watch of the day for twelve years and in 
that state wandered through the forests and 
devoured multitudes of men. 


wet 7 afrgfagedt aria we aA 
SasT 3 3 

wae «86 aNfaot Taacat = aT 
Warfadareracaaraot SAI 3 I 

wat: OW Ment agree afacadt, wale 
weapdcayed weNitara:, A Waa: 
Teta weaaiganita mapas wa TT; 
saa agrat wat feet om: wi 4 
TAOTARAAT I 3 & 1 


Waray: wed geared wa’ weniaranta seo 7 ws ‘wened 
faft wu wae wared:| wegen Tage oer naufeifat:, «= TET 


fate 3 oft 
aT MEAT srl aAcet aHeUTIAT- 
CeoC | 


AT A HEMMER, ASNT UE TATet 
Taare «=| wee = WUT 
WATATI 3 21 

The king, who had taken up water in the 
palms of his hands and was prepared to curse 
the Muni, now considered that Vasistha was 
his spiritual guide and being reminded by 
Madayanti his queen that it 111 became him to 
denounce an imprecation upon a holy teacher, 
who was the guardian divinity of his race, 
abandoned his intention. Unwilling to cast the 
water upon the earth, lest it should wither up 
the grain, for it was impregnated with his 
malediction and equally reluctant to throw it 
up into the air, lest it should blast the clouds 
and dry up their contents, he threw it upon his 
own feet. Scalded by the heat which the water 
had derived from his angry imprecation, the 
feet of the Raja became spotted black and 
white and he then obtained the name of 
KalmaSapada or he with the spotted (kalmaSa) 
feet (pada). In consequence of the curse of 


Waar WS 


On one occasion he beheld a holy person 
engaged in dalliance with his wife. As soon as 
they saw his terrific form, they were 
frightened and endeavoured to escape; but the 
regal R&ksasa overtook and seized the 
husband. The wife of the Brahmana then also 
desisted from flight and earnestly entreated the 
savage to spare her lord, exclaiming, "You, 
Mitrasaha, are the pride of the royal house of 
Iksvaku, not a malignant fiend! It is not in 
your nature, who know the characters of 
women, to carry off and devour my husband." 
But all was in vain and regardless of her 
reiterated supplications, he ate the Brahmana, 
as a tiger devours a deer. The Brahmana's 
wife, furious with wrath, then addressed the 
Raja and said, "Since you have barbarously 
disturbed the joys of a wedded pair and killed 
my husband, your death shall be the 
consequence of your associating with your 
queen.” So saying, she entered the flames. 


aA Brae faqnentet 
yest Brrararal aay wert 
TAIT AIT 3911 


326 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





Mat Wat Gar a aa agwaa wal a ae, 
acted Ring Val TA YAR TET UTE 
Ue ANA! AIHA Yotal AMT Yatsuad! asa 
Feast ana feaarat 


amrea:, weanfefefaa:, aa fauas:, wet 
weaet «fectias! «9 atsah target ag 
caMIVAASTM WIA wa a Hahwasadaef 
afeq: we, - wast at weeny: 
aerate SAAT ora - Vea RA NATTA | 
SapHls ea feranfaa4r fant cafererany 
TUNRUPTATS AIT A TUNA: WarMareans F 
fraat:, 7 aie taamigged war Hafaeafse, 
TW waetange-wW-ganfenseeqaeafatmad 
gery, «oat Ome PET 
WaT Tae BIDODIE TOME CIOEL 
Watery MATa wet 
arged yal, ata MaAa 3 ct 


At the expiration of the period of his curse 
Saudasa returned home. Being reminded of the 
imprecation of the Brahmani by his wife 
Madayanti, he abstained from conjugal 
intercourse and was in consequence childless; 
but having solicited the interposition of Vasist 
ha, Madayanti became pregnant. The child, 
however, was not born for seven years, when 
the queen, becoming impatient, divided the 
womb with a sharp stone and was thereby 
delivered. The child was then called ASmaka 
(from Asmana, 'a stonc'), The son of ASmaka 
was Milaka, who, when the warrior tribc was 
extirpated upon earth, was surrounded and 
concealed by a number of females; whence he 
was denominated Narikavaca (having women 
for armour)’. The son of Miulaka was 
DaSaratha; his son was Ilavila; his son was 
Visvasaha; his son was Khatvanga, called also 
Dilipa’?, who in a battle between the gods and 
the Asuras, being called by the former to their 
succour, killed a number of the latter. Having 


thus acquired the friendship of the deities in 
heaven, they desired him to demand a boon. 
He said to them, "If a boon is to be accepted 
by me, then tell me, as a favour, what is the 
duration of my life?" "The length of your life 


; is but an hour," the gods replied. On which, 


Uftareal certs] aaa arteneraqereten yerng 


Khatvanga, who was swift of motion, 
descended in his easy-gliding chariot to the 
world of mortals. Arrived there, he prayed, 
and said, "If my own soul has nevcr been 
dearer to me than the sacred Brahmanas, if I 
have never deviated from the discharge of my 
duty; if I have never regarded gods, men, 
animals, vegetables, all created things, as 
different from the imperishable; then may I, 
with unswerving step, attain to that divine 
being on whom holy sages meditate!" Having 
thus spoken, he was united with that supreme 
being, who is Vasudeva; with that elder of all 
the gods, who is abstract existence and whose 
form cannot be described. Thus he obtained 
absorption, according to this stanza, which 
was repeated formerly by the seven Rsis; 
"Like unto Khatvanga will be no one upon 
earth, who having come from heaven and 
dwelt an hour amongst men, became united 
with the three worlds by his liberality and 
knowledge of truth’*." 


canta spaa yeitanr ia: Ware: TT 

Geaient wal wea: afsygeat wfecaten 

aq tanifeerrea yet wea sitfarty 

wastrafen clear geen ara da feu seu 

Gea diag: yAsHag! adt WW: Tengen: 
sme «eee: «arena sikmar stern 
UGS YaTATAT ¥ ott 

wast aa wa fenirapena msaeai 
Spc i had 

wat a uiafiguared gi faaa, qagryae 
TIAA! VAAN WAN) WATS 
a mem meade ave, dhersrehati 
Wratital aedgyeaat At & V1 


BOOK IV, 4 


AHATANTH UTP CATHY TTS 
UTA A-AOTA HIT 3 I 

figeMemftrisntienra wguraraatadt ai 
faagti yx 

fate-Gt-aOTaly] HE-Aer UW Wa Tear 
areifary arpmerageard § sa aFATTEa 
ARMS ASIA AIA TY SMI a TARA : j 
Wait sara YG 


The son of Khatvanga was Dirgabhau; his 
son was Raghu; his son was Aja; his son was 
DaSaratha'’. The god from whose navel the 
lotus springs became fourfold, as the four sons 
of DaSaratha, Rama, Laksmana, Bharata and 
Satrughna, for the protection of the world. 
Rama, while yet a boy, accompanied 
Visvamitra, to protect his sacrifice and slew 
Tadaka. He afterwards killed Ma@rica with his 
resistless shafts; and Subahu and others fells 
by his arms. He removed the guilt of Ahalya 
by merely looking upon her. In the palace of 
Janaka he broke with ease the mighty bow of 
MaheSvara and received the hand of Sita, the 
daughter of the king, self-born from the earth, 
as the prize of his prowess. He humbled the 
pride of ParaSurama, who vaunted his 
triumphs over the race of Haihaya and his 
repeated slaughters of the Ksatriya tribe. 
Obedient to the commands of his father and 
cherishing no regret for the loss of 
sovereignty, he entered the forest, 
accompanied by his brother Laksmana and by 
his wife where he killed in conflict Viradha, 
Kharadisana and other Raksasas, the headless 
giant Kabandha and Bali the monkey monarch. 
Having built a bridge across the ocean and 
destroyed the whole R4aksasas nation, he 
recovered his bride Sita, whom their ten- 
headed king Ravana had carried off and 
returned to Ayodhya with her, after she had 
been purified by the fiery ordeal from the soil 
contracted by her captivity and had been 
honoured by the assembled gods, who bore 
witness to her virtue. '® 


327 


WMMAST WeaagIaenranrasaleteral SI 


WAErrafiracrnaN Ayal Maul aT Taree 
feat wy a fraferem selanregqeractas- 


TATA HT- AAT : H&G UI 

Bharata made himself master of the 
country of the Gandharvas, after destroying 
vast numbers of them; and Satrughna having 
killed the Raksasas chief Lavana, the son of 


Madhu, took possession of his capital 
Mathura. 

Having thus, by their unequalled valour 
and might, rescued the whole world from the 
dominion of malignant fiends, Rama, Laks 
mana, Bharata and Satrughna reascended to 
heaven and were followed by those of the 
people of Kosala who were fervently dcvoted 
to these incarnate portions of the supreme Vis 
nu. 

THA YF H-Mat yal, Mena ie-wahd, 
TaA-THT MAT YAE-MCI BT PAA Vl 

Rama and his brothers had each two sons. 
KuSa and Lava were the sons of Rama; those 
of Laksmana were Angada and Candraketu; 
the sons of Bharata were Taksa and Puskara; 
and Subahu and Sirasena’’ were the sons of 
Satrughna. 

arena: afar fre: yatsvaq 
free Aet:, ache wn: awa: yusita:, 
Ha: AA, A UW earla: aAeey: 
(adt @U:) det Se:, TI a Ufwara:, wicare:, 
SATA:, ANI: TAM AMATM:, «TAA 
VIgIM:, adt ayferry:, war favael aa 
fewer = veratiteetfataferer:) = at 
UMaeeA UTA) way ya: YAI:, THs 
gaara: , ad: geyta:, awMATaiAant , ada BUT: 
qasfe we: yatsymt! atsat 9 ahrrerarenta 
HATTA sa ecw he | sTrTfaey 


qetaverveitaa afaerdift: waqrereaan:, 


328 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





away oante:, aaged:, wea Wear ad 
fegrary, al qeqae:,  atsyearrahergT 
UAT AATAATI YC 

We Cearsyaren: wears wale: | 

Washed quay aad: WAT Ye II 

sta faenpgaror agaist aged: sear: 11 

The son of Kusa was Atithi; his son was 
Nisadha; his son was Nala;’® his son was 
Nabhas; his son was Pundarika; his son was 
Ksemadhanvan; his son was Devanika; his son 
was Ahinagu;'” his son was Paripatra; his son 
was Dala;”’ his son was Chala;”! his son was 
Uktha;” his son was Vajranabha: his son was 
Sankhanabha;” his son was Abhyutthitasva;”* 
his son was Viévasaha;? his son was 
Hiranyandbha, who was a pupil of the mighty 
Yogi Jaimini and communicated the 
knowledge of _ spiritual exercise to 
Yajitavalkya.” The son of this saintly king 
was Pusya; his son was Dhruvasandhi;”’ his 
son was Sudarsana; his son was Agnivarna; his 
son was Sighra; his son was Maru, who 
through the power of devotion (Yoga) is still 
living in the village called Kalapa and in a 
future age will be the restorer of the Ksatriya 
race in the solar dynasty. Maru had a son 
named Prasusruta; his son was Susandhi; his 
son was Amarsa; his son was Mahasvat;”” his 
son was Visrutavat;’ ° and his son was 
Vrihadbala, who was killed in the great way 
by Abhimanyu, the son of Arjuna. These are 
the most distinguished princes in the family of 
Iksvaéku : whoevcr listens to the account of 
them will be purified from all his sins.”’ 
NOTES 

1. So the Ramayana, Sumati is called the 
daughter of Aristanem1 : the Mahabharata calls her 
Saivya. The story of Sagara and his descendants is 
told at length in the Ramayana, first book and in the 
Mahabharata, Vana Parva, III. 106, et seq., as well 
as in most of the Puranas. 

2. O Paricajana : Brahma. 

3. The Bhagavata has, for a Purana, some 
curious remarks on this part of the story, flatly 


denying its truth. 7 wyatel qrarraissian Fragen se 
aaa! set TARA faded wnat a 
wiya:| Baa aera qeetkiat wWHepeRa ares 
varia Aue fase: ways Be yas "The 
report is not true, that the sons of the king were 
scorched by the wrath of the sage; for how can the 
quality of darkness, made up of anger, exist in a 
world-purifying nature, consisting of the quality of 
goodness; the dust of earth, as it were, in the sky? 
How should mental perturbation distract that sage, 
who was on with the supreme and who has 
promulgated that Saikhya philosophy, which is a 
strong vessel, by which he who is desirous of 
liberation passes over the dangerous ocean of the 
world by the path of death?" 

4, Sagara is still the name of the ocean and 
especially of the Bay of Bengal, at the mouth of the 
Ganges. On the shore of the island called by the 
same name, tradition places a Kapilasrama or 
hermitage of Kapila, which is still the scene of an 
annual pilgrimage. Other legends assign a very 
different situation for the abode of the ascetic or the 
foot of the Himd&laya, where the Ganges descends 
to the plains. There would be no incompatibility, 
however, in the two sites, could we imagine the 
tradition referred to a period when the ocean 
washed, as it appears once to have done, the base of 
the Himalaya and Saugor (Sagara) was at Haridvar. 

5. Or Khatvanga : Brahma and Hari Vamsa : but 
this is apparent an error. See note 14. 

6. Omitted : Matsya and Agni. Visruta : Linga. 

7. Nabhin : Bhagavata. 

8. Ayutayus : Vayu, Linga and Kirma, Srautayu 
: Agni, Ayutajit ; Brahma. 

9, Haecag: "knowing the heart of the dice’. The 
same epithet, as well as that of ‘friend of Nala' is 
given him in the Vayu, Bhagavata and Brahma 
Puranas and in the Hari Varhga and leaves no doubt 
of their referring to the hero of the story told in the 
Mahabharata. Nala however, as we shall hereafter 
see, is some twenty generations later than Rituparna 
in the same family; and the Vayu therefore thinks it 
necessary to observe that two Nalas are noticed in 
the Puranas and the one here adverted to is the son 
of Virasena; Bitar Rey ead 
aherrasaga aseapepcige: | while the other belongs 
to the family of Iksvaku. The same passage occurs 
in the Brahma Purana and Hari Vamsa; and the 
commentator on the latter observes, fraueral Fat 


BOOK IV, 4 
areas! ‘Nala the son of Nisadha is 


different from Nala the son of Virasena.' It is also 
to be observed, that the Nala of the tale is king of 
Nisadha and his friend Rituparna is king of 
Ayodhya. The Nala of the race of Iksvaku 1s king 
of Ayodhya : he is the son of Nisadha, however and 
there is evidently some confusion between the two. 
We do not find Virasena or his son in any of the 
lists. See n. 19. 

10, There is considerable variety in this part of 
the lists, but the Vayu and Bhagavata agree with 
our text. The Matsya and others make Kalmasapada 
the son or grandson of Rituparna and place 
Sarvakama or Sarvakarman after him. See further 
on. 

11. The Vayu, Agni, Brahma and Hari Varhsa 
read Amitrasaha, 'foe-enduring'; but the 
commentator on our text explains it Mitra, a name 
of Vasistha, Saha, 'able to bear’ the imprecation of; 
as in the following legend, which is similarly 
related in the Bhagavata. It is not detailed in the 
Vayu. A full account occurs in the Mahabharata, 
Adi Parva, s.176, but with many and important 
variations. Kalmasapada, while _ihunting, 
encountered Saktri, the son of Vasistha, in the 
woods; and on his refusing to make way, struck the 
sage with his whip. Saktri cursed the king to 
become a cannibal; and Visvamitra, who had a 
quarrel with Vasistha, seized the opportunity to 
direct a Raksasas to take possession of the king, 
that he might become the instrument of destroying 
the family of the rival saint. While thus influenced, 
Mitrasaha, a Brahmana, applied to KalmaSapada for 
food and the king commanded his cook to dress 
human flesh and give it to the Brahmana, who, 
knowing what it was, repeated the course of Saktri, 
that the king should become a cannibal; which 
taking effect with double force. Kalma&Sapada 
began to eat men. One of his first victims was 
Saktri, whom he slew and ate; and then killed and 
devoured, under the secret impulse of Visvamitra's 
demon, all the other sons of Vasistha. Vasistha 
however liberated him from the Raksasas who 
possessed him and restored him to his natural 
character. The imprecation of the Brahmana's wife 
and its consequences, are told in the Mahabharata 
as in the text, but the story of the water falling on 
his feet appears to have grown out of the etymology 
of his name, which might have referred to some 


329 


disease of the lower extremities the prince's 
designation being at length, Mitrasaha Saudasa 
KalmaSapada or Mitrasaha, son of Sudasa, with the 
swelled feet. 

12. His name Milaka or 'the root', refers also to 
his being the stem whence the Ksatriya races again 
proceeded. It may be doubted if the purpose of his 
title Narikavaca 1s accurately explained by the text. 

13. This prince is confounded with an earlier 
Dilipa by the Brahma Purana and Hari VarhSa. 

14. The term for his obtaining final liberation 1s 
rather unusual; wasfitafedt eet: 'By whom the 
three worlds were affected or beloved : fava #at: | 
the three worlds being identified with their source 
or the supreme. The text says of this stanza, Jadi 
and the Vayu, citing it, says fa 9fa: 1 the legend is 
therefore from the Vedas. 

15. The lists here differ very materially, as the 
following comparison will best show : 


Visnu Matsya Ramayana 
Kalmasapada KalmaSapada §Kalmasapada 
Asmaka Sarvakarman = Sankana 
Milaka Anaranya Sudarsana 
DaSaratha Nighna Agnivama 
avila Anamitra Sighraga 
Visvasaha Raghu Maru 
Dilipa Dilipa Prasusruka 
Dirghabéhu Aya Ambarisa 
Raghu Dirghabahu Nahusa 
Aja Ajapala Yayati 
DaSaratha DaSaratha Nabhaga 
Aja 
DaSaratha 


The Vayu, Bhagavata, Kirma and Linga agree 


with our text, except in the reading or a few names; 
as Sataratha for Dasaratha the first; Vairivira for 
lavila; and Kritasarman, Vrddhasarman or 
Vrddhakarman, for Visvasaha. The Agni and 
Brahma and Hari Varmsa agree with the second 
series, with similar occasional exceptions; showing 
that the Puranas admit two series, differing in 
name, but agreeing in number. The Ramayana, 
however, differs from both in a very extraordinary 
manner and the variation is not limited to the cases 
specified, as it begins with Bhagiratha, as follows : 


Puranas Ramayana 
Bhagiratha Bhagiratha 
Sruta Kakutstha 
Nabhaga Raghu 


330 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





Ambarisa Kalmasapada 
Sindhudvipa 
Ayutasva 
Rituparna 
Sarvakama 
Sudasa 
Kalmasapada 

The entire Paurénik series comprises twenty 
descents and that of the Ram4yana sixteen. Some of 
the last names of the poem occur amongst the first 
of thosc of the Puranas, but there is an 
irreconcilable difference in much of the 
nomenclature. The Agni, under the particular 
account of the descent of Rama, has for his 
immediate predecessors Raghu, Aja, Dasaratha, as 
in our text; and the author of the Raghu Vamsa 
agrees with the Puranas from Dilipa downwards. 

16. This is an epitome of the Ramayana, the 
heroic poem of Valmiki, on the subject of Rama's 
exploits. A part of the Ramayana was published, 
with a translation by Carey and Marshman, several 
years since; but much more correct edition of the 
text of the two first books, with a Latin translation 
of the first and part of the second, have been more 
recently published by Professor Schlegel; a work 
worthy of his illustrious name. A summary of the 
story may be found in Jones’ Works, Maurice's 
Hindustan, Moor's Pantheon. It is also the subject 
of the Uttara Rama Carita in the Hindu Theatre, in 
the introduction to which an outline of the whole is 
given. The story is therefore, no doubt, sufficiently 
familiar even to English readers. It seems to be 
founded on historical fact; and the traditions of the 
south of Indian uniformly ascribe its civilisation, 
the subjugation or dispersion of its forest tribes of 
barbarians and the settlement of civilised Hindus, to 
the conquest of Lanka by Rama. 

17. The Vayu specifies the countries or cities 
over which they reigned Angada and Citraketu, as 
the Vayu terms the latter, governed countries near 
the Himalayas, the capitals of which were Angadi 
and Candravaktréa. Taksa and Puskara were 
sovereigns of Gandh4ra, residing at Taksasila and 
Puskaravati. Subahu and Siirasena reigned at 
Mathura; and in the latter we might be satisfied to 
find the Sirasenas of Arrian, but that there is a 
subsequent origin, of perhaps greater authenticity, 
in the family of Yadu, as we shall hereafter see. 
'KuSa built Kugasthali on the brow of the Vindhya, 


the capital of Kosala; and Lava reigned at Sravasti 
(see Bk. IV. Chs. I and II) in Uttara (northern) 
Kogalav: $a ae tee aT HURT TaN 
Paired frearedaaqy! SRE wt wa a 
Teer: | saeit cleferenat; The Raghu Vamésa 
describes Kusa at returning from KusSavati to 
Ayodhya, after his father's death; but it seems not 
unlikely that the extending power of the princes of 
the Doab, of the lunar family, compelled Rama's 
posterity to retire more to the west and south. 

18. The Bhagavata is the only Purana that omits 
this name, as if the author had been induced to 
correct the reading in order to avoid the necessity 
of recognising two Nalas. See above, n.9. 

19. Here again we have two distinct series of 
princes, independently of variations of individual 
names. Instead of the list of the text, with which the 
Vayu and Bhagavata nearly and the Brahma and 
Hari Varhsa indifferently conform, we have in the 
Matsya, Linga, Kirma and Agni the following : 
Ahinagu, Sahasrasva, Sahasraya or Sahasrabala, 
Candravaloka, Tarapida or Taradhisa, Candgragiri, 
Bhaniratha or Bhanumitra and Sritayus, with 
whom the list ends, except in the Linga, which adds 
Bahula, killed by Abhimanyu enumerating 
therefore from Devanika but seven or eight princes 
to the great war, instead of twenty-three, as in the 
other series. The Raghu Varhsa gives much the 
same list as our text, ending with Agnivarna. 

20. Bala : Bhagavata Nala : Hari Varhsa. 

21. Sthala : Bhagavata, Sala : Vayu and Brahma. 
Sila : Raghu Varnéa. 

22, Omitted : Bhagavata. 

23. Sankha : Brahma. Khagana : Bhag. 

24. Disitasva : Vayu. Adhyisitasva : Brahma. 
Vidhriti : Bhagavata. 

25. Omitted : Braluma and Bhagavata. 

26, Omitted : Brahma and Hari Varhsa : but 
included with similar particulars by the Vayu, 
Bhagavata and Raghu Varhsa : see also Bk. II. Ch. 
VI, where Kausalya is likewise given as the 
synonym of MHiranyagarbha, being, as _ the 
commentator observes, his Visesanam, his epithet 
or attribute, born in or king of Kosala. The. Vayu 
accordingly terms him, feat: :\ but in the 
Bhagavata the epithet Kausalya is referred by the 
commentator to Yajnavalkya, the pupil of 
Hiranyanabha Gd: GH 
armamd| The author of the Raghu Varga, not 


BOOK IV, 5 


understanding the meaning of the term, has coveted 
KauSalya into the son of Hiranyanaébha. Raghu 
Vamsa 18.27. The Bhagavata, like out text, calls 
the prince the pupil of Jaimini. The Vayu, more 
correctly, sf: tea: faa: 1 ‘the pupil of the sage's 
grandson.' There seems to be, however, something 
unusual in the account given of the relation borne 
by the individuals named to each other. As a pupil 
of Jaimini, Hiranyanabha is the teacher of the 
Sa4maveda (Bk. III. Ch. VI), but Yajfiavalkya is the 
teacher of the Vajasaneyi branch of the Yajrs (Bk. 
IJ]. Ch. V). Neither of them is specified by 
Colebrooke amongst the authorities of the Patanjala 
or Yoga philosophy; nor does either appear as a 
disciple of Jaimini in his character of founder of the 
Mim4amsa school. Jrans. R. As. Soc. Vol.I. 

27. Arthasiddhi : Brahma Purana and Hari 
Varhsa. 

28. Maruta : Brahma Purana and Hari Varhsa. 
These authorities omit the succeeding four names. 

29. Sahasavat : Vayu. 

30. ViSvasaha : Bhagavata. 


31. The list closes here, as the author of the 
Puranas, Vyasa, is contemporary with the great 
war. The line of Iksvaku is resumed prophetically 
in the twenty-second chapter. 


KKK 


331 





BOOK IV, 5 331 


a wud AA Ua Aedes Naas 
arated Ged facet aferdita wd eatu wn 


Wiggs wWe,- TAIT 
sed Ua wae way winal seer, 
ae Tene te: ulead faerie wird arat 
CRATING Ml 


The son of Iksvaku, who was named Nimi,! 
instituted a sacrifice that was to endure for a 
thousand years and applied to Vasistha to offer 
the oblations. Vasistha in answer said, that he 
had been pre-engaged by Indra for five 
hundred years, but that if the Raj4 would wait 
for some time, he would come and officiate as 
Superintending priest. The king made no 
answer and Vasistha went away, supposing 
that he had assented. When the sage had 
completed the performance of the ceremonies 
he had conducted for Indra, he returned with 
all speed to Nimi, purposing to render him the 
like office. When he arrived, however and 
found that Nimi had retained Gautama and 
other priests to minister at his sacrifice, he was 
much displeased and pronounced upon the 
king, who was then asleep, a curse to this 
effect, that since he had not intimated his 
intention, but transferred to Gautama the duty 


CHAPTER 5 he had first entrusted to himself, Vasistha, 
Usratseara: Nimi should thenceforth cease to exist in a 
corporeal form. When Nimi woke and knew 

(Firagtaraon, dara sake: , what had happened, he in return denounced as 
FATA TRITH) an imprecation upon his unjust preceptor, that 


he also should lose his bodily existence, as the 
TUGTT SATE punishment of uttering a curse upon him 


Sea asa fiftatr, a q Wewan without previously communicating with him. 


Nimi then abandoned his bodily condition. 
aaa, afar stat Srararan 21 
: Taras frase afasat: was, 


afss:, aefraor useage armed wenat ; 
TG savieshigadatawarday: Aarne afar teaat 
FA, Tee MlTETATY,  aTTeTTETATHY re ae 

aaah, sears a yfadtafrar + fafsew:u In ih pecan oa 
roma a aT ATT ALN 3 UI dq avarice Granary, welqatis vaio 

sfq acnremartantatrataat aware = 

The spirit of Vasistha also leaving his 

arrarait  atareaferera:  aat body, was united with the spirits of Mitra and 

SHCA TST AHS aa Maret @pt, Varuna for a season, until, through their 


332 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





passion for the nymph Urvasi, the sage was q we: Wa: witaeqn:, Tad, HIM: TANT 


born again in a different shape. The corpse of 
Nimi was preserved from decay by being 
embalmed with fragrant oils and resins and it 
remained as entire as if it were immortal.” 


aaa Te MMT, Sar afer Se: 
aaa att araafafa sayareat FfrrV ci 


WASH GAM wWH:, F 
atari sake, wartrerifaar wate, 


aartta: | 

AA TATA TT THF 1 

When the sacrifice was concluded, the 
priests applied to the gods, who had come to 
receive their portions, that they would confer a 
blessing upon the author of the sacrifice. The 
gods were willing to restore him to bodily life, 
but Nimi declined its acceptance, saying, "O 
deities, who are the alleviators of all worldly 
suffering, there is not in the world a deeper 
cause of distress than the separation of soul 
and body; it is therefore my wish to dwell in 
the eyes of all beings, but never more to 
resume a corporeal shape!" To this desire the 
gods assented and Nimi was placed by them in 
the eyes of all living creatures; in consequence 
of which their eyelids are ever opening and 
shutting. ) 

wT tT TI We: wim 
FAAS WAT: Qo 

AT HAN WH, TAA HAA STATAATT 221 

As Nimi left no successor, the Munis, 
apprehensive of the consequences of the earth 
being without a ruler, agitated the body of the 
prince and produced from it a prince who was 
called Janaka, from being born without a 
progenitor. 


aye fateiser fade att certo 
MANA: Yatsyq aat aAeaga:, TM Tas:, 
Te sad: AY FesHy:, AA a vetatea:, 
weae aah: , Aays Gehy:, Paey:, Tay 


:, wea faga:, venta uvagia:, Ta 7 
aia: at wer, wa: Gach, vente yar 
Baum, wa: densa wa gad arya 
Hea: Ue die ser aya) Weare war 
Tiga: = aya) Ata 
MTA VV 


In consequence of his father being without 


_ a body (videha), he was termed also Vaideha, 
" "the son of the bodiless;' and he further 


received the name of Mithi, from having been 
produced by agitation (mathana)’. The son of 
Janaka owas Udavasu; his son was 
Nandivarddhana; his son was Suketu; his son 
was Devarata; his son was Brhaduktha; his son 
was Mah§avirya; his son was Satyadhrti; his 
son was Dhrstaketu; his son was Haryyasva; 
his son was Maru; his son was Pratibandhaka; 
his son was Krtaratha; his son was Krta; his 
son was Vibudha; his son was Mahdadhrti; his 
son was Krtirata; his son was Maharoman; his 
son was Suvarnaroman; his son was 
Hrasvaroman; his son was_ Siradhvaja. 
Siradhvaja ploughing the ground, to prepare it 
for a sacrifice which he instituted in order to 
obtain progeny, there sprang up in the furrow a 
damsel, who became his daughter Sita.* The 
brother of Siradhvaja was Kusadhvaja, who 
was king of Kasi’ : he had a son also, named 
Bhanumat.° 


ATTA: PATET:, WEA Yfer: TEATEMaSl AMT ya 
Wal TeMe werat: (9), aa: ah: Cafe) 
SreM:, Wa: aghaq adsheahy: Te yarg:, 
aa: Wale:, Ta WeT: (Aaa:), aa: arf: 
THAT: AANA: (AAM:), TT AIT:, 
TS aa:, Meas: TAM Ad: (SaqA:), 
Ta WIA:, ASM Bra (Yaut:), aria 
Qua:, Wt: Ba:, Tees: wagar faa: wea 
A:, MA YAS: at aiaeer:, Tanq aH: 
Teg (AAA:, Tad) Giet:, gaagena: aT WR: 
alt: Hat Uwseass HAG-A: 11 V3 1 


BOOK IV, 5 


333 





see teers wget | warnefaaafant 
OTST ATE AT TI VY II 


sta sifaeargeat agaist ast: StearT: It 

The son of Bhanumat was Satadyumna; his 
son was Suci; his son was Urjjavaha; his son 
was Satyadhvaja; his son was Kuni;’ his son 
was Anjana; his son was Rtujit; his son was 
Aristanemi*: his son was Srutayus; his son was 
Suparsva; his son was Safijaya’; his son was 
Ksemari'’: his son was Anenas!': his son was 
Minaratha’*; his son was Satyaratha; his son 
Satyarathi’’; his son was Upagu"; his son was 
Sruta’’; his son was SAsvata’®: his son was 
Sudhanvan; his son was Subhasa; his son was 
Susruta’’; his son was Jaya; his son was 
Vijaya; his son was Rita; his son was 
Sunaya'’; his son was Vitahavya; his son was 
Dhrti; his son was Bahuladsva; his son was 
Krti, with whom terminated the family of 
Janaka. These are the kings of Mithila, who 
for the most part will be’’ proficient in 
spiritual knowledge”. 


kKK* 


NOTES 


}. None of the authorities, except the Vayu and 
Bhagavata, contain the series of kings noticed in 
this chapter. 

2. This shows that the Hindus were not 
unacquainted with the Egyptian art of embalming 
dead bodies. In the Kasi Khanda, s. 30, an account 
is given of a Brahmana who carries his mother's 
bones or rather her corpse, from Setubandha or 
Rameswara to Kasi. For this purpose he first 
washed it with the five excretions of a cow and the 
five pure fluids or milk, curds, ghee, honey and 
sugar. He then embalms it with Yaksakarddama, a 
composition of Agallochum, camphor, musk, 
saffron, sandal and a resin called Kakkola; and 
envelopes it severally with Netravastra, flowered 
muslin; Pattamvara, silk; Surasavastra, coarse 
cotton; Manjistha, cloth dyed with madder; and 
Nepala Kambala, Nepal blanketing. He then covers 
it with pure clay and puts the whole into a coffin of 
copper. Tamra samputa. These practices are not 
only unknown, but would be thought impure in the 
present day. 


3. These legends are intended to explain and 
were probably suggested by, the terms Vaideha and 
Mithila, applied to the country upon the Gandaka 
and Kosi rivers, the modern Tirhut. The Ramayana 
places a prince named Mithi between Nimi and 
Janaka, when comes the name Mithila. In other 
respects the list of kings of Mithila agrees, except 
in a few names. Janaka the successor of Nimi is 
different from Janaka who is celebrated as the 
father of Sité. One of them, which, does not appear, 
is also renowned as a philosopher and patron of 
philosophical teachers. Mahabharata, Moksa 
dharma. According to the Vayu Purana, Nimi 
founded a city called Jayantapur, near the Asrama 
of Gautama. The remains of a city called Janakpur, 
on the northern skirts of the district, are supposed 
to indicate the site of a city founded by one of the 
princes so named. 

4. This identifies Siradhvaja with the second 
Janaka, the father-in-law of Rama. The story of Sita 
birth or rather discovery, is narrated in the Aranya 
Khanda of the Ramayana, the Vana Parva of the 
Mahabharata and in the Vayu, Brahma Vaivartta, 
K4lika and other Puranas. 

5. The Ramayana says, 'of Sankasya', which is 
no doubt the correct reading. Fa Hian found the 
kingdom of Sang-kiashi in the Doab, about 
Mainpuri. Account of the Foe-Kue-ki. The 
Bhagavata makes Kusadhvaja the son of 
Siradhvaja. 

6. The Bhagavata differs from our authority here 
considerably, by inserting several princes between 
KuSadhvaja and Bhaénumat; or Dharmadhvaja, who 
has two sons, Krtadhvaja and Khdndikya; the 
former is the father of Kesidhvaja, the latter of 
Bhanumat. See the last book of the Visnu. 

7. Sakuni and the last of the series, according to 
the Vayu. 

8. Between this prince and Suci the series of the 
Bhagavata is Sanadhvaja, Urdhvaketu, Aja, Purujit. 
The following variations are from the same 
authority. 

9. Citraratha. 

10. Ksemadhi. 

1], Omitted. 

12. Samaratha. 

13. Omitted. 

14. Upaguru. 

15. Upagupta. 


334 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





16. Vasvananta. 

17. Yuyudh4na, Subh4sana, Sruta. 

18. Sunaka. 

19, arafeenataon ufssaa is the reading of all the 
copies; but why the future verb, ‘will be’, is used 
does not appear. 

20. Descendants of two of the other sons of the 
Manu are noticed in the Bhagavata; from Nrga, it is 
said, proceeded Sumati, Bhitajyotis, Vasu, Pratifka, 
Oghavat and his sister Oghavati, married to 
Sudarsana. The Linga gives three sons to Nrga, Vrs 
a, Dhrstaka and Ranadhrsta and alludes to a legend 
of his having been changed to a lizard by the curse 
of a Brahmana. Narisyanta's descendants were 
Citrasena, Daksa, Madhvat, Pirva, Indrasena, 
Vitthotra, Satyasrava, Urusravas, Devadatta, 
Agnivesya, also called Jatukarna, a form of Agni 
and progenitor of the Agnivesya Brahmanas. In the 
Brahma Purana and Hari Varhnsa Purana the sons of 
Narisyat, whom the commentator on the latter 
considers as the same with Narisyanta, are termed 
Sakas, Sacae or Scythians; while, again, it is said 
that the son of Narisyanta was Dama or as 
differently read, Yama. As this latter affiliation is 
stated in the authorities, it would appear as if this 
Narisyanta was one of the sons of the Manu; but 
this is only a proof of the carelessness of the 
compilation, for in the Visnu, Vayu and 
Markandeya Puranas, Narisyanta, the father of 
Dama, is the son of Marutta, the fourteenth of the 
posterity of Dista or Nedista. 

ke 


334 


CHAPTER 6 
Uatseqa: 


(TCATHATY, ANTS, attaraicahas 1) 
aaa sara 
wae we! ae: eafsat waar WAI 
arre ayt wafigery aaftreatt wirar en 
aid Farah terrane watt: 
VATS TASTY ASA VI 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


hear a description of the prince who trace their 
lineage from the moon and whose race is still 
celebrated for glorious deeds. You are able to 
relate it to me, Brahmana, if you will so favour 
me. 


UU Sata 


sree Gfrerget aig: were: | 
AAG HA GTA Tava AS APTN 3 
Facignaanftantdteatgarfatietareteregia: Xt 
we aera qaay- seers aan 
ee Ualsfa: set: are:, 
TST AOA ATO felt ger era OTT eT - 


Seas 

a a Wega! aq wrareenerferren- 
fasta ae anfaaern § i 

Heacana Waar at uit 
FETT UI 

aera gemfaanfert waa geo Area: 
wag tafifrarannistt a qua aa fe 


FECA HAT: WiAMSIS AAAI ¢ I 


PariSara said-You shall hear from me, 
Maitreya, an account of the illustrious family 
of the moon, which has produced many 
celebrated rulers of the earth; a race adorned 
by the regal qualities of strength, valour, 
magnificence, prudence and activity; and 
enumerating amongst its monarchs Nahusa, 
Yayati, Kartaviryarjuna and others equally 
renowned. That race will I describe to you; do 
you attend. 

Atri was the son of Brahma, the creator of 
the universe, who sprang from the lotus that 
grew from the navel of Narayana. The son of 
Atri was Soma’ (the moon), whom Brahma 
installed as the sovereign of plants, of 
Brahmanas and of the stars. Soma celebrated 
the Rajastiya sacrifice and from the glory then 


Maitreya said~ You have given me, acquired and the extensive dominion with 
reverend preceptor, an account of the kings of which he had been invested, he became 
the dynasty of the sun : I am now desirous to arrogant and liccntious and carried off Tard, 


BOOK IV, 6 


555 





the wife of Brhaspati, the preceptor of the 
gods. In vain Brhaspati sought to recover his 
bride; in vain Brahma commanded and the 
holy sages remonstrated; Soma refused to 
relinquish her. Usanas, out of enmity to 
Brhaspati, took part with Soma. 


SET waives wary at sea: 
MTA UT 8 tt 


WHACTAARTA: TAISAAAI Qo tI 7 


Rudra, who had studied under Angiras, the 
father of Brhaspati, befriended his fellow- 
student. In consequence of UsSanas, their 
preceptor, joining Soma, Jambha, Kujambha 
and all the Daityas, Danavas and other foes of 
the gods, came also to his assistance; while 
Indra and all the gods were the allies of 
Brhaspati. 

Tas wilt: | derreatfafirencarat 
AMMA! TT Wea ayia zat 
Sag UPlTaa FHA VMI 

Was caryTeaayaraIaya WE Te 
PROT FATT V2 
TMM! AS waaacter «= geuafi 
Tell 3 

aoa at vaerrea arhagrgutaemte- 
Tet ww a wage fan waa 
THT THT TS OXI 

@ agen atfaasrar cami deirenfaaran ey 

geuhiittes wea Henican afer 
at tat: | ayaa es: SU 
TAHA T AT! | HATTA: 
gem: ? saa ar ara fear a fefsearan eat 

aeismiufet werat eavat ara, ad: 
HAL ? WAGIA:, We Use! snag Haram ad 
arena, sda asciecmac: wfranad 
SMa, Ga tara waaifan go 


am amar frament HAN afar ca 
am, wa ad! aerment:? anen 
Fea, ? SAAT MATSATS- ATED’ Far Ve I 

wa: : 
ufeaga Hat we ae aca! wast ge sf 
ATA TI LSI 


Then there ensued a fierce contest, which, 
being on account of Taraka (or Tara), was 
termed the Tarakamaya or Taraka war. In this 
the gods, led by Rudra, hurled their missiles 
on the enemy; and the Daityas with equal 
determination assailed the gods. Earth, shaken 
to her centre by the struggle between such 
foes, had recourse to Brahma for protection; 
on which he interposed and commanding 
USanas with the demons and Rudra with the 
deities to desist from strife, compelled Soma 
to restore Tara to her husband. Finding that 
she was pregnant, Brhaspati desired her no 
longer to retain her burden; and in obedience 
to his orders she was delivered of a son, whom 
she deposited in a clump of long Mufja grass. 
The child, from the moment of its birth, was 
endued with a splendour that dimmed the 
radiance of every other divinity and both 
Brhaspati and Soma, fascinated by his beauty, 
claimed him as their child. The gods, in order 
to settle the dispute, appealed to Tara; but she 
was ashamed and would make no answer. As 
she still continued mute to their repeated 
applications, the child became incensed and 
was about to curse her, saying, "Unless, vile 
woman, you immediately declare who is my 
father, [ will sentence you to such a fate as 


_ Shall deter every female in future from 


hesitating to speak the truth." On this, Brahma 
again interfered and pacified the child; and 
then, addressing Tara and said, "Tell me, 
daughter, is this the child of Brhaspati or of 


. Soma?” "Of Soma," said Tara, blushing; As 


soon as she had spoken, the lord of the 
constellations, his countenance bright and 
expanding with rapture, embraced his son and 


336 


said, "Well done, my boy; verily you are 
wise:" and hence his name was Budha.” 


sro sit geek atl) cediieck 

gmat yeu WATT 
CASTS THAT Ya AMATI 2 I 
asft a anfintaaaaccitaciaardiqard- 
orauatfaenra-sranrarronnraerea 

AAPA TASS 2 
syngas UAT 
HATA DTT 2 3 I 

TWAT T ATA ATTN 2 XU 

By warmenfirarmister waters 9st 
AMA SATa ST HTN VG A 

yaaa af y arauftaert wary Hafan 25 I 
sets WMA YET YATTAaTTI VII 
PATA HAAG YAN ATA BCU 
qaigy War Al A FwVet:, YAMA AAT: 
seranata warts! war a Welradtahearat 
urnfeary =| |- ameTTgueuSy ss afTTTTUTIAT 
mmafeat:g afr wa afpatagentir 
sHfeaeurmestad! «sayit a AgUabT 
WaAMASAAIUOM Sr HaaS a A Wet AAT 
fat ddvar geascearat fag wera 
AMATHUNAS TATU 2 FU 


It has already been related how Budha 
begot Puriravas by Ila. Purtiravas’ was a 
prince renowned for liberality, devotion, 
magnificence and- love of truth and for 
personal beauty. Urvasi having incurred the 
imprecation of Mitra and Varuna, determined 
to take up her abode in the world of mortals; 
and descending accordingly, beheld Purtiravas. 
As soon as she Saw him she forgot all reserve 
and: disregarding the delights of Svarga, 
became deeply enamoured of the prince. 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


Beholding her infinitely superior to all other 
females in grace, elegance symmetry, delicacy 
and beauty, Purtravas was equally fascinated 
by Urvasi; both Were inspired by similar 
sentiments and mutually feeling that each was 
everything to the other, thought no more of 
any other object. Confiding in his merits, 
Purdravas addressed the nymph and said, "Fair 
creature, I love you; have compassion on me 
and return my affection.” Urvasi, half averting 
her face through modesty, replied, "I will do 
so if you will observe the conditions I have to 
propose." "What are they?" inquired the 
prince; "declare them;” "I have two rams," 
said the nymph, "which I love as children; 
they must be kept near my bedside and never 
suffered to be carried away; you must also 
take care never to be seen by me undressed; 
and clarified butter alone must be my food." 
To these terms the king readily gave assent. 


waaei-yera: warafag famagqied- 
Naa Fi PAA AH AUTH WV 3 ot 

Ta Ua Taare wey q, 
UTA: Wa: anreraaaigan, & 
veurgeanieerend Tan, ‘A Ut eal seat’ far 3 
a 86 - SIT 
dareanigaaora = wenravd sea gar 
‘SMe HYSTAM A sreaMauht AAI 
Tear Warmed ep! gp! 
east eae) Wear weadulassaen 
faguian aq wat aledeit wanqaaarat Spr 
IFAT TAONSATASH ATI! 3 21 

After this, Purtravas and Urvasi dwelt 
together in Alaka, sporting amidst the groves 
and lotus-crowned lakes of Caitraratha and the 
other forests there situated, for sixty-one 
thousand years.” The love of Puriravas for his 
bride increased every day of its duration; and 
the affection of Urvasi augmenting equally in 
fervour, she never called to recollection 
residence amongst the immortals. Not so with 
the attendant spirits at the court of Indra; and 


BOOK IV, 6 





nymphs, genii and quipsters, found heaven 
itself but dull while Urvasi was away. 
Knowing the agreement that Urvasi had made 
with the king, Visavasu was appointed by the 
Gandharvas to effect its violation; and he, 
coming by night to the chamber where they 
slept, carried off one of the rams. Urvasi was 
awakened by its cries and exclaimed. "Ah me! 
Who has stolen one of my children? Had Ia 
husband, this would not have happened! To 
whom shall I apply for aid?" The Raja 
overheard her lamentation, but recollecting 
that he was undressed and that Urvasi might 
see him in that state, did not move from the 
couch. Then the Gandharvas came and stole 
the other ram; and Urvasi hearing it bleat, 
cried out that a woman had no protector who 
was the bride of a prince so dastardly as to 
submit to this outrage. This incensed 
Purtiravas highly and trusting that the nymph 
would not see his person, as it was dark, he 
rose and took his sword and pursued the 
robbers, calling upon them to stop and receive 
their punishment. At that moment the 
Gandharvas caused a flash of brilliant 
lightning to play upon the chamber and Urvasi 
beheld the king undressed : the compact was 
violated an the nymph immediately 
disappeared. 


Wafetal 3 4 


The Gandharvas, abandoning the rams, 
departed to the region of the gods. Having 
recovered the animals, the king returned 
delighted to his couch, but there he beheld no 
Urvasi; and not finding her anywhere, he 
wandered naked over the world, like on 
insane. At length coming to Kuruksetra, he 
saw Urvasi sporting with four other nymphs of 
heaven in a lake beautified with lotuses and he 
ran to her and called her his wife and wildly 
implored her to return. "Mighty monarch," 
said the nymph, "refrain from _ this 
extravagance. I am now pregnant : depart at 
present and come hither again at the end of a 
year, when I will deliver to you a son and 
remain with you for one night.” Puriravas, 
thus comforted, returned to his capital. Urvasi 
said to her companions, "This prince is a most 
excellent mortal : I lived with him long and 
affectionately united." "It was well done of 
you," they replied; "he is indeed of comely 
appearance and one with whom we could live 
happily forever." 


we Uw ew wR Haq 


aaaet eat, wars fet da car walfirar waUatT 


Ufa araqroreal weal: Ete: Tens wast ATTN EI 
a Garatert «BEAT: «ayaa | ataeit — garer SD TTT-atenq Mier wera ad wa 


SITTIN 3 VM 


Teal @tat: WaM:, Tange faaat az sf zon 


TSAIPATTA Tae ay, Fest ane wa «a fafi-ancrafamaeanal 


STAT SNMITGA: Wade ayafimaray:, aedeeraqedyiraeieane 
qeyll WageRTed we ae fs, aaa, aR amremfe, aeenqar waver = ar 
AT, SUTHATL THAaATI 3 3 I AqUheTATA 3 cI 

ame | aeayi-wentt «= eafadeeieat «= wegas weal ues Prem ag 3e 


Wes: TAI ararsrearcengedyit SOETATE, ahaa aan cal 


ae 6 Ogee, «= a ret STH ATA TCT, 
RAMI ATATA AEaa4r il 3 ¥ I afadaq- swat Bt arfirgeat, 


338 
areryttfer apatecatanterearen AIT 
CYC X 2 


ataraat fatixvefadtad, wleyitareiaa- 
meant weed, UW a wa seat 
Ufa Was AT acters gen sya 
wma ance = witnisnyents- 
weir ear stfedad-war weit faferar, a 
aaa: warrisyq  adatrarenfereuea 
eur = ook eat gee 
BCAA & 2 UI 

When the year had expired, Urvasi and the 
monarch met at Kuruksetra and she consigned 
to him his first-born Ayus; and these annual 
interviews were repeated, until she had borne 
to him five sons. She then said to Purtiravas, 
"Through regard for me, all the Gandharvas 
have expressed their joint purpose to bestow 
upon my lord their benediction : let him 
therefore demand a boon." The R4ja replied, 
"My enemies are all destroyed, my faculties 
are all entire; I have fricnds and kindred, 
armies and treasures : there is nothing which I 
may not obtain except living in the same 
region with my Urvasi. My only desire 
therefore is, to pass my life with her." When 
he had thus spoken, the Gandharvas brought to 
Puriravas a vessel with fire and said to him, 
"Take this fire and according to the precepts of 
the Vedas, divide it into three fires; then fixing 
your mind upon the idea of living with Urvasi, 
offer oblations and you shall assuredly obtain 
your wishes." The R4ja took the brasier and 
departed and came to a forest. Then he began 
to reflect that he had committed a great folly 
in bringing away the vessel of fire instead of 
his bride; and leaving the vessel in the wood, 
he went disconsolate to his palace. In the 
middle of the night he awoke and considered 
that the Gandharvas had given him the brasier 
to enable him to obtain the felicity of living 
with Urvasi and that it was absurd in him to 
have Icft it by the way. Resolving therefore to 
rccover it, he rose and went to the place where 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


he had deposited the vessel; but it was gone. In 
its stead he saw a young Asvattha tree growing 
out of a Sami plant and he reasoned with 
himself and said, "I left in this spot a vessel of 
fire and now behold a young Asvattha tree 
growing out of a Sami plant. Verily I will take 
these types of fire to my capital and there, 
having engendered fire by their attrition, I will 
worship it." 


UANT TACT TAS TON ATT ¥ 311 
ASUS: HAL WATTST) TSAR. 
TEA AT A ATTT TAI BB 


wit faite wear wera, 
sayiaead ae wucmrdfeaar aarttafatear 
agar Gay So Wedel wer sey we 


faart Aram y & I 


waisfrgavaq waa wa wat aa 
wfafrar ¥ & 11 


sfa sitfampgael uguist we: sears: 

Having thus determined, he took the plants 
to his city and prepared their wood for 
attrition, with pieces of as many inches long as 
there are syllables in the Gayatri : he recited 
that holy verse and rubbed together sticks of as 
many inches as he recited syllables in the 
Gayatri.” Having thence elicited fire, he made 
it threefold, according to the injunctions of the 
Vedas and offered oblations with it, proposing 
as the end of the ceremony reunion with 
Urvasi. In this way, celebrating many 
sacrifices agreeably to the form in which 
offerings are presented with fire, Purtravas 
obtained a seat in the sphere of the 
Gandharvas and was no more separated from 
his beloved. Thus fire, that was at first but one, 
was made threefold in the present Manvantara 
by the son of Ia.° 
NOTES 

1. The Vayu says the essence of Soma (Somatva) 
issued from the eyes of Atri and impregnated the 
ten quarters. The Bhagavata says merely that Soma 
was born from the eyes of Atri. The Brahma Purana 


BOOK IV, 7 


339 





and Hari Varhsa give a grosser name to the 
effusion. 

2. 'He who knows'. Much erroneous speculation 
has originated in confounding this Budha, the son 
of Soma and regent of the planet Mercury, ‘he who 
knows,’ the intelligent, with Buddha, any deified 
mortal, or ‘he by whom truth is known;' or, as 
individually applicable, Gautama or Sakya, son of 
Raja Suddhodana, by whom the Buddhists 
themselves aver their doctrines were first 
promulgated. The two characters have nothing in 
common and the names are identical only when one 
or other is misspelt. 

3. The story of Puriiravas is told much in the 
same strain as follows, though with some variations 
and in greater or less detail, in the Vayu, Matsya, 
Vamana, Padma and Bhagavata Puranas. It is also 
referred to in the Mahabharata, vol. I. p. 113. It is 
likewise, the subject of the Vikrama and Urvasi of 
Kalidasa, in which drania the incidents offensive to 
good taste are not noticed. See Hindu Theatre, vol. 
I, p. 187. The Matsya Purana, besides this story, 
which is translated in the introduction to the drama, 
has in another part, c. 94, an account of a 
Purtravas, who, in the Caksusa Manvantara, was 
king of Madra and who by the worship of Visnu 
obtained a residence with the Gandharvas. 

4. One copy has sixty-one years; the Brahma 
Purana and Hari VarnSa have fifty-nine : one period 
is aS likely as the other. 

5. It does not appear why this passage 1s 
repeated. The length of the sticks, conformably to 
the number of syllables in the usual form of the 
Gayatri, would be twenty-four inches. The 
Bhagavata attaches to the operation a piece of 
mysticism of a Tantrika origin : Purtiravas, while 
performing the attrition, mentally identifies himself 
and Urvasi with the two sticks and repeats the 
mantra, Seavat Aha Yara: | 

6. The division of one fire into three is ascribed 
to Purtiravas by the Mahabhdrata and the rest. The 
commentator on the former specifies them as the 
Garhapatya, Daksina and Ahavaniya, which Jones, 
Manu. II. 231, renders nuptial, ceremonial and 
sacrificial fires; or rather, 1. Household, that which 
is perpetually maintained by a house-holder; 2. A 
fire for sacrifices, placed to the south of the rest; 
and 3. A consecrated fire for oblations; ferming the 
Tretagni or triad of sacred fires, in oppositicn to the 
Laukika or merely temporal ones. To Puriravas it 
would appear the triple arrangement was owing; 


but there are some other curious traditions 
regarding him, which indicate his being the author 
of some important innovations in the Hindu ritual. 
The Bhagavata says, that before his time there was 
but one Veda, one caste, one fire and one god, 
Narayana; and that, in the beginning of the Treta 
age, Purtiravas made them all 'three:' Tata Waretaa} 
aa Fai that is, according to the commentator, the 
ritual was then instituted : HAM: Weel aq! The 
Matsya Purana has an account of this prince's going 
to the orbit of the sun and moon at every 
conjunction, when oblations to progenitors are to 
be offered, as if obsequial rites had originated with 
Purtravas. The Mahabharata states some still more 
remarkable particulars. 'The glorious Puriravas, 
endowed, although a mortal, with the properties of 
a deity, governing the thirteen islands of the ocean, 
engaged in hostilities with the Brahmanas in the 
pride of his strength and seized their jewels, as they 
exclaimed against his oppression. Sanatkumara 
came from the sphere of Brahma to teach him the 
rules of duty, but Purtiravas did not accept his 
instructions and the king, deprived of 
understanding by the pride of his power and 
actuated by avarice, was therefore ever accursed by 
the offended great sages and was destroyed.' faa: 4 
fame (UR! WER 
TIAA pA TA ses ap a - 
adh Vereen adi vefsfr ae: aa: 
SRAM | AMAA ATTA TTT: | 


KKK 


BOOK IV, 7 


339 


CHAPTER 7 
Cansei: 


(GEtaa WEB aya) 
WIM sara 
TeTreangearmag-Baraa = - MY: «=a: 
(HAATY:) Gal: ASAT VAT 1 Vi 
saraaia AM yaswaqi wee a, 
RSA Tela: , Teafe wg: aset ararenfeaci 


340 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





Purtravas had six sons, Ayus, Dhimat, 
Amavasu, Visvavasu, Satayus and Srutayus.' 
The son of Amavasu was Bhima;? his son was 
Kancana;*> his son was Suhotra;* whose son 
was Jahnu. This prince, while performing a 
sacrifice, saw the whole of the place 
overflowed by the waters of the Ganges. 
Highly offended at this intrusion, his eyes red 
with anger, he united the spirit of sacrifice 
with himself, by the power of his devotion and 
drank up the river. The gods and sages upon 
this came to him and appeased his indignation 
and -re-obtained Ganga from him, in the 
capacity of his daughter (when she is called 
Jahnavi)’. 

Was qt ytswaqi werena:, ad 
actaray:, Tat AN:, PI Hyr- 
HUAN ATTAIN: FAT AYA 3 1 

wat Hoey: ‘“yeRTea Bust wa’ fers aes 
CETIBCUESEC circ MM varrasergerdtel 
PUTA: GRATIN I 


The son of Jahnu was Sumantu;® his son 
was Ajaka; his son was Valakasva;’ his son 
was Kusa,® who had four sons, Kusgamba, 
Kusanabha, Amirttaya and Amiavasu.’ 
Kusdmba, being desirous of a son, engaged in 
devout penance to obtain one who should be 
equal to Indra. Observing the intensity of his 
devotion, Indra was alarmed lest a prince of 
power like his own should be engendered and 
determined therefore to take upon himself the 
character of Kusamba's son.” 


mama a alfvatssaq meer aeadi am 
SAAT Tat wee sree STNG 

pia bibs sige =| a STATUTE, 
ASS HAY CHAAATI § 

aia mffor aeurarngaena spadlatad 
UeMAAsa SATIN 

aT: HATTA 


He was accordingly born as Gadhi, of the 
race of KuSsa (Kausika). Gadhi had a daughter 


named Satyavati. Rcika, of the descendants of 
Bhrgu, demanded her in marriage. The king 
was very unwilling to give his daughter to a 
peevish old Brahmana and demanded of him, 
as the nuptial present, a thousand fleet horses, 
whose colour should be white, with one black 
ear. Rcika having propitiated Varuna, the god 
of ocean, obtained from him, at the only 
placed called ASvatirtha, a thousand such 
steeds; and giving them to the king, espoused 
his daughter.” 


ies Te Wat aa warfaasy 
GANA AAALAC MHTTL AAAI ¢ 

Tw wean saa aaah 
Sqr At WTA Sl 

Saas «OO «= aa ae-aad 
dtaradl wadieadisefa ona ameter «arg 


TERRA TAHA Ro UI 

aqaur fe wHenpUseahares HAT Vg 

fren adres a wa ws wast 
SAaAN VU 

In order to effect the birth of a son, Rictka!? 
prepared a dish of rice, barley and pulse, with 
butter and milk, for his wife to eat; and at her 
request he consecrated a similar mixture for 
her mother, by partaking of which she should 
give birth to a prince of martial prowess. 

Leaving both dishes with his wife, after 
describing particularly which was intended for 
her and which for hes mother, the sage went 
forth to the forests. When the time arrived for 
the food to be eaten, the queen said to 
Satyavati, "Daughter, all persons wish their 
children to be possessed of excellent qualities 
and would be mortified to see them surpassed 
by the merits of their mother's brother. It will 
be desirable for you, therefore, to give me the 
mess your husband has set apart for you and to 
eat of that intended for me; for the son which 
it is to procure me is destined to be the 
monarch of the whole world, while that which 
your dish would give you must be a 


BOOK IV, 7 


341 





Brahmana, alike devoid of affluence, valour 
and power." Satyavati agreed to her mother’s 
proposal and they exchanged messes. 


a ae «= aeradigfircayaq «= ae 


aamg-siaara! fafrenarel wan Haq, afatse 2 


ace, Tt aa aagaieage:; 4 


FHAATI 23 Il 
Tet fe aa Ut Weer Vilel-ard-aereammeratar, 


fafa: yat vag, armdfaa: dat wag samt 


afrreare—waneg stati 94 1 

When Rcika returned home and beheld 
Satyavati, he said to her, "sinful woman, what 
have you done! I view your body of a fearful 
appearance. Of a surety you have eaten the 
consecrated food which was prepared for your 
mother : you have done wrong. In that I had 
infused the properties of power and strength 
and strength and heroism; in your, the qualities 
suited to a Brahmana, gentleness, knowledge 
and resignation. In consequence of having 
reversed my plants, your son shall follow a 
warrior's propensities and use weapons and 
fight and slay. Your mother's son shall be born 
with the inclinations of a Brahmana and be 
addicted to peace and piety." Satyavati, 
hearing this fell at her husband's feet and said, 
"My lord, I have done this thing through 
ignorance; have compassion on me; let me not 
have a son such as you have foretold : if such 
there must be, let it be my grandson, not my 
son." The Muni, relenting at her distress, 
replied, "So let it be." 


ses a wets aaa w feast 
warmer aad wi alfeat am azasraq 


wnefmfeagaricaa Wwierat weargqra 


; ae 
THAR TATA AHS ATTA 2G II 

fauftagag aria wa wast am tdde:, 
Ta Saad) ae A WyET-wa- Hada- 
Caya-Hese-gintareN fawmfrayar VyW: 11 Vo 

we de atfreanain xeerg darn 
Warr 

fa sitfamygear agaist Ma: Sea: th 

Accordingly in due season she gave birth to 
Jamadagni; and her mother brought forth 
Visvamitra. Satyavati afterwards became the 
Kausiki river.'? Jamadagni married Renuka, 
the daughter of Renu, of the family of Iksvaku 
and had by her the destroyer of the Ksatriya 
race, Parasurama, who was a portion of 
Narayana, the spiritual guide of the universe.’* 


LEGEND OF PARASURAMA 
(FROM THE MAHABHARATA) 


"Jamadagni (the son of Ricika’®) was a pious 
sage, who by the fervour of his devotions, while 
engaged in holy study, obtained entire possession 
of the Vedas. Having gone to king Prasenajit, he 
demanded in marriage his daughter Renuk4 and the 
king gave her unto him. The descendant of Bhrgu 
conducted the princess to his hermitage and dwelt 
with her there and she was contented to partake in 
his ascetic life. They had four sons and then a fifth, 
who was Jamadagnya, the last but not the least of 
the brethren. Once when her sons were all absent, 
to gather the fruits on which they fed, Renuké who 
was exact in the discharge of all her duties, went 
forth to bathe. On her way to the stream she beheld 
Citraratha, the prince of Mrittikavati, with a garland 
of lotuses on his neck, sporting with his queen in 
the water and she felt envious of their felicity. 
Defiled by unworthy thoughts, wetted but not 
purified by the stream, she returned disquieted to 
the hermitage and her husband perceived her 
agitation. Beholding her fallen from perfection and 
shorn of the lustre of her sanctity, Jamadagni 
reproved her and was exceedingly wroth. Upon this 
there came her sons from the wood, first the eldest, 
Rumanvat, then Susena, then Vasu and_ then 
ViSvavasu; and each, as he _ entered, was 


342 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





successively commanded by his father to put his 
mother to death; but amazed and influenced by 
natural affcction, neither of them made any reply : 
therefore Jamadagni was angry and cursed them 
and they became as idiots and lost all understanding 
and were like unto beasts or birds. Lastly, Rama 
returned to the hermitage, when the mighty and 
holy Jamadagni said unto him, "Kill your mother, 
who has sinned; and do it, son, without repining." 
Rama accordingly took up his axe and struck off 
his mother's head; whereupon the wrath of the 
illustrious and mighty Jamadagni was assuaged and 
he was pleased with his son and said, "Since you 
have obeyed my commands and done what was 
hard to be performed, demand from me whatever 
blessings your will and your desires shall be all 
fulfilled." Then Rama begged of his father these 
boons; the restoration of his mother to life, with 
forgetfulness of her having been slain and 
purification from all defilement; the return of his 
brothers to their natural condition and for himself, 
invincibility in single combat and length of days; 
and all these did his father bestow. 


"It happened on one occasion, that, during the 
absencc of the Rsi's sons, the mighty monarch 
Karttavirya, the sovereign of the Haihaya tribe, 
endowcd by the favour of Dattatreya with a 
thousand arms and a golden chariot that went 
wheresoever he willed it to go, came to the 
hermitage’® of Jamadagni, where the wife of the 
sage received him with all proper respect. The king, 
inflated with the pride of valour, made no return to 
her hospitality, but carried off with him by violence 
the calf of the milch cow of the sacred obation’” 
and cast down the tall trees surrounding the 
hermitage. When R4ama returned, his father told 
him what had chanced and he saw the cow in 
affliction and he was filled with wrath. Taking up 
his splendid bow,'* Bhargava, the slayer of hostile 
heroes, assailed Karttavirya, who had now become 
subject to the power of death and overthrew him in 
battle. With sharp arrows Rama cut off nis 
thousand arms and the king perished. The sons of 
Karttavirya, to revenge his death, attacked the 
hermitage of Jamadagni, when Rama was away and 
Slew the pious and unresisting sage, who called 
repeatedly, but fruitlessly, upon his valiant son. 
They then departed; and when R4ma returned, 
bearing fuel from the thickets, he found his father 
lifeless and thus bewailed his unmerited fate : 
‘Father, in resentment of my actions have you been 


murdered by wretches as foolish as they are base! 
By the sons of K4rttavirya are you struck down, as 
a deer in the forest by the huntsman's shafts! [Il 
have deserved such a death; you who have ever 
trodden the path of virtue and never offered wrong 
to any created thing! How great is the crime that 
they have committed, in slaying with their deadly 
shafts an old man like you, wholly occupied with 
pious cares and engaging not in strife! Much have 
they to boast of to their fellows and the friends, 
they have shamelessly slain a solitary hermit, 
incapable of contending in arms?’ Thus lamenting, 
bitterly and repeatedly, Rama performed his father's 
last obsequies and lighted his funeral pile. He then 
made a vow that he would extirpate the whole Ks 
atriya race. In fulfilment of this purpose he took up 
his arms and with remorseless and fatal rage singly 
destroyed in fight the sons of K4rttavirya; and after 
them, whatever Ksatriyas he encountered, Rama, 
the first of warriors, likewise slew. Thrice seven 
times did he clear the earth of the Ksatriya caste;'” 
and he filled with their blood the five large lakes of 
Samanta-paficaka, from which he offered libations 
to the race of Bhrgu. There did he behold his sire 
again and the son of Rcika beheld his son and told 
him what to do. Offering a solemn sacrifice to the 
king of the gods, Jimadagnya presented the earth to 
the ministering priests. To Kasyapa he gave the 
altar made of gold, ten fathoms in length and nine, 
in height.”” With the permission of Kasyapa, the 
Brahmanas divided it in picces amongst them and 
they were then called Khandavayana Brahmanas. 
Having given the earth to Kasyapa, the hero of 
immeasurable prowess retired to the Mahendra 
mountain, where he still resides : and in this 
manner was there enmity between him and the race 
of Ksitryas and thus was the whole earth conquered 
by Rama.” 

The son of Visvamitra was Sunahsgephas, the 
descendant of Bhrgu, given by the gods and then 
named Devarata.”* Visvamitra had other sons also, 
amongst whom the most celebrated were 
Madhuchandas, Krtajaya, Devadeva, Astaka, 
Kacchapa and Harita; these founded many families, 
all of whom were known by the name of Kausikas 
and intermarried with the families of various Rsis.” 


NOTES 


1. Considerable variety prevails in these names 
and the Matsya, Padma, Brahma and Agni 
enumerate eight. The lists are as follows : 


BOOK IV, 7 


343 





Mahabharata Matsya Agni Kirm Bhagavata 


Ayus Ayus Ayus  Ayus_- Ayus 
Dhimat Dhrtimat Dhimat Mayus Srutayus 
Amavasu Vasu Vasu Amiayus Satydyus 
Dridhayus Drdhayus Usrayus Visvayus Raya 
Vandyus DhanadyusAntayus Satdyus Vijaya 
Satdyus Satdyus Satayus Srutdyus Jaya 
Asvayus Ritayus 
Divijata Divijata 
The list of the Brahma is that of the 


Mahabharata, with the addition of Satdyus and 
Visvayus; and the Padma agrees with the Matsya. 

2. Son of Vijayu : Bhagavata. This line of 
princes is followed only in our text, the Vayu, 
Brahma and Hari Varnsa and the Bhégavata. 

3. Kancanaprabha : Brahma. 

4. Hotraka : Bhagavata. 

5. The Brahma Purana and Hari Varhsa add of 
this prince, that he was the husband of Kaveri, the 
daughter of Yuvanasva, who by the imprecation of 
her husband became the KaAveri river : another 
indication of the Daksina origin of these works. 
The Hari Varmsa has another Jahnu, to whom it 
gives the same spouse, as we shall hereafter see. 

6. Sunuta : Brahma. Puri : Bhagavata. 

7. Valaka : Brahma. Ajaka : Bhagavata. 

8. The Brahma Purana and Hari VarhSa add that 
Kaisa was in alliance with the Pahlavas and 
foresters. 

9. Our authorities differ as to these names : 


Vayu Brahma and Hari VamSa Bhagavata 
Kusasva or 
Kusasthamba Kusasva Kusamba 
Kusanabha Kusanabha Kusanabha 
Amurttarayasa Amurttimat Amurttaraya 
Vasu Kusika Vasu 

The Ramdyana has Kusémba, Kusanabha, 


Amurttarajasa and Vasu; and makes them severally 
the founders of Kausambi, of Mahodaya (which 
afterwards appears the same as _ Kanou}), 
Dharmaranya and Girivraja; the latter being in the 
mountainous part of Magadha. I. s. 29. 

10. The Brahma and Hari Varhsa make Gadhi 
the son of Kusika; the Vayu and Bhagavata, of 
Kusamaba : the Ramayana, of Kusanabha. 

11. The Ram@yana notices the marriage, but has 
no legend. The Mahabharata, Vana Parva, has a 
rather more detailed narration, but much the same 
as in the text. According to the commentator, 


ASvatirtha is in the district of Kanouj; perhaps at 
the confluence of the Kalanadi with the Ganges. 
The agency of the god of Ocean in procuring 
horses, is a rather curious additional coincidence 
between Varuna and Neptune. 

12. In the Mahabharata, Bhrgu, the father of 
Rcika, prepares the Cari. 

13. So the Ramayana, after stating that Satyavati 
followed her husband in death, adds, that she 
became the Kausiki river; the Kosi, which, rising in 
Nepal, flows through Pirnia into Ganges, opposite 
nearly to Rajamahal. 

14. The text omits the story of Parasurama, but 
as the legend makes a great figure in the Vaisnava 
works in general. I have inserted it from the 
Mahabharata, where it is twice related once in the 
Vana Parva and once in the Rajadharma section of 
the Santi Parva. It is told also at length in the ninth 
book of the Bhagavata, in the Padma and Agni 
Puranas. 

15. The circumstances of Ricika's marriage and 
the birth of Jamadagni and ViSsvamitra, are told 
much in the same manner as in our text both in the 
Mahabharata and Bhagavata. 

16. In the beginning of the legend occurs the 
account of Karttaviryarjuna, with the addition that 
he oppressed both men and gods. The latter 
applying to Visnu for succour, he descended to 
earth and was born as ParaSurdma, for the especial 
purpose of putting the Haihaya king to death. 

17. In the Rajadharma the sons of the king carry 
off the calf. The Bhagavata makes the king seize 
upon the cow, by whose aid Jamadagni had 
previously entertained Arjuna and all his train : 
borrowing, no doubt, these embellishments from 
the similar legend of Vasistha and Visvamitra, 
related in the Ramayana. 

18. The characteristic weapon of Rama, is 
however an axe (Parasu), when his name R&ma, 
‘with the axe.' It was given to him by Siva, whom 
the hero propitiated on mount Gandhamddana. He 
at the same time received instruction in the use of 
weapons generally and the art or war. Rajadharma. 

19. This more than ‘thrice slaying of the slain’ is 
explained in the Rdjadharma to mean, that he killed 
the men of so many generations, as fast as they 
grew up to adolescence. 

20. It is sometimes read Narotsedha, ‘as high as a 


man . 


la 


344 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





21. The story, as told in the Rajadharma section 
adds, that when Rama had given the earth to 
Kasyapa, the latter desired him to depart, as there 
was no dwelling for him in it and to repair to the 
sea-shore of the south, where Ocean made for him 
(or relinquished to him) the maritime district named 
Sirparaka. The traditions of the Peninsula ascribe 
the formation of the coast of Malabar to this origin 
and relate that Parasurama compelled the ocean to 
retirc and introduced Brahmanas and colonists from 
the north into Kerala or Malabar. According to 
some accounts he stood on the promontory of Delhi 
and shot his arrows to the south, over the site of 
Kerala. It seems likely that we have proof of the 
local legend being at least as old as the beginning 
of the Christian era, as the mons Pyrrhus of 
Ptolemy is probably the mountain of Parasu or 
Parasurama. See Catalogue of Mackenzie 
Collection, Introd. P. xcv. And vol. II. P. 74. The 
Rdjadharma also gives an account of the Ksatriyas 
who escaped even the thrice seven times repeated 
destruction of their race. Some of the Haihayas 
were concealed by the earth as women; the son of 
Viduratha, of the race of Pura, was preserved in the 
Rksa mountain, where he was nourished by the 
bears; Sarvakarman, son of Sauddsa, was saved by 
ParaSara, performing the offices of a Sidra; Gopti, 
son of Sivi, was nourished by cows in the forests; 
Vatsa, the son of Pratarddana, was concealed 
amongst the calves in a cow-pen; the son of 
Deviratha was secreted by Gautama on the banks of 
the Ganges; Vrhadratha was preserved in 
Gridhrakita; and descendants of Marutta were 
saved by the ocean. From these the lines of kings 
Were continued; but it does not appear from the 
ordinary lists that they were ever interrupted. This 


legend however, as well as that of the Ramayana, b.. 


J. c. 52, no doubt intimates a violent and protractcd 
struggle betwcen the Brahmanas and Ksatriyas for 
supreme domination in India, as indeed the text of 
the Mahabharata more plainly denotes, as Earth 1s 
made to say to Kasyapa. ‘The fathers add 
grandfathers of these Ksatriyas have been killed by 
ne remorseless of Rama in warfare on my account 

' wast frrda adaa frame: ned Rea a 
a eee 

22. The story of Sunahgephas in told by different 
authorities, with several variations. As the author of 
various Siktas in the Rk, he is called the son of 
Ajigartta. The Ramayana makes him the middle son 
of the sage Rcika, sold to Ambarisa, king of 


Ayodhya, by his parents, to be a victim in a human 
sacrifice offered by that prince. He is set at liberty 
by Visvamitra, but it is not added that he was 
adopted. The Bhagavata concurs in the adoption, 
but makes SunahSephas the son of Visvamitra's 
sister, by Ajigartta or the sacrifice of Hariscandra 
(see n. 9. Bk. IV. Ch. II). The Vayu makes him a 
son of Rcika, but a!'udes to his being the victim at 
Hariscandra’s sacrifice. According to _ the 
Ramayana, Visvamitra called upon his sons to take 
the place of Sunahsephas and on their refusing, 
degradcd them to the condition of Candalas. The 
Bhagavata says, that fifty only of the hundred sons 
of Visvamitra were expelled from their tribe, for 
refusing to acknowledge Sunahgephas or Devarata 
as tlieir elder brother. The others consented; and the 
Bhagavata expresses this; 548 Was aa 
4 f€1 'They said to the elder, profoundly versed in 
the mantras. We are your followers:’ as the 
commentator; afr: ast A eee:! The 
Ramayana also observes, that Sunahgephas, when 
bound, praised Indra with Rcas or hymns of the 
Rgveda. The origin of the story therefore, whatever 
may be its correct version, must be referred to the 
Vedas; and it evidently alludes to some innovation 
in the ritual, adopted by a part only of the Kausika 
families of Brahmanas. 

23. The Bhagavata says one hundred sons, 
besides Devarata and others, as Astaka, Harita. 
Much Ionger lists of names are given in the Vayu, 
Bhagavana, Brahma and Hari Varhsa. The two 
latter specify the mothers. Thus Devasravas, Kati 
(the founder of the Katyayanas) and Hiranyaksa 
were sons of Silavati; Renuka, Galava, Sankriti, 
Mudgala, Madhucchandas and Devala were sons of 
Renu; and Astaka, Kacchapa and Harita were the 
sons of Drsadvati. The same works enumerate the 
Gotras, the families or tribes of the Kausika 
Brahmanas these are Parthivas, Devaratas, 
Yajnavalkyas, Samarsanas, Udumbaras, Dumlanas, 
Tarakayanas, Muncatas, Lohitas, Renus, Karisus, 
Babhrus, Paninas, Dhyanajyapyas, Syd4lantas, 
Hiranyaksas, Sankus, Galavas, Yamaditas, 
Devailas, Salankayanas, Baskalas, Dadativadaras, 
Sausratas, Saindhavayanas, Nisnatas, Cunculas, 
Salankkrityas, Sankrityas, Vadaranyas and an 
infinity of others, multiplied by intermarriages with 
other tribes and who, according to the Vayu, were 
originally of the regal caste, like Visvamitra; but, 
like him, obtained Brahmanhood through devotion. 


BOOK IV, 8 345 





Now these gotras or some of them at least, no doubt 
existed, partaking more of the character of schools 
of doctrine, but in which teachers and scholars were 
very likely to have become of one family by 
intermarrying; and the whole, as well as their 
original founder, imply the interference of the Ks 
atriya caste with the Brahmanical monopoly of 
religious instruction and composition. 
kek 


BOOK IV, 8 


CHAPTER 8 


SPU SeaITa: 
(TqaMaIAY, Gadteaht:, Te awautaw) 
WUT Sarat 


Tea We: wt araim, a 
MelSteaqtquaa Tea W UST War SaTaTa AEa- 
aeagg: TW.ign:, wart: war: yarsa 
AAT Wea: yalsaat argery-Tarereanay 
Wraasvaqy!| weet = yihewngqdudwadfaar- 
SIL Vt 

ara oaiigrn:, aa dh: yaiswadq 
gaia ddadsy a fe dfagaretam: 
TATA AMAT 2 

WTA ARTA UB sear BN SA 3 Ut 

AMINMASATA aAaET WeMyad afeata, 
ae wfaeata Stati xi 

wad gat: Ya: gam Agua stew, 
weta 4 feaiera:, ad: We ww @ 
aauyanfaraern: was fir sf 
VATA & UI 

wa od wifmeregar aca acteatfea:, adi 
AAS ATAMATH & 

AAAI BRATHAN GAY HackaaAay 
AY, HAT saa ofreai wet: 

Ta AT aM Wiseal aAvaq armenia 
voitent WHadi- 

ufs adagentir afs aternft ai 

MAHI APA BP Afett Far cit 


345 


Ayus, the eldest son of Puriravas, married 
the daughter of Rahu (or Arahu), by whom he 
had five sons, Ndahusa, Ksatravrddha,' 
Rambha,” Raji and Anenas.’? The son of Ks 
atravrddha was Suhotra,’ who had three sons, 
Kaga,’ Lesa° and Ghrtasamada. The son of that 
last was Saunaka,’ who first established the 
distinctions of the four castes.» The son of 
Kaisa was  Kasiraja;> his son was 
Dirghatamas;’” his son was Dhanvantan, 
whose nature was exempt from human 
infirmities and who in every existence had 
been master of universal knowledge. In his 
past life (or when he was produced by the 
agitation of the milky sea), Narayana had 
conferred upon him the boon, that he should 
subsequently be born in the family of Kasiraja, 
should compose the eight-fold system of 
medical science’’ and should be thereafter 
entitled to a share of offerings made to the 
gods. The son of Dhanvantari was Ketumat; 
his son was Bhimaratha; his son was 
Divodasa;'* his son was Pratarddana, so named 
from destroying the race of Bhadrasrenya. He 
had various other appellations, as Satrujit, 'the 
victor over his foes,’ from having vanquished 
all his enemies; Vatsa, or ‘child’, from his 
father's frequently calling him by that name; 
Ritadhvaja, ‘he whose emblem was truth,' 
being a great observer of veracity; and 
KuvalaydSva, because he had a horse (aSva) 
called Kuvalaya.’* The son of this prince was 
Alarka, of whom this verse is sung in the 
present day; “For sixty thousand and sixty 
hundred years no other youthful monarch 
except Alarka, reigned over the earth.""* 


WNIARA VACA TAL! TT: WA:, TT 
Yry:. Wal aelag:, ad: Wesg:, Tene, fay:, 
Ta: Blay:, Way YHI:, Tene gyag:, Ades 
aqem:, owe oart:, owe arty, 
saggavanght:, sald wrgrat sada: Berar: 
Wey waa: sean <u 

ofa sitfamyqert agquist arom: sear: tt 


346 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





The son of Alarka was Santati;’ his son 
was Sunitha; his son was Suketu; his son was 
Dharmaketu; his son was Satyaketu; his son 
was Vibhu; his son was Suvibhu; his son was 
Sukum4ra; his son was Dhrstketu; his son was 
Vainahotra; his son was Bharga; his son was 
Bhargabhtmi; from whom also rules for the 
four castes were promulgated.'® These are the 
Kasya princes or descendants of Kaga.'? We 
will now enumerate the descendants of Raji. 

kk 


NOTES 


1. Dharmavrddha Vayu. Vrddhasarman 
Matsya. YajfiaSarman : Padma. 

2. Darbha : Agni. Dambha : Padma. 

3. Vipapman : Agni and Matsya, Vidaman : 
Padma. The two last authorities proceed no further 
with this line. 

4. Sunahotra : Vayu, Brahma. 

5. Kasya : Bhagavata. 

6. Sala : Vayu, Brahma, Hari Varnsa : whose son 
was Arstisena, father of Caranta; Vayu : of 
Kasyapa; Brahma and Hari VarhSa. 

7. Here is probably an error, for the Vayu, 
Bhagavata and Brahma agree in making Sunaka the 
son of Ghrtsamada and father of Saunaka. 

8. The expression is wqart yadfaat ‘The 
originator or causer of the distinctions (or duties) of 
the four castes.’ The commentator, however, 
understands the expression to signify, that his 
descendants were of the four castes. So also the 
ib ll ino Mtl anaes thn 
afrnaa Werder) wars aweaqa: fats: 
aufigen: | 'The son of Ghrtsamda was Sunaka, 
whose son was Saunaka, Brahmanas, Ksatriya, 
Vaisyas and Siidras were born in his race: 
Brahmanas by distinguished deeds.' The existence 
of but one caste in the age of purity, however 
incompatible with the legend which ascribes the 
origin of the four tribes to Brahma, is everywhere 
admitted. Their separation is assigned to different 
individuals, whether accurately to any one may be 
doubted; but the notion indicates that the distinction 
was of a social or political character. 

9. Kasiya : Brahma. 

10. Dirghatapas : Vayu. Ghrtsatamas :Agni. The 
Bhagavata inserts a Rastra before this prince and 
the Vayu a Dharma after him. 


11. The eight branches of medical science are, |. 
Salya, extraction of extraneous bodies; 2. Salaka, 
treatment of external organic affections : these two 


‘constitute surgery; 3. Cikitsa, administration of 


medicines or medical treatment in general; 4. 
Bhitavidya4, treatment of maladies referred to 
demoniac possession; 5. Kaumarabhrtya, midwifery 
and management of children; 6. Agada, 
alexipharmacy; 7.  Rasdyana,  al-chemical 
therapeutics; 8. Bajikarana, use of aphrodisiacs. 
Dhanvantari, according to the Brahma Vaivartta 
Purana, was preceded in medical science by Atreya, 
Bharadvaja and Caraka : his pupil Susruta is the 
reputed author of a celebrated work still extant. It 


* seems probable that Kasi or Bandrasa was at an 


early period a celebrated school of medicine. 

12. Some rather curious legends are connected 
with this prince in the Vayu and Brahma Puranas 
and Hari VarmSa and especially in the Kasi Khanda 
of the Skanda Purana. According to these 
authorities, Siva and Parvati, desirous of occupying 
Kasi, which Divodasa possessed, sent Nikumbha, 
one of the Ganas of the former, to lead the prince to 
the adoption of Buddhist doctrines; in consequence 
of which he was expelled from the sacred city and 
according to the Vayu, founded another on the 
banks of the Gomati. We have, however, also some 
singular, though obscure intimations of some of the 
political events of this and the succeeding reign. 
The passage of the Vayu is, Sos"aey Yar 
waqmaurad) seat fraser fear aaa 
NEHA Wed | Bd VA AHS WSs WARY TEA ATA 
aaa: | featterR OO aeifa reff 
fedierressacat FO wa wads: 1 FA IMT a Vad TET a 
TA: | A HET Ta Tar Bt fafereqat 'The king of 
Divodasa, having slain the hundred sons of 
Bhadrasrenya, took possession of his kingdom, 
which was conquered by that hero. The son of 
Bhadrasrenya, celebrated by the name of 
Durddama, was spared by Divodasa, as being an 
infant. Protarddana was the son of Divodasa by Drs 
advati; and by that great prince, desirous of 
destroying all enmity, (was recovered) that 
(territory) which had been seized by that young boy 
(Durdama).' This is not very explicit and something 
is wanted to complete the sense. The Brahma 
Puréna and Hari Varnsa tell the story twice over, 
chiefly in the words of the Vayu, but with some 
additions. In chapter 29 we have, first, the first 


BOOK IV, 8 


three lines of the above extract; then comes the 
story of Banarasa being deserted; we then have the 
two next lines; then follow, eae ¢ Waa aay a 
Feat: | sats fageara fealera ed Ae WesHVAeA YANUT 
Seat Vere award Fert afar fafteaa 'The 
prince (Durddama) invading his _patrimonial 
possessions, the territory which Divodasa had 
seized by force was recovered by the gallant son of 
Bhadrasrenya, Durddama, a warrior desirous, 
mighty king, to effect the destruction of his foes.’ 
Here the victory is ascribed to Durddama, in 
opposition to what appears to be the sense of the 
Vayu and what is undoubtedly that of our text, 
which says that he was called Pratarddana from 
destroying the race of Bhadragrenya and Satrujit 
from vanquishing all his foes : a: Weal 
Tg Sv fact sit wa fevadi By 
Variasya anta, 'the end of hostility or enmity', is 
obviously not to be understood here, as M. 
Langlois has intimated, a friendly pacification, but 
the end or destruction of all enemies. In the 32" 
chapter of the Hari Varnsa we have precisely the 
same lines, slightly varied as to their order; but they 
are preceded by this verse; aga Jods Yt aRTe 
Ta AIT WTI THAT Ail "The city (that on 
the Gomati), before the existence of Bandrasa, of 
Bhadrasrenya, a pious of the Yadu race.’ This verse 
is not in the Brahma Purana. After giving the rest of 
the above quotation, except the last line, the 
passage proceeds, eRe Aa Fa: Gat vad a1 wa 
Ty wey ved Ta ue ae Term afer 
faftteaat! 'The king called Astaratha was the son of 
Bhimaratha; and by him, great king, a warrior 
desirous of destroying his foes was (the country) 
recovered, the children (of Durddama) being 
infants.’ TI eae Frat! Com. According to 
the same authority, we are here to understand 
Bhimaratha and Astaratha as epithets of 
Divodasa and Pratarddana. From these scanty and 
ill-digested notices it appears, that Divodasa, on 
being expelled from Banarasa, took some city and 
district on the Gomati from the family of 
Bhadrasrenya; that Durddama recovered the 
country and that Pratarddana again conquered it 
from his descendants. The alternation concerned 
apparently only bordering districts, for the princes 
of Mahisamati and of Kasi continue, in both an 
earlier and a later series, in undisturbed possession 
of their capitals and their power. 


347 


13. The Vayu, Agni, Brahma Purana and Hari 
VarhSa interpose two sons of Pratarddana, Garga or 
Bharga and Vatsa; and they make Vatsa the father 
of Alarka, except the Brahma, which has Satrujit 
and Rtadhvaja as two princes following Vatsa. 

14. The Vayu, Brahma and Hari Varhsa repeat 
this stanza and add that Alarka enjoyed such 
protracted existence through the favour of 
Lopamudra and that having lived till the period at 
which the curse upon K4si terminated, he killed the 
Raksasas Ksemaka, by whom it had been occupied 
after it was abandoned by Divodasa and caused the 
city to be reinhabited, WVAIrd Aerareecat HATTA 
val areaarara Wt aRMrei FA: | The Hari Varhga agrees 
as usual with the Brahma, except in the reading of 
one or two names. It is to be observed, however, 
that the Agni makes the Kasi princes the 
descendants of Vitatha, the successor of Bharata. 
The Brahma Purana and Hari Varhga, determined 
apparently to be right, give the list twice over, 
deriving it in one place from Ksatravrddha, as in 
our text, the Vayu and the Bhagavata; and in 
another, with the Agni, from Vitatha. The series of 
the Brahma, however, stops with Lauhi, the son of 
Alarka and does not warrant the repetition which 
the carelessness of the compiler of the Hari Varhsa 
has superfluously inserted. 

15. Several varieties occur, in the series that 
follows, as the comparative lists will best show : 


Bhagavata Brahma Vayu Agni 
Alarka Alarka Alarka Alarka 
Santati Sannati Sannati Dharmaketu 
Sunitha Sunitha Sunitha Vibhu 
Suketana Ksema Suketu Sukuméara 
Dharmaketu§ Ketumat Dhrstaketu Satyaketu 
Satyaketu Suketu Venuhotra 
Dhrstaketu Dharmaketu Gargya 
Sukuméara Satyaketu. Gargabhimi 
Vitthotra Vibhu Vatsabhimi 
Bharga Anartta 
Bhargabhimi Sukumdara 

Dhrstaketu 

Venuhotri 

Bharga 

Vatsabhimi 


16. Our text is clear enough and so is the 
Bhagavata, but the Vayu, Brahma and Hari VarhSa 
contain additions of rather doubtful import. The 
former has, wer qamfe weal 4d amfaga: mW 


348 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





Tivteg ade va: san: afrenda wi: oH 
year: | 'The son of Venuhotra was the celebrated 
Gargya; Gargabhimi was the son of Gargya; and 
Vatsa, of the wise Vatsa; virtuous Brahmanas and 
Ksatriyas were the sons of these two.'’ By the 
second Vatsa 1s perhaps meant Vatsabhtimi; and the 
purpose of the passage is, that Gargya (or possibly 
rather Bharga, one of the sons of Pratarddana) and 
Vatsa were the founders of two races (Bhimi, 
‘earth,’ implying 'source' or 'founder'), who were Ks 
atriyas by birth and Brahmanas by profession. The 
Brahma and Hart  Varisa § apparently 
misunderstanding this text, have increased the 
perplexity. According to them, the son of 
Venuhotra was Bharga; Vatsabhiimi was the son of 
Vatsa; and Bhargabhiimi (Bhrgubhimi, Brahma) 
was from Bhargava. 'These sons of Angiras were 
born in the family of Bhrgu, thousands of great 
might, Brahmanas, Ksatriyas and Vaisyas.' @eAy 
daft sl ATH Waa: | ares cee opfyffequrian 
Cayfrguriag) | wWerara: ya: arat agisaurta 
SIM: aaara WAG! AAT: | The commentator 
has, aeencdefag yarns acai; arta 
aa: | aga meena arfa faa 
wtacaqi| ‘Another son of Vatsa, the father of 
Alarka, is described, Vatsabhiimi. From Bhargava, 
the brother of Vatsa. (They were) Angirasas from 
Galava belonging to that family (and were born) in 
the family of Bhrgu from the descent of 
Visvamitra.' The interpretation is not very clear, but 
it authorises the notion above expressed, that Vatsa 
and Bharga, the sons of Pratarddana, are the 
founders of two races of Ksatriya-Brahmanas. 

17. On the subject of note 12 some further 
illustration is derivable from the Mahabharata, 
Santi Parva, Dana-dharma. Haryagva, the king of 
the K4sis, reigning between the Ganges and the 
Yamuna or in the Doab, was invaded and slain by 
the Haihayas, a race descended, according to this 
authority; from Saryati, the son of Manu (see Bk. 
IV. Ch, II). Sudeva, the son of Haryasva, was also 
attacked and defeated by the same enemies. 
Divodasa, his son, built and fortified Bandrasa as a 
defence against the Haihayas, but in vain, for they 
took it and compelled him to fly. He sought refuge 
with Bharadvaja, by whose favour he had a son 
born to him, Pratarddana, who destroyed the 
Haihayas under their king Vitihavya and _ re- 
established the kingdom of Kasi. Vitihavya, 


through the protection of Bhrgu, became a 
Brahmana. The Mahabharata gives a list of his 
descendants, which contains several of the names 
of the Kasya dynasty of the text; thus, Ghrtsamada 
is Said to be his son and the two last of the line are 
Sunaka and Saunaka. See supra, n. 7. 

tek 


348 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


CHAPTER 9 
TaANTSearea: 


(TWAS FSA, MAGA amraternaag) 
WU Sara 


w  Wagedkhanare «= - aay 
REMY UTeaeaat ea «= TaNvi 
UMEZ 11 

way! sraent fava mat: wat wa 
afar se wrarm—aame  <foraget 
Uitte str cereter winreraeraderranaad: 
We, -areasé waar, waeaat-ware wana 
afaenty ght snavdaq afufedt, 3 qaqa 


wfaereifa aatern QI 

Raji had five hundred sons, all of 
unequalled daring and vigour. Upon the 
occurrence of a war between the demons and 
the gods, both parties inquired of Brahma 
which would be victorious. The deity replied, 
"That for which Raji shal] take up arms." 
Accordingly the Daityas immediately repaired 
to Raji, to secure his alliance; which he 
promised them, if they would make him their 
Indra after defeating the gods. To this they 
answered and said, "We cannot profess one 
thing and mean another; our Indra is Prahlada 
and it is for him that we wage war.” Having 
thus spoken, they departed; and the gods then 
came to him on the like errand. He proposed to 
them the said conditions and they agreed that 
he should be their Indra. 


BOOK IV, 9 


tient taeda sranieracesangiact 
frafarq stafsarafess sat thraurgne- 
mare Futgae,- waaeniecaaad wary 
AMAA TAT HAT TATE Yat eaeTAH: 13 I 


Raji therefore joined the heavenly host and 
by his numerous and formidable weapons 
destroyed the army of their enemies. When the 
demons were discomfited, Indra placed the 
feet of Raji upon his head and said, "You have 
preserved me from a great danger and I 
acknowledge you as my father; you are the 
sovereign chief over all the regions and I, the 
Indra of the three spheres, am your son." 


a aia Tan weee,- Vater, smitten 
fe afuercarafaraneaermt suft, sya 
CTA TAN SI MTT AHTT 


The Raja smiled and said, "Even be it so. 
The regard that is conciliated by many 
agreeable speeches 1s not to be resisted even 
when such language proceeds from a foe 
(much less should the kind words of a friend 
fail to win our affection)." He accordingly 
returned to his own city and Indra remained as 
his deputy in the government of heaven. 


wat a OG oareftetfert «= tater: 
VATA GANAS WR ATT GH 
wer Mateaitater: watrgdt wR: 
ay agit ae add  geafimtar 
SUUTRAANST-AHATT: MATTE & I 


aaa Temtred- wad wdta ware alfa: 
i, ara wed fernenteafttrii 9 it 
camafenenttch afeqera waar a agg 
Warsi 

When Raji ascended to the skies, his sons, 
at the instigation of Narada, demanded the 
rank of Indra as their hereditary right; and as 
the deity refused to acknowledge their 
supremacy, they reduced him to submission by 
force and usurped his station. After some 


Waa: ay fag:, 


349 


considerable time had elapsed, the god of a 
hundred sacrifices, Indra, deprived of his share 
of offerings to the immortals, met Brhaspati in 
a retired place and said to him, "Cannot you 
give me a little of the sacrificial butter, even if 
it were no bigger than a jujube, for I am in 
want of sustenance?" "If," replied Brhaspati, "I 
had been applied to by you before, I could 
have done anything for you that you wished; 
as it is, I will endeavour and restore you in a 
few days to your sovereignty." So saying, he 
commenced a sacrifice for the purpose of 
increasing the might of Indra and of leading 
the sons of Raji into error and so effecting 
their downfall.' 

a ule a gfaneniyaart gafee stent 
aCTUUGE TYG: AT AVA Fat 
TEA Wieenatns fag wafager 
URAGANUT eal YER: TaUae ied at a 
areata 

Misled by their mental fascination, the 
princes became enemies of the Brahmanas, 
regardless of their duties and contemners of 
the precepts of the Vedas; and thus devoid of 
morality and religion, they were slain by 
Indra, who by the assistance of the priest of 
the gods resumed his place in heaven. 
Whoever hears this story shall retain forever 
his proper place and never be guilty of wicked 
acts. 


eT 
Wiaagrgd: Weda:, Taned:, Ta waaa:, 
Gefa:, aga: amt: geld aaa 
AIA BVA SHI ¢ i 
sia sfawpgaat agaiey Aaa: Se: 11 

Rambha, the third son of Ayus, had no 
progeny.” Ksatravrddha had a son named 
Pratiksatra®; his son was Sanjaya; his son was 
Vijaya;’ his son was Yajiiakrit;> his son was 
Harsavarddhana;° his son was Sahadeva; his 


son was Adina;’ his son was Jayasena; his son 
‘ ‘ 8 
was Sankrti; his son was Ksatradharman. 


art 


350 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





These were the descendants of Ksatravrddha. I 
will now mention those of Nahusa. 
kkk 


NOTES 


1. The Matsya says he taught the sons of Raji the 
Jinadharma or Jain religion : frat wares acare 
a aefad 

2. The Bhagavata enumerates however, as his 
descendants, Rabhasa, Gambhira and Akriya, 
whose posterity became Brahmanas. The same 
authority gives as the descendants of Anenas the 
fourth son of Ayus, Suddha, Suci, Trikakud and 
Santakhya. 

3. The Vayu agrees with our text in making 
Pratipaksa (Pratiksatra) the son of Ksattravrddha; 
but the Brahma Purana and Hari Varhsa consider 
Anenas to be the head of this branch of the 
posterity of Ayus. The Bhagavata substitutes Kusa, 
the Lesa of our text, the grandson of Ksatravrddha, 
for the first name; and this seems most likely to be 
correct. Although the different MSS, agree in 
reading agGYa: it should be perhaps MAG! the 
patronymic Ksatravrddha; making then, as the 
Bhagavata does, Pratiksatra the son of Ks 
atravrddha. 

4. Jaya: Bhagavata, Vayu. 

5. Vijaya : Vayu, Krta : Bhagavata. 

6. Haryasva : Brahma, Hari Varhsa Haryavana : 
Bhagavata. 

7. The last of the list : Vayu, Ahina : Bhagavata. 

8. Ksatravrddha : Brahma, Hari VarhSa. 

kk 


350 
CHAPTER 10 
SUMS: 
(ACVIAMAAY, AAAS ) 


Ue Ua Hea THE:) alae ted Ae 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


IAM Sanlerta AAASAATATA 3 1 


MUNA ase fier Mene,~ aA Wafeat WeTVt 
ASR TN 4 I 

Yati, Yayati, Sanyati, Ayati, Viyati and 
Krti were the six valiant sons of Nahusa.’ Yati 
declined the sovereignty’ and Yayati therefore 
succeeded to the throne. He had two wives, 
Devayani, the daughter of USanas and Sarmist 
ha, the daughter of Vrsaparvan; of whom this 
genealogical verse is recited : "Devayani bore 
two sons, Yadu and Turvasu. Sarmistha, the 
daughter of Vrsaparvan, had three sons, 
Druhyu, Anu and Puru."’ Through the curse of 
Usanas, Yayati became old and infirm before 
his time; but having appeased his father-in- 
law, he obtained permission to transfer his 
decrepitude to any one who would consent to 
take it. He first applied to his eldest son Yadu, 
and said, "Your maternal grandfather has 
brought this premature decay upon me; by his 
permission, however, I may transfer it to you 
for a thousand years. I am not yet satiate with 
worldly enjoyments and wish to partake of 
them through the means of your youth. Do not 
refuse compliance with my request." Yadu, 
however, was not willing to take upon him his 
father’s decay; on which his father denounced 
an imprecation upon him and said, "Your 
posterity shall not possess dominion.” 


Tes 8 Reda = plucitufastreure 
a wiearal dean, 


aenfeg yyenad, seas sfert faa wig MSR MTT Ser SCE ORBLE CE IDICS| 


area yTaA I 811 
SATTaVeaA ate 
aga Jaqea caer sare 
ITS Yea yiitar aaa 211 


YS wae, a ufaranata: wore frat wagart 
Ter warisanarafigenratiard wit wfasere 
wats aed fax ech asft a ad waa 
PA) MAH WATT & I 


BOOK IV, 10 


fagrent wernt yaa aMaMManareani- 
afet Trea TAI 9 Il 


He then applied successively to Druhyu, 
Turvasu and Anu and demanded of them their 
juvenile vigour. They all refused and were in 
consequence cursed by the king. Lastly he 
made the same request of Sarmistha's 
youngest son, Puru, who bowed to his father 
and readily consented to give him his youth 
and receive in exchange Yayati's infirmities, 
saying that his father had conferred upon him 
a great favour. 

The king Yayati being thus endowed with 
renovated youth, conducted the affairs of state 
for the good of his people, enjoying such 
pleasures as were suited to his age and 
strength and were not incompatible with 
virtue. He formed a connection with the 
celestial nymph Visvaci and was wholly 
attached to her and conccived no end to his 
desires. 


Sylora SMT HMA VAT AA C1 
aa aUTTAL 

aarrearen 
TW aM: ST saa 
sian Foracia yea warhiagan 8 tt 
aq vise difead fart agra: fara: 
USE A Tals Aaahigs TAIT 0 1 
aa T Hed Wes WayAT Wea 
WAgdeal Ya: Gal wa War farsi eV 
a seat sufafirat 3 siete seta: 
ot TU Va Wat: Tatar V2 
Tare sel: Het Sa Aa SA: 
SATE Vitae a sitsarshe 7 fn V3 1 


The more they were gratified, the more 
ardent they became; as it is said in this verse, 
"Desire is not appeased by enjoymert; fire fed 
with sacrificial oil becomes but the more 
intense. No one has ever more than enough of 
rice or barley or gold or cattle, or women; 
abandon therefore inordinate desire. When a 


351 


mind finds neither good nor ill in all objects, 
but looks on all with an equal eye, then 
everything yields it pleasure. The wise man is 
filled with happiness, who escapes from 
desire, which the feeble-minded can with 
difficulty relinquish an which grows not old 
with the aged. The hair becomes grey, the 
teeth fall out, as man advances in years; but 
the love of wealth, the love of life, are not 
impaired by age." 

quataee T fararamard:| 

AMATTeT FUT AAT ATT ¥ I 

ACCA TIAA FAVA AAAI 

Freel Frint spar afcenfa gt: wan eu 

"A thousand years have passed,” reflected 
Yayati, "and my mind is still devoted to 
pleasure; every day my desires are awakened 
by new objects. I will therefore now renounce 
all sensual enjoyment and fix my mind upon 
spiritual truth. Unaffected by the alternatives 
of pleasure and pain and having nothing I may 
call my own, I will henceforth roam the forests 
with the deer." 


WU Sata 


Ui: Wares wt sat @ Baa 

TRshirey Yes wast ATA ATTN ge Il 

fefor fa 7a « ; « fe 

WATS Ta Fa eferorvaat ATA got 

sda wart arear qusfert Far 

wagers ws aisfafeer at aati ei 

fa sitfawmrgeror aqutsr err: SteareT: 

Having made this determination, Yayati 
restored his youth to Puru, resumed his own 
decrepitude, installed his youngest son in the 
sovercignty and departed to the wood of 
penance (Tapovana).* To Turvasu he 
consigned he south-east districts of his 
kingdom; the west to Druhyu; the south to 
Yadu; and the north to Anu; to govern as 
viceroys under their younger brother Puru, 


whom he appointed supreme monarch of the 
earth.” 


352 


NOTES 


1. The Bhagavata refers briefly to the story of 
Nahusa which is told in the Mahabharata more than 
once, in the Vana Parva, Udyoga Parva, Dana 
Dharma Parva and others; also in the Padma and 
other Puranas. He had obtained the rank of Indra; 
but in his pride or at the suggestion of Saci, 
compelling the Rsis to bear his litter, he was cursed 
by them to fall from his state and reappear upon 
earth as a serpent. From this form he was set free 
by philosophical discussions with Yudhisthira and 
received final liberation. Much speculation, wholly 
unfounded, has been started by Wilford's conjecture 
that the name of this prince, with Deva, ‘divine’, 
prefixed, a combination which never occurs, was 
the same as Dionysius or Bacchus. Authorities 
generally agree as to the names of the first three of 
his sons : in those of the others there is much 
variety and the Matsya, Agni and Padma have 
seven names, as follows omitting the three first of 
the text: 


Matsya Agni Padma Linga 
Udbhava § Udbhava Udbhava Saryati 
Pansci Paficaka Pava Campaka 
Sunyati Palaka Viyati Andhaka 
Meghayati Megha Meghayatt 


2. Or, as his name implies (4a), he became a 
devotee, a Yati : Bhagavata. 

3. The story is told in great detail in the Adi 
Parvan of the Mahabharata, also in the Bhagavata, 
with some additions evidently of a recent taste. 
Sarmisth, the daughter of Vrsaparvan, king of the 
Daityas, preceptor of the same race), had her 
thrown into a well. Yayati, hunting in the forest, 
found her and taking her to her father, with his 
consent espoused her. Devay4ni, in resentment of 
Sarmistha's treatment, demanded that she should 
become her handmaid; and Vrsaparvan, afraid of 
Sukra's displeasure, was compelled to comply. In 
the service of his queen, however, Yayati beheld 
Sarmistha and secretly wedded her. Devay4ani 
complaining to her father of Yayati's infidelity, 
Sukra inflicted on him premature decay, with 
permission to transfer it to any one willing to give 
him youth and strength in exchange, as is related in 
the text. The passage specifying the sons of Yayati 
is precisely the same in the Mahabharata as in our 
text and is imtroduced in the same way 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


saci vale) oe aqda ta taart warerad! Tw 
ar Ys witie antatoit 

4. Bhrgutunga, according to the Brahma. 

5. The elder brothers were made Mandala-nrpas, 
kings of circles or districts : Bhagavata. The 
situation of their governments is not exactly agreed 
upon. 


Vayu and Brahmaand Bhagavyata 
Padma Hari Varmsa 
Turvasu South-east South-east West 
Druhyu West West South-east 
Yadu South-west South South 
Anu North North North 


The Linga describes the ministers and people as 
expostulating with Yayati, for illegally giving the 
supremacy to the youngest son; but he satisfies 
them by showing that he was justified in setting the 
seniors aside, for want of filial duty. The 
Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva Galava Caritra, has a 
legend of Yayati's giving a daughter to the saint 
Galava, who through her means obtains from 
different princes cight hundred horses, white with 
one black ear, as a fee for his preceptor Visvamitra. 
Yayati, after his death and residence in Indra's 
heaven, is again descending to earth, when his 
daughter's sons give him the benefit of their 
devotions and replace him in the celestial sphere. It 
has the air of an old story. A legend in some 
respects similar has been related in our text, Bk. IV, 
Ch. VII. 

kkk 


352 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


CHAPTER 11 
WHS SATA: 
(Aga AeaeeTyA Bey a Fo) 


UUM Jara 

at: Ut Fa: waayrer gered ae 
frelnttarrmentatirerquercwraa aarhrgar- 
Users ware fasy- 
TARA VU 


STI Vera: 


BOOK IV, 11 


aardet At: gear Baad: WEA 
aad faanpanst wt wer Frasier 2 1 
I will first relate to you the family of Yadu, 

the eldest son of Yayati, in which the eternal 
immutable Visnu descended upon earth in a 
portion of his essence;' of which the glory 
cannot be described, though forever hymned in 
order to confer the fruit of all their 
wishes—whether they desired virtue, wealth, 
pleasure or liberation—-upon all created beings, 
upon men, saints, heavenly quiristers, spirits 
of evil, nymphs, centaurs, serpents, birds, 
demons, gods, sages, Brahmanas and ascetics. 
Whoever hears the account of the race of Yadu 
shall be released from all sin; for the supreme 
spirit, that is without form and which is called 
Visnu, was manifested in this family. 


Teak REA Tye | AgIaT Ag: | 
RGR GF: Bah wer teaayeMea: ya 
aya: eae aMa:, Ad: Het:, HA: Tele, 
waar Ase, AAT eT: aa seN:, TANS 
qb: aeaet = Heaaheal-gelta-paanl-gqritsra- 


aaAaeMvIMaaT! «AO T(Netrasenfa 
Waa 3 
Ti a andere aia areata ofgar: 


GAARA AAT WAT SAT AS 
ABFA A A WASMATI 4 II 

Ue Uaeiftraearrteareatedn raster 
Tama! «feet «= feat = aHer- 
TATE = FaTeaeaaea- 
Tadgaaradraaenista Wau: wit ag 
CATMTGEA PUTT AG I 


Yadu had four sons, Sahasrajit, Krosti, 
Nala and Raghu.” Satajit was the son of the 
elder of these and he had three sons, Haihaya, 


353 


Venu’ and Haya. The son of Haihaya was 
Dharmanetra’*: his son was Kunti’; his son was 
Sahanji°; his son was Mahismat’: his son was 
Bhadrasena®; his son was Durddama; his son 
was Dhanaka’, who had four sons, Krtavirya, 
Krtagni, Krtavarman and Krtaujas. Krtavirya's 
son was Arjuna, the sovereign of the seven 
Dvipas, the lord of a thousand arms. This 
prince propitiated the sage Dattatreya, the 
descendant of Atri, who was a portion of Vis 
nu and solicited and obtained from him these 
boons— a thousand arms; never acting unjustly; 
subjugation of the world by justice and 
protecting it equitably; victory over his 
enemies; and death by the hands of a person 
renowned in the three regions of the universe. 
With these means he ruled over the whole 
earth with might and justice and offered ten 
thousand sacrifices. Of him this verse is still 
recited : "The kings of the earth will assuredly 
never pursue his steps in sacrifice, in 
munificence, in devotion, in courtesy and in 
self-control." In his reign nothing was lost or 
injured; and so he governed the whole earth 
with undiminished health, prosperity, power 


. and might, for eighty-five thousand years. 


While sporting in the waters of the Narmada 
and elevated with wine, Ravana came on his 
tour of triumph to the city Mahismati and 
there he who boasted of overthrowing the 
gods, the Daityas, the Gandharvas and their 
king, was taken prisoner by K4rttavirya and 
confined like a tame beast in a corner of his 


capital.” 

a: UMIsiaad aga aewaUralenaar 
WA =U sue) TT 
FANART: VS GAT TyG:, YL AAAI 
TATE! | RATE, Teg: «= YI HAT 
aaa Yaa Aer wast aifrea:, qara 
WA:, WANE F-Word BW GAT yA aqwiadq 
wane gemma yrradiq ad afardama 
MaMa «= AWM aS Aaa 
AAT TARTU AI 9 11 

sta stifaaygrray Taatst Warest: STATI 


354 


_ THE VISNU-PURANAM 





At the expiration of his long reign 
Karttavirya was killed by Parasurama, who 
was an embodied portion of the mighty 
Narayana.’ Of the hundred sons of this king, 
the five principal were Stra’, Strasena, Vrs 
ana!?, Madhu’ and Jayadhvaja.'° The son of 
the last was Talajaigha, who had a hundred 
sons, called after him Talajanghas : the eldest 
of these was Vitihotra; another was Bharata'®, 
who had two sons, Vrsa and Sujati'’. The son 
of Vrsa was Madhu’; he had a hundred sons, 
the chief of whom was Vrsni and from him the 
family obtained the name of Vrsni’’. From the 
name of their father, Madhu, they were also 
called Madhavas; while from the 
denomination of their common ancestor Yadu, 
the whole were termed Yadavas.”” 

KKK 


NOTES 


1. Or, ‘in which Krsna was born.’ It might have 
bcen expected, from the importance of this 
genealogy, that it would have been so carefully 
preserved, that the authorities would have closely 
concurred in its details. Although, however, the 
leading specifications coincide, yet, as we shall 
have occasion to notice, great and irreconcilable 
variations occur. 

2. The two first generally agree. There are 
differences in the rest; as 


Vayu Brahma’ Bhiagavata Kiirma 
Nila Nala Nala Nila 
Ajita  Anjika Aripu Jina 
Raghu Payoda Raghu 


The Brahma and Hari Varhsa read Sahasrada for 
the first name; and the Linga has Balasani in place 
of Nala. The Agni makes Satajit also a son of Yadu. 

3. Venuhaya : Bhagavata. Uttanahaya : Padma. 
Vettahaya : Matsya. They were the sons of 
Sahasrada : Brahma and Hari VarhSa. 

4. Dharmatantra : Vayu, Dharma : Karma. 

5. Kirtti : Vayu. 

6. Sanjneya : Vayu. Sankana : Agni. Sahafija of 
Sahanjani pura : Brahma. Sanjnita : Linga. Sanhana 
: Matsya. Sohanyji : Bhagavata. 

7. By whom the city of MahiSmati on the 
Narbadda was founded : Brahma and Hari Vamsa. 


8. So the Bhagavata; but the Vayu, more 
correctly, has Bhadrasrenya. See Bk. IV. Ch. VIII. 
n, 12. 

9. Kanaka : Vayu. Varaka : 
Kiarma, 

10. According to the Vayu, Karttavirya was the 
ageressor, invading Lanka and there taking Ravana 
prisoner. The circumstances are more usually 
narrated as in our text. 

11. See Bk. IV. Ch. VII. Karttavirya’s fate was 
the consequence of an imprecation denounced by 
Apava or’ Vasistha, the son of Varuna, whose 
hermitage had been burnt, according to the 
Mahdbharata, Rajadharma, by Citrabhanu or Fire, 
to whom the king had in his bounty presented the 
world. The Vayu makes the king himself the 
incendiary, with arrows given him by Sarya to dry 
up the ocean. 

12. Urjjita : Bhagavata. 

13. Vrsabha : Bhagavata. Dhrsta : Matsya, Dhrs 
na : Kirma. Prsokta : Padma, Vrsni : Linga. Krs 
naksa : Brahma. 

14. Krsna, in all except the Bhagavata. 

15. King of Avanti : Brahma and Hari VarhSa. 

16. Ananta : Vayu and Agni; elsewhere omitted. 

17. Durjaya only : Vayu, Matsya. 

18. This Madhu, according to the Bhagavata, 
was the son of Karttavirya. The Brahma and Hari 
Varhsa make him the son of Vrsa, but do not say 
whose son Vrsa was. The commentator on the latter 
asserts that the name is a synonym of Payoda, the 
son of Yadu, according to his authority and to that 
alone. 

19. The Bhagavata agrees with our text, but the 
Brahma, Hari Varhsa, Liiga and Karma make Vrs 
ana the son of Madhu and derive the family name 
of Vrsnis or Varsneyas from him. 

20. The text takes no notice of some collateral 
tribes, which appear to merit remark. Most of the 
other authorities, in mentioning the sons of 
Jayadhvaja, observe that from them came the five 
great divisions of the MHaihaya tribe. These, 
according to the Vayu, were the Talajanghas, 
Vitihotras, Avantyas, Tundikeras and Jatas. The 
Matsya and Agni omit the first and substitute 
Bhojas; and the latter are included in the list in the 
Brahma, Padma, Linga and Hari Vamsga. For Jatas 
the reading is Safijatas or Sujatas. The Brahma 
Purdna has also Bharatas, who, as wcll as the 


Linga. Andhaka : 


BOOK IV, 12 355 





Sujatas, are not commonly specified, it is said, 
‘from their great number.’ They are in all 
probability invented by the compiler out of the 
names of the text, Bharata and Sujati. The situation 
of these tribes is central India, for the capital of the 
Talajaighas was Maéahismati or Culi-Mahesvara, 
still called, according to Tod, Shasra-bahukibasti, 
'the village of the thousand-armed;’ that is, of 
Karttavirya. Annals of Rajasthan, 1. 39. n. The 
Tundikeras and Vitihotras are placed in the 
geographical lists behind the Vindhyan mountains 
and the termination-kaira is common in the valley 
of the Narmada, as Bairkaira or we may have 
Tundikera abbreviated, as Tundari on the Tapti. 
The Avantyas were in Ujjayin and the Bhojas were 
in the neighbourhood probably of Dhar in Malva. 
These tribes must have preceded, then, the Rajput 
tribes, by whom these countries are now occupied 
or Rathores, Chauhans, Pawars, Ghelotes and the 
rest. There are still some vestiges of them and a 
tribe of Haihayas still exists, at the top of the valley 
of Sohagpur in Bhagel-khanda, aware of their 
ancient lineage and though few in number, 
celebrated for their valour. Tod's Rajasthan, I. 39. 
The scope of the traditions regarding them, 
especially of their overrunning the country, along 
with Sakas and other foreign tribes, in the reign 
preceding that of Sagara (see Bk. IV, Ch. IID), 
indicates their foreign origin also; and if we might 
trust to verbal resemblances, we might suspect that 
the Hayas and Haihayas of the Hindus had some 
connection with the Hia, Hoiei-ke, Hoiei-hu and 
similarly denominated Hun or Turk tribes, who 
make a figure in Chinese history. Des Guignes, 
Histoire des Huns, 1.7, 55, 231, Il. 253. At the same 
time it is to be observed that these tribes do not 
make their appearance until some centuries after 
the Christian era and the scene of their first exploits 
is far from the frontiers of India : the coincidence 
of appellation may be therefore merely accidental. 
In the word Haya, which properly means ‘a horse,’ 
it is not impossible, however, that we have a 
confirmatory evidence of the Scythian origin of the 
Haihayas, as Tod supposed; although we cannot 
with him imagine the word ‘horse' itself is derived 
form haya. Rajasthan, I. 76. 
kK 


BOOK IV, 12 


355 


CHAPTER 12 
BIS Searea: 
(AgyaR TAHA) 
WI Sara 
ABA agree afritar 1 aay warfe:, 
adt WAg:, WaRl:, ara: ywelrgarey- 
Hee TAHAI ATT V1 
Ta A Wdaeaa Ushaaaq cytes 
Wat: ANS WaM:, Wart, ya: yalft:, 
qaqa, We Yat: WaAi:| Yywaa: ARM: 
TagT:! BW afta wate wt a 
fragain yaisyq, aefe eauaaa:, aa: Wad 
USM SYS: SATE TATTTT Verleay Aa 21 


Krostri, the son of Yadu,' had a son named 
Vrijinivat’; his son was Svahi’; his son was 
Rusardru‘:; his son was Citraratha; his son was 
Sasavindu, who was lord of the fourteen great 
gems” - he had a hundred thousand wives and a 
million of sons.° The most renowned of them 
were Prthuyasas, Prthukarman, Prthujaya, 
Prthukirtti, Prthudana and Prdhusravas. The 
son of the last of these six’ was Tamas’: his 
son was Usanas’, who celebrated a hundred 
sacrifices of the horse; his son was Siteyus'”; 
his son was Rukmakavaca!!: his son was 
Pardvrt, who had five sons, Rukmesu, 
Prthurukman, Jyamagha, Palita and Harita.'” 
To this day the following verse relating to 
Jyaémagha is repeated : 

aaa & hae afasarant yar: 

wary TATA: ate vleaTaAT TTT: 1 

STYAT TET AT Ueit Ver Aa aaerat 

STURT TE Wararat wreatafareai 


"Of all the husbands submissive to their 
wives, who have been or who will be, the most 
eminent is the king Jyamagha'’, who was the 
husband of Saivya." Saivyd was barren; but 
Jyamagha was so much afraid of her, that he 
did not take any other wife. 


356 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





-Ta-GU-aMedarant «weed 


Weagarz 3 1 

ates fagasitaraecteraactreranet safe art 
orate facratagt WereHaeTATAN TIX It 

On one occasion the king, after a desperate 
conflict with elephants and horscs, defeated a 
powerful foe, who abandoning wife, children, 
kin, army, treasure and dominion fled. When 
the enemy was put to flight, Jyamagha beheld 
a lovely princess left alone and exclaiming, 
"Save me, father! Save me, brother!" as her 
large eyes rolled widely with affright. 


west TATA TATA 

TOYS ETAT 4 UI 
ae Pref 

fakrarartat aarerquafend, aed Wyse 
ay dat Brera tanfaerd Tari & 

wa tered: ayeeatat seat wart 
TAANTAR TTI 9 It 

The king was struck by her beauty and 
penetrated with affection for her and said to 
himself, "This is fortunate; I have no children 
and am the husband of a sterile bride; this 
maiden has fallen into my hands to rear up to 
me posterity : I will espouse her; but first I 
will take her in my car and convey her to my 
palace, where J must request the concurrence 
of the queen in these nuptials." Accordingly he 
took the princes into his chariot and returned 
to his own capital. 


fannie Teragedtegaufarmenaadar year 
SOMATA 2 1 

MT Hater Ue: waMahtt aadtagg 
AN | Tat ahad—siferererfenia 
Serer waaniftr sit | araraerrenfadtar- 
SEAS fared AAS ,— SAT Aaah si 

When Jydmagha's approach was 
announced, Saivya came to the palace gate, 
attended by the ministers, the courtiers and the 


a 


citizens, to welcome the victorious monarch; 
but when she beheld the maiden standing on 
the left hand of the king, her lips swelled and 


slightly quivered with resentment and she said 


to JSyamagha, "Who is this light-hearted 
damsel that is with you in the chariot?" The 
king unprepared with a reply, made answer 
precipitately, through fear of his queen; "This 
is my daughter-in-law." 

swat veteran 

We WAT YACT APA Wea Tal 

QUART HA YT A Po it 

Srarreatena- ae fea-aperr yea farcteray 
PIR MPIC CECE IM Etro] R21] 

qa oweeenen:, wenmata wat 


fraftrm seravataqygern were wfadw a 
Tat Waasrarara vl 


"T have never had a son, rejoined Saivy4, 
"and you have no other children. Of what son 
of yours then is this girl the wife?" The king 
disconcerted by the jealousy and anger which 
the words of Saivya displayed, made this reply 
to her in order to prevent further contention; 
"She is the young bride of the future son 
whom you shall bring forth." Hearing this, 
Saivyd smiled gently and said, "So be it;" and 
the king entered into his great palace. 

STATA AY SAAS TATA - 
aaa: ufonagernta ster 
waretrarelrstrara 83 
wert U YAR wer a fast ef fra ara 


Ul BA at SATAN exit 


In consequence of this conversation 
regarding the birth of a son having taken place 
in an auspicious conjunction, aspect and 
season, the queen, although passed the time of 
women, became shortly afterwards pregnant 
and bore a son. His father named him Vijarbha 
and married him to the damsel, he had brought 
home. 


Tae weal Yaraaq Was gts 
Wawnrsss HATA! Wrweae ay: Twt:, Tat 


BOOK IV, 12 


357 





afa:1 aifgraeata af: gasyd, wea wat dan 
QUA: | AEA FTAA YA: HPATAATN VG I 

aaafin:, guifidta: fede: ar arm 
aeareafa Virga:, wena aerepft:, acl sira:, 
AME AR:, A BA: aa Wa:, Ta: 
SMA:, BOIS TNE saaa:, Ta 
WY: TAAA:, SAA HEAT:, AINGW:, 
TA: YRelat GA Tea sys, Ta Wet: Teared 
Sead: Il 2 I 

saat wammenfa wag sgreafea: sar 
AAMT: WAAL Vo II 

sfa sitfaenpgaret agaist greet: steara: 

They had three sons, Kratha, Kaigika’* and 
Romapada’’. The son of Romapada was 
Babhru’® and his son was Dhrti'’. The son of 
Kaisika was Cedi, whose descendants were 
called the Caidya kings’*. The son of Kratha 
was Kunti!’:; his son was Vrsni’’: his son was 
Nirvrti?’; his son was Dasarha; his son was 
Vyoman; his son was Jimita; his son was 
Vikrti?; his son was Bhimaratha; his son was 
Navaratha”’; his son was Dagaratha*; his son 
was Sakuni; his son was Karambhi; his son 
was Devarata; his son was Devaksatra’’; his 
son was Madhu": his son was Anavaratha; his 
son was Kuruvatsa; his son was Anuratha; his 
son was Puruhotra; his son was Ansu; his son 
was Satvata, from whom the princes of this 
house were termed S4tvatas. This was the 
progeny of Jyamagha; by listening to the 
account of whom, a man is purified from his 


sons. 
eK 


NOTES 


1. In the Brahma Purdna and Hari Vamsa we 
have two families from Krostri; one which is much 
the same as that of the text; the other makes short 
work of a long story, as we shall again notice. 

2. Vajravat : Korma. 


3. Santi : Kirma. Svahd : Matsya. Triganku : 
Linga. 
4. Visénsu : Agni. Rsabha : Linga. Kusika : 


Karma. Ruseku : Bhagavata. 


5. Or articles the best of their kind; seven 
animate and seven inanimate; a wife, a priest, a 
general, a charioteer, a horse, an elephant and a 
body of foot soldiers; or instead of the last three, an 
executioner, an economist, a reader of the Vedas; 
and a chariot, an umbrella, a jewel, a sword, a 
shield, a banner and a treasure. 

6. The text states this in plain prose, but the 
Vayu quotes a verse which makes out but a 
hundred hundred or 10,000 sons : yevard 7H: 


ara: | ereferecreT TAT wartataesd | MTA TSI 
T 


7. The Matsya has the first, third and fifth of our 
text and Prthudharma, Prthukirtti and Prthumat. 
The Kirma has also six names, but makes as many 
successions. 

8. Suyajfia : Agni, Brahma, Matsya. Dharma : 
Bhagavata. 

9. Usat : Brahma, Hari Varh§a. 

10. Sitiksu : Agni. Sineyus : Brahma. Punijit : 
Bhagavata. The Vayu has  Maruta = and 
Kambalavarhis, brothers, instead. 

11. Considerable variety prevails here. The 
Brahma and Hari Vamsa have Marutta the Rajarsi 
(a gross blunder, see Bk. Ch. IV. Ch. J), 
Kambalavarhis, Sataprasiti, Rukmakavaca : the 
Agni-Marutta, Kambalavarhis, Rukmesu : while the 
Bhagavata makes Rucaka son of USanas and father 
to the five princes who in the text are the grandsons 
of Rukmakavaca. 

12. The Bhagavata has Rukmesu, Rukman, 
Jyamagha, Prthu and Purujit. The Vayu reads the 
two last names Parigha and Hari. The Brahma and 
Hari VarhSa insert Parajit as the father of the five 
named as in the text. 

13. Most of the other authorities mention that the 
elder of the five brothers, Rukmesu, succeeded his 
father in the sovereignty; and that the second, 
Prhurukman, remained in his brother's service. 
Palita and Harita were set over Videha (facey 
fFarraq!| Linga) or Tirhut and Jyamagha went forth 
to settle where he might : according to the Vayu he 
conquered Madhyadesa (the country along the 
Narmada), Mekala and the Suktimat mountains. So 
the Brahma Purana states that he established 
himself along the Riksavat mountain and dwelt in 
Suktimati. He names his son, as we shall, see 
Vidarbha : the country so called is Berar and 
amongst his descendants we have the Caidyas or 


358 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





princes of Boghelkhanda and Chandail and 
Dasarha, more correctly perhaps Dasarna, 
Chhattisghar; so that this story of Jya4magha's 
adventures appears to allude to the first settlement 
of the Yadava tribes along the Narmada more to the 
south and west than before. 

14. The Bhagavata has Kusa; the Matsya, 
Kausika : all the authorities agree in specifying 
three sons. 

15. Lomapada : Agni. 

16. Vastu : Vayu. Krti : Agni. 

17. Ahuti : Vayu. Iti : Padma. Dyuti : Matsya. 
Bhrti : Karma. This latter is singular in carrying on 
the line of Romapada for twelve generations 
further. 

18. The Bhagavata, however, makes the princes 
of Cedi continuous from Romapfda; as, Babhru, 
Dhrti, Usika, Cedi - the Caidyas, amongst whom 
were Damaghosa and Sisupala. 

19, Kumbhi : Padma. 

20. Dhrsta : Vayu. Dhrsii : Matsya. 

21. Nivrtti : Vayu. Nidhrti : Agni. The Brahma 
makes thrce sons, Avanta, Dasaérha and Balivrs 
ahan. In the Linga it is said of Dasarha that he was 
aati Yea:1 ‘destroyer of the host of copper 
(faced; European?) foes.' 

22. Vikala : Matsya. 

23. Nararatha : Brahma and Hari Varmsa. 

24. Drdharatha : Agni. Devarata : Linga. 

25. Soma : Linga. Devanaksatra : Padma. 

26. There is great vareity in the succeeding 
appellations : 

BhagavataVayu Brahma Matsya Padma Kirma 
Madhu Madhu Madhu Madhu Madhu Madhu 
Kuruvasa Manu ManavasasUruvas Puru Kuru 
Anu Puruvatsa Purudvat PurudvatPunarvasuAnu 
PuruhotraPurudvat Cope Jantu) Jantu. Ansa 
Ayu Satva and Satva 
Satvata Satvata Satvata Satvata Satvata Andhaka 
Satvata 

The Linga has Purusaprabhu, Manvat, 
Pratarddana, Satvata; and the Agni, Dravavasu, 
Puruhuta, Jantu and Sdatvata. Some of these 
originate, no doubt, in the blunders of copyists, but 
they cannot all be referred to that source. 

eK 


358 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





CHAPTER 13 


FAST SEATA: 


(AeaQaAT aulAy, WTHAorgardHasy) 
WU SaTT 
Aeagdesy YAT AYA <1 VI 

wre ffi-gau-gea:, qr wEATAT:- 
Veh AsArherg-styast GAT VU 

caren ay: WaIsHY. TT UW set yore 
THA 3 

Bla SORT SU Ava! 

ay: Met APA eakaraet: WAU vi 

yet: we a ufpy we wea we wi 
ASTAATYMAT TATATFATAAT 4 1) 

TeMreahrernian wearaa ata uiftenaa4 


TAN GH 

IN: By yaa yasvaq vagfaa-fori 
TAT G1 

sftfaa:, fee ‘wer-wnfidth aa a 
CAAT WTA: ATA 611 

The sons of Satvata were Bhayjina, 
Bhajamana, Divya, Andhaka, Devavrddha, 
Mahabhoja and Vrsni’. Bhajamana had three 
sons Nimi*, Krikana’ and Vrsni‘, by one wife 
and as many by another, Satrayit, Shasrajit and 
Ayutajit”. The son of Devavrddha was Babhru 
of whom this verse is recited : "We hear when 
afar and we behold when nigh, that Babhru is 
the first of men and Devavrddha is equal to the 
gods; sixty-six persons following the precepts 
of one and six thousand and eight who were 
disciples of the other, obtained immortality." 
Mahabhoja was a _ pious prince; his 
descendants were the Bhojas, the princes of 
Mrittikavati®, then called Marttikavatas’. Vrsni 
had two sons, Sumitra and Yudhay it®; from the 
former Anamitra and Sini were born’. The son 
of Anamitra was Nighna, who had two sons, 


BOOK IV, 13 


Prasena and Satrajit. The divine Aditya, the 
sun, was the friend of the latter. 


Tae wetdeicdsa: gd wafraqera 
aM de Margaariswey we, 
seapghiat daeier waft: qelng,-wa 
ante wat afefauctounenugd ware mee 
+ fatranact waretaed fagreqreerenti <i 

saa «| (ae) wea Pareanvareayer 
wadaam  uafiranet wart 2e:, 
TaAMMIesaagy == - Sualfagerarmifacs- 
TR Raruranetaicas Aaya 
Waramenistad ge wz aw ada 
afore! a aie amt a aa faa a 
fAARTTTETEI! 20 1 

TMS aTe-AeAeT «|yet sa 
Taree, Brat ferergtn Vai 

raafareg aera wearfaged 
ME CII C CIRMID INE! SIC ECOVGUIEUI 
yfurare—way! wads FA EATaatiaca: 
saravsy wea ad ame war, arma: 
wadsamigaet waar veafin 
fayesraraia. det fawen: wad, same 
ATW VA 

a oa od waaare veniam 
Tl 231 


359 


apart and Satrajit beheld him of a dwarfish 
stature, with a body like burnished copper and 
with slightly reddish eyes. Having offered his 
adorations, the sun desired him to demand a 
boon and he requested that the jewel might 
become his. The sun presented it to him and 
then resumed his place in the sky. Having 
obtained the spotless gem of gems, Satrayjit 
wore it on his neck and becoming as brilliant 
thereby as the sun himself, irradiating all the 
region with his splendour, he returned to 
Dvaraké. The inhabitants of that city, 
beholding him approach, repaired to the 
eternal male, Purusottama, who, to sustain the 
burden of the earth, had assumed a mortal 
form (as Krsna) and said to him, "Lord, 
assuredly the divine sun is coming to visit 
you.” But Krsna smiled and said, "It is not the 
divine sun, but Satrajit, to whom Aditya has 
presented the Syamantaka gem and he now 
wears it; go and behold him without 
apprehension.” Accordingly they departed. 
Satrajit having gone to his house, there 
deposited the jewel, which yielded daily eight 
loads of gold and through its marvellous virtue 
dispelled all fear of portents, wild beasts, fire, 
robbers and famine. 


sreaqsie = agi UT eMafatet 
fercarses, Waves Prensa A WAM ee I 
Riess wide Weenie: 


waters aafaremanet SIS qu WATS ate SAAN VOI 


Sata VY 
qa Wairaa wpeivant arrafy- 
arrenta-ang tienes 7 safe 94 1 


On one occasion Satrajit, while walking 
along the sea shore, addressed his mind to 
Sirya and hymned his praises; on which the 
divinity appeared and stood before him. 
Bcholding him in an indistinct shape, Satrajit 
said to the sun, "I have beheld you, lord, in the 
heavens as a globe of fire : now do you show 
favour unto me, that I may see you in your 
proper form." On this the sun taking the jewel 
called Syamantaka from off his neck, placed it 


wm 86a fererrormprqavreranfad 

quae, se a wa aa, aa exh 
sTarafa Wea: ada HUST Sect 
PMs! at Uw fee ara aes t Freca 
faasmuerafrerareone4 TeYQEA: 
mae waa eet afi waar 
wafers wiact wfaa, qautadaa a 
STATA TRAl 


Acyuta was of opinion that this wonderful 
gem should be in the possession of Ugrasena; 
but although he had the power of taking it 
from Satrajit, he did not deprive him of it, that 


360 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





he might not occasion any disagreement 
amongst the family. Satrajit, on the other hand, 
fearing that Krsna would ask him for the 
jewel, transferred it to his brother Prasena. 
Now it was the peculiar property of this jewel, 
that although it was an inexhaustible source of 
good to a virtuous person, yet when worn by a 
man of bad character it was the cause of his 
death. Prasena having taken the gem and hung 
it round his neck, mounted his horse and went 
to the woods to hunt. In the chase he was 
killed by lion. The lion, taking the jewel in his 
mouth, was about to depart, when he was 
observed and killed by Jambavant, the king of 
the bears, who carrying off the gem retired 
into his cave and gave it to his son Sukumara 


to play with. 
ey wt FN 


When some time had elapsed and Prasena 
did not appear, the Yadavas began to whisper 
one to another and to say, "This is Krsna's 
doing; desirous of the jewel and not obtaining 
it, he has perpetrated the murder ot Prasena in 
order to get it into his possession." 


fafenctarrararray war ugeaftan: 
WaMIea yaa, saw wad wed fred 
fast! oafeenmuaet = fagueastapaafigts: 
FASTAATAATT 2 0 II 

matarera faery after agar 
TTiagTeMe wera fiat w waena 
UgaeAeRNeY wa Valyant wafact wade ard 
wags 06 eT: «Ss Yaageraet = ait 
PATA 2 2M 

When these calumnious rumours came to 
the knowledge of Krsna, he collected a 
number of the Yadavas and accompanied by 
them pursued the course of Prasena by the 


impressions of his horse's hoofs. Ascertaining 
by this means that he and his horse had been 


killed by a lion, he was acquitted by all the 
people of any share in his death. Desirous of 
recovering the gem he then followed the steps 
of the lion and at no great distance came to the 
place where the lion had been killed by the 
bear. Following the foot-marks of the latter, he 
arrived at the foot of a mountain, where he 
desired the Yadavas to await him, while he 
continued the track. Still guided by the marks 
of the feet, he discovered a cavern and had 
scarcely entered it, when he heard the nurse of 
Sukumara saying to him, 

fag: waraadiq fae araaat ea: | 

Bears! ar Valea VT TSH 221 

seas | ARITA AaB: «=| ATT 
— ey Aras ; 
SEIT 2 BUI 

Ww Butahienrageayd yaaa ait 


t anf arélfat SMsTNITI 2 VII 


TETAS: | A TASTY 
+ @ agatha warsfentt 


tenrydemnureny:! sf a agit 


saarana fase varie wet 
aura fenft ward amet wadifa 
eran aad: «2S TC (t$ssTT 
HAIATATY 21124 Il 


"The lion killed Prasena; the lion has been 
killed by Jambavant : weep not, Sukuméra, the 
Syamantaka is your own." Thus assured of his 
object, Krsna advanced into the cavern and 
saw the brilliant jewel in the hands of the 
nurse, who was giving it as a play thing to 
Sukumara. The nurse soon descried his 
approach and marking his eyes fixed upon the 
gem with eager desire, called loudly for help. 
Hearing her cries, Jambavant, full of anger, 
came to the cave and a conflict ensued 
between him and Acyuta, which lasted twenty- 
one days. The Yadavas who had accompanied 
the latter waited seven or eight days in 
expectation of his return, but-as the foe of 


BOOK IV, 13 


361 





Madhu still came out forth, they concluded 
that he must have met his death in the cavern. 
"It could not have required so many days," 
they thought "to overcome an enemy;" and 
accordingly they departed and returned to 
Dvaraka and announced that Krsna had been 
killed. 

ASAT eee eT aT UTA aaa 
THUR EU 

wa ma qanrentagenatreaarague- 
MAA FOOT ACMTOTT NTT I 2 19 11 


SAAT Tara Vy Ga EM ATMlag NTA Sa 
farazae franca ae: fairer waar 
ATTA KUTA TYR YX Ta TT-TTATAaAT- 
Tahara + ae weas:, feqeafaret- 
Tera eT TAA 


roc MR eAL 

TA WAAR TANT Aa TAT IAT I 2 Ut 
Wen frratacrerg EG PEGDA C Ia 
GATTI Olt 

aa wom gait were araadl amt at 
TST AATATT 3 QU 
wane «= oaftroet Ss ets 
srs = eemarafe = aarforeet- 
ATMA FATS 3 


When the relations of Acyuta heard this 
intelligence, they performed all the obsequial 
rites suited to the occasion. The food and 
water thus offered to Krsna in the celebration 
of his Sraddha served to support his life and 
invigorate his strength in the combat in which 
he was engaged; while his adversary, wearied 
by daily conflict with a powerful foe, bruised 
and battered in every limb by heavy blows and 
enfeebled by want of food, became unable 
longer to resist him. Overcome by his mighty 
antagonist, Jimbavant cast himself before him 
and said, "You, mighty being, are surely 
invincible by all the demons and by the spirits 


of heaven, earth or hell; much less are you to 
be vanquished by mean and powers creatures 
in a human shape; and still less by such as we 
are, who are born of brute origin. Undoubtedly 
you are a portion of my sovereign lord 
Narayana, the defender of the universe." Thus 
addressed by Jambavant, Krsna explained to 
him fully that he had descended to take upon 
himself the burden of the earth and kindly 
alleviated the bodily pain which the bear 
suffered from the fight, by touching him with 
his hand, Jambavant again prostrated himself 
before Krsna and presented to him his 
daughter Jambavanti, as an offering suitable to 
a guest. He also delivered to his visitor the 
Syamantaka jewel. Although a gift from such 
an individual was not fit for his acceptance, 


fa yet Krsna took the gem for the purpose of 


clearing his reputation. 


We Wea garnet wae 
wii = atarafesrrer = geuacilanqar- 
Farfaraktormaaarsts qaateriranrad. 
anages fara fetaft a wactarear: fear 
WUSATATATT: 113 3 UI 


UTES WaT sat fronfinnhePreexaert, 
wraadtaret:yt =| agrararan 
aaNet «=| AAT: «= Maat 
aera wad rat zat 3 vu 

He then returned along with his bride 
Jaémbavanti to Dvarakaé. When the people of 
Dvaraka beheld Krsna alive and returned, they 
were filled with delight, so that those who 
were bowed down with years recovered 
youthful vigour; and all the Yadavas, men and 
women, assembled round Anakadundubhi, the 
father of the hero and congratulated him. Krs 
na related to the whole assembly of the 
Yadavas all that had happened, exactly as it 
had befallen and restoring the Syamantaka 
jewel to Satrajit was exonerated from the 
crime of which he had been falsely accused. 
He then led Jambavanti into the inner 
apartments. 


362 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





When Satrajit reflected that he had been the another and how he had carried off the jewel; 
cause of the aspersions upon Krsna's character, and she implored him to take prompt measures 
he felt alarmed and to conciliate the prince he to avenge such heinous wrong. Krsna, who is 
gave him to wife his daughter Satyabham. ever internally placid, being informed of these 


ASEH HAAM- MAAN AT weal: ya transactions, said to Satyabhama, as his eyes 


flashed with indignation. "These are indeed 
ATITATY : | aT WeaMieamdaraTrt == - ATA: : ee, ; 2 
= audacious injuries, but I will not submit to 


waar saga UR:. Se WTS them from so vile a wretch. They must assail 
wera: saafiguean waa alsenttaat the tree, who would kill the birds that there 
INAS AeA. Wad arfeoreg «sera have built their nests. Dismiss excessive 
aaart, deems staan aad aaenct war Sorrow; it needs not your lamentations to 
fe 3 yer? | aeregaerantt excite any wrath." Returning forthwith to 
: Peele: bai i Dvaraka, Krsna took Baladeva apart and said 
geet HATA TN 3 4 to him, "A lion slew Prasena, hunting in the 
The maiden had been previously sought in forests; and now Satrajit has been murdered by 
marriage by several of the most distinguished Satadhanvan. As both these are removed, the 
Yadavas, as Akrtra, Krtavarman and jewel which belonged to them is our common 
Satadhanvan, who were highly incensed at her right. Up then, ascend your car and put 
being wedded to another and leagued in Satadhanvan to death." 


enmity against Satrajit. The chief amongst wa q ahem gata wat wera wa, 
them, with Akrira and Krtavarman, said to UfireeTaTe faqaerniqnt a ween vin 


Satadhanvan, "This caitiff Satrajit has offered 
a gross insult to you, as well as to us who Seotatagl ANUTaAT Well aadse wfeaufeata 


solicited his daughter, by giving her to Krsna : sane vera area ommied:, ae 
let him not live : why do you not kill him and wrraafinermvedq dearenagremn wale 
take the jewel? Should Acyuta therefore enter Ger Wh aq Peaantata PUTTS 391 


into feud with you, we will take your part." 
g a ies . wa dap: uwigercaciste Fem: 


HTH ALOT ATs 1 3 GM : 
Upon this promise Satadhanvan undertook 
to slay Satrajit. When news arrived that the TATA 3 VU 


sons of Pandu had been burned in the house of Waraeaayrargya: sileaviitaareaufrat, 
wax'’, Krsna who knew the real truth, set off saat Arareaeyl «ss aeantavard argea: 
for Vdrandvata to allay the animosity of 

| we PAT wae rafasterra 


Duryodhana and to perform the duties his 
relationship required. Satadhanvan taking TatiettseAEAT WMATA Fert wie: 


advantage of his absence, killed Satrajit in his agrafaarend afore Bart 
sleep and took possession of the gem. Upon wfaeaftiwon 


this coming to the knowledge of Satyabhamé, aghas, aregat w:, yeeghearatent 
she immediately mounted her chariot and seafutereaatfa ae = oe 


filled with fury at her father's murder, repaired 


to Barandvata and told her husband how WQMIgIeNa Weal grantor urfearqeat- 
Satrajit had been killed by Satadhanvan in aaa ead ae a eran, We acveg- 


resentment of her having been married to argeanat We fercrerrerrerq, SATHANA 


BOOK IV, 13 


363 


its being in my _ possession." To this 


_ Satadhanwan agreed and Akrtra took the 


_ jewel; and other former mounting a very swift 
mare, one that could travel a hundred leagues 


aerferereart sagen, sfitredtion a day, fled from Dvaraké. When Krsna heard 


Tio aw we Waenmeaanmraronat ag 
aa: ag ai » STOTT RTETTAT & QIN 


autre, qert went aaa scacerafonet 
STEN Y 2 

UHRA: | pleq-Wata-Waye-aersanry-WIwa- 
GRUATA A Tea Asa ATMA ¥ 3 


Being thus excited by his brother, 
Balarama engaged resolutely in the enterprise; 
but Satadhanvan, being aware of their hostile 
designs, repaired to Krtavarman and required 
his assistance. Krtavarman, however, declined 
to assist him, pleading his inability to engage 
in a conflict with both Baladeva and Krsna, 
Satadhanwan thus disappointed, applied to 
Akrtra; but he said, "You must have recourse 
to some other protector. How should I be able 
to defend you? Thcre is no one even amongst 
the immortals, whose praises are celebrated 
throughout the universe, who is capable of 
contending with the wielder of the discus, at 
the stamp of whose foot the three worlds 
tremble; whose hand makes the wives of the 
Asuras widows, whose weapons no host, 
however mighty, can resist : no one 1s capable 
of encountering the wielder of the 
ploughshare, who annihilates the prowess of 
his enemies by the glances of his eyes, that roll 
with the joys of wine; and whose vast 
ploughshare manifests his might, by seizing 
and exterminating the most formidable foes." 
"Since this is the case," replied Satadhanvan, 
"and you are unable to assist me, at least 
accept and take care of this jewel." "I will do 
so," answered Akrira, "if you promise that 
even in the last extremity you will not divulge 


of Satadhanvan's flight, he harness his four 
horses, Saivya, Sugriva, Meghapuspa and 
Balahaka, to his car and accompanied by 
Balarama, set off in pursuit. 


aM a asa yaaa univer gaia 
arama fafreraaest wronged sree at 
URART Wana tarRa ¥ XI 

PONS TRANE-AMaeAa EY TAA WAI 
SENATE Vana Tareas are arcana 
aa fe Tt ogee ea: Afisat wand 
ITS FAT SG 

aaa act w wa wen aensty 
farm yinrmqga aa wh - 
weaeqy: 6 ferisrader «= eaieg 
agrararacaty weed afi ara Ps 
qatar aes, Gdarenfraifra: wary: 3 
Tankard aoe SerHUst SHAT 
qeaeal argeanre, —freg vat weemeifereg:1 waa F 
WIAA aet wa:, Wea way, 7 a 
waa, oF wa, 7A wa: ae 
sreraaaaradisciasas:| | seaferee t T 
Warerariste 4 wean, faceqé fader se 
wiageagdeantat ye wasramra a ata a 
Tea argeasht ERaMRMM Bad WaT 
TAISATA, AMAL aATBY salerreaeea4ryng 
TST MTRATAT STATA ¥ 9 

aad «=o | aaamyfatraaiaadt 
Fura saanaaeeye war ite: 
AHA ETAT YS I 


The mare held her speed and accomplished 
her hundred leagues; but when she reached the 
country of Mithila, her strength was exhausted 
and she dropped down = and_ died. 
Satadhanwan'' dismounting, continued his 
flight on foot. When his pursuers came to the 


364 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





place where the mare had perished, Krsna said 
to Balarama, "Do you remain in the car, while 
I follow the villain on foot and put him to 
death; the ground here is bad; and the horses 
will not be able to drag the chariot across it." 
Balarama accordingly stayed with the car and 
Krsna followed Satadhanvan on foot; when he 
had chased him for two kosa, he discharged 
his discus and although Satadhanwan was at a 
considerable distance, the weapon struck off 
his head. Krsna then coming up, searched his 
body and his dress for the Syamantaka jewel, 
but found it not. He then returned to 
Balabhadra and told him that they had effected 
the death of Satadhanvan to no purpose, for 
the precious gem, the quintessence of all 
worlds, was not upon his person. When 
Balabhadra heard this, he flew into a violent 
rage and said to Vasudeva, "Shame light upon 
you, to be thus greedy of wealth! I 
acknowledge no brotherhood with you. Here 
lies my path. Go whither you please; I have 
done with Dvdaraka, with you, with all our 
house. It is of no use to seek to impose upon 
me with your perjuries." Thus reviling his 
brother, who fruitlessly endeavoured to 
appease him, Balabhadra went to the city of 
Videha, where Janaka'* received him 
hospitably and there he remained. Vasudeva 
returned to Dv4raka. It was during his stay in 
the dwelling of Janaka that Duryodhana, the 
son of Dhrtardstra, learned from Balabhadra 
the art of fighting with the mace. At the 
expiration of three years, Ugrasena and other 
chiefs of the .Yadavas, being satisfied that Krs 
na had not the jewel, went to Videha and 
removed Balabhadra's suspicions and brought 
him home. 


BTHPUS SAAN UTA ay A YAO TATA 
AAAI S 8 A 

wart fe afaadsdt fem geet vadicadt 
daraad wfas va wet frafrasifirny ott 

w owafinesmaq = aalemightyrranfad 
ADTTN Vl 


apa: WA Meader war carafaa 
Ast: WHA ARATE STAT HG 

Akrira, carefully considering the treasures 
which the precious jewel secured to him, 
constantly celebrated religious rites and 
purified with holy prayer’, lived in affluence 
for fifty-two years; and through the virtue of 
that gem there was no dearth nor pestilence in 
the whole country." At the end of that period, 
Satrughna, the great grandson of Satvata, was 
killed by the Bhojas and as they were in bonds 
of alliance with Akriira, he accompanied them 
in their flight from Dvaraka. 

AUST A SAATTA TATA BAT- 
agua «= 1 Te -eTRTAA- 
wads «owagenitadr:, feafeatadca 
WAT ARAT TAN ATSTAT ATAU & 3 UI 

Sq SISA AeTg: We,- steqearer fon 
gach AM aa aad, wat aa sfelar- 
TAM vaah ATT & VI 

From the moment of his departure various 
calamities, portents, snakes, dearth, plague and 
the like, began to prevail; so that he whose 
emblem is Garuda called together the 
Yadavas, with Balabhadra and Ugrasena and 
recommended them to consider how it was 
that so many prodigies should have occurred 
at the same time. On this Andhaka, one of the 
elders of the Yadu race, thus spoke 
"Wherever Svaphalka; the father of Akrira, 
dwelt, there famine, plague, dearth and other 
visitations were unknown. 

align 9 fariseargpat sameatsarer, 
ddwManned sat aah afer uae mf 
Gay MG 

wife wise wafteret Aa fermi way we 
ma gem aatvaheard ay: | afer 
aeastt «omer, uf! sara wea? 
Pearman sera gehen cane arat fenfata 
fat aeprafa sqrt a midta amen, ar! 
weet ott fet fer gremna: yaa, 


BOOK IV, 13 


365 





daenitaeieng wi daca 


UIST Udeaaanaud Ayawarae- 


Feafrearifa: wrt taaramacd we were age: 8  paefaitenraqrd = sear 


fet fet at meq, ale wan aeat oa 

aden: feat micife art war ar miei 

SA PHHANTHAY YETIATAAAT Wal, A A 

mre wfafet aeautet arora at ada 

TATA: STHCHTAG| 
Mea 


srafem: TayArid:, aa Ut Wa Are- 
CARTAN MTA SATS B.-A TaH- S fvaTSaTMET TRA: 
we HoT fra, ewe aot wes 
Trea wae wit: queisrenrafe- 
SPATATTEO STAT WATT G 
TAT WaT a aerate: watareateasia 


a «Reanacarisa wtegfierguar 4 aca adfan: wre: geen srrafe ame 


wat  dararraataia, srentarferyoraca- 
UTATATU Sha & Gil 


Once when there was want of rain in the 
kingdom of Kagiraja, Svaphalka was brought 
there and immediately there fell rain from the 
heavens. It happened also that the queen of * 
Kasiraj4 conceived and was quick with a 
daughter; but when the time of delivery 
arrived, the child issued not from the womb. 
Twelve years passed away and still the girl 
was unborn. Then K4siraj4 spoke to the child 
and said, 'Daughter, why is your birth thus 
delayed? Come forth; I desire to behold you, 
why do you inflict this protracted suffering 
upon your mother?' Thus addressed, the infant 
answered, 'if, father, you will present a cow 
every day to the Brahmanas, I shall at the end 
of three years more be born.’ The king 
accordingly presented daily a cow to the 
Brahmanas and at the end of three years the 
damsel came into the world. Her father called 
her Gandini and the subsequently gave her to 
Svaphalka, when he came to his palace for his 
benefit. Gandini, as long as she lived, gave a 
cow to the Brahmanas every day. Akriira was 
her son by Svaphalka and his birth therefore 
proceeds from a combination of uncommon 
excellence. 


When a person such as he is, is absent from 
us, it 1s likely that famine, pestilence and 
prodigies should fail to occur? Let him then be 
invited to return : the faults of men of exalted 
worth must not be too severely scrutinised.” 


RIN, TAN BMAt sade swednersre 
sierra «= arafinftasdifa §=6=- adeseras=r 
Waeryfera WacaaaANMS Vara! aT 
unfasataey weay yanmar wafad 
a afer 46 waemeafiermamat we Heat 
WATEATRTAPTATEN & 8 Il 
aaa! owe wa adja wert 
wt | att | ad: TTT 
WeaAB a Wad: aT festa 
fisg, Wa Wa ay aarnamen: = farcdt 
TeMASAMSTA Ae Maa aye, 
safufed: wet: dsfadtaq farabaq? sewer 
Uy Taras, a acreage wad 
wai, sadsaq + aafatt afsaza 
TARTU ATU: aT! WaT 
RTH MATA AAATT & oN 
aT WU ates st 8: Test at War ai 
ataerittt panftiqesirad aera, 
wea FT TOTEM TENEM aaa A AE 
TTGHMAAA & VU 
WaT ae aa A weAlift ai 
WIA Ad SAAT FT UMASAT TNs VI 
dee Vda Yay, sea weahiad wa 
VHAA Ad: Asati iareyaraHaya ts 
WHelAatarql & 31 
aay Peart waa ar agaant Ware 
gest aT re ftaeraree- 
Tear & xi 


366 


Agreeably to the advice of Andhaka ‘he 
elder, the Yadavas sent a mission, headed by 
Kesava, Ugrasena and Balabhadra, to assure 
Akrtra that no notice would be taken of any 
irregularity committed by him; and having 
satisfied him that he was in no danger, they 
brought him back to Dvarakd. Immediately on 
his arrival, in consequence of the properties of 
the jewel, the plague, dearth, famine and every 
other calamity and portent, ceased. Krsna, 
observing this, reflected’ that the descent of 
Akrira from Gandini and Svaphalka was a 
cause wholly disproportionate to such an 
effect and that some powerful influence must 
be exerted to arrest pestilence and famine. "Of 
a surety," said he to himself, "the great 
Syamantaka jewel is in his keeping, for such I 
have heard are amongst its properties. This 
Akrira too has been lately celebrating 
sacrifice after sacrifice; his own means are 
insufficient for such expenses; it is beyond a 
doubt that he has the jewel." Having come to 
this conclusion, he called a meeting of all the 
Yadavas at his house, under the pretext of 
some festive celebration. When they were all 
seated and the purpose of their assembling had 
been explained and the business accomplished, 
Krsna entered into conversation with Akrira 
and after laughing and joking, said to him, " 
Kinsman, you are a very prince in your 
liberality; but we know very well that the 
precious jewel which was_ stolen’ by 
Sudhanvan was delivered by him to you and is 
now in your possession, to the great benefit of 
this kingdom. So let it remain; we all derive 
advantage from its virtues. But Balabhadra 
suspects that I have it and therefore, out of 
kindness to me, show it to the assembly." 
When Akrira, who had the jewel with him, 
was thus taxed, he hesitated what he should 
do. "If I deny that I have the jewel," thought 
he, "they will search my person and find the 
gem hidden amongst my clothes. I cannot 
submit to a search." So reflecting, Akrira said 
to Narayana, the cause of the whole world, "It 
is true that the Syamantaka jewel was 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


entrusted to me by Satadhanvan, when he went 
from hence. I expected every day that you 
would ask me for it and with much 
inconvenience therefore I have kept it until 
now. The charge of it has subjected me to so 
much anxiety, that I have been incapable of 
enjoying any pleasure and have never known a 
moment's ease. Afraid that you would think 
me unfit to retain possession of a jewel so 
essential to the welfare of the kingdom, I 
forbore to mention to you its being in my 
hands; but now take it yourself and give the 
care of it to whom you please.” Having thus 
spoken, Akrtira drew forth from his garments a 
small gold box and took from it the jewel. On 
displaying it to the assembly of the Yadavas, 
the whole chamber where they sat was 
illuminated by its radiance. 


TMH: UT Ao: yaeraares Taft: 
ward, wow yeontetn 9 aafirenneter 
waar wey area fattarrrat aratssen 
waa waa wars: wafatesa fa 
GANZ: WHSlS AAT & 4 

waad faqafienda a deme wearsrarei 


AA-TAAT- AHA FUSE waa AA 
faa Wang EH 
warmers, —Uafeg aforcerar- 


weet agai efsaqi ura wa aemg aT 
BT, Faqs AAMT APTET € it 
wa 8 86adaret =f were TOTaTT 


fremomayperatead, smyfe fea. 
TAMA Sra ci 


"This", said Akrira, "is the Syamantaka 
gem, which was consigned to me by 
Satadhanvan : let him to whom it belongs now 
take it." When the Yddavas beheld the jewel, 
they were filled with astonishment and loudly 
expressed __ their delight. Balabhadra 
immediately claimed the jewel as his property 
jointly with Acyuta, as formerly agreed upon; 
while Satyabhama demanded it as her right, as 
it had originally belonged to her father. 


BOOK IV, 13 


367 





Between these two Krsna considered himself 
as an ox between the two wheels of a cart and 
thus spoke to Akrira in the presence of all the 
Yadavas : "This jewel has been exhibited to 
the assembly in order to clear my reputation; it 
is the joint right of Balabhadra and myself and 
is the patrimonial inheritance of Satyabhama. 
But this jewel, to be of advantage to the whole 
kingdom, should be taken charge of by a 
person who leads a life of perpetual 
continence : If worn by an impure individual, 
it will be the cause of his death. 


SASTA Wewaiaeauiaecanal 
AUT BH 

BIHA, CIMA tary? sei eengunta 
AUT: «aT | dee 
ageratsa aemgisé WN a wat aaa! sefar:, 
We wana anfat «we:, wae 
UPR, TRAM Wa 
Mag waa 7 ameter anufregqard4 
ware aaeaforey at: WYRE aEAT: Waetandta 
NT | WRARTUPATTavareet «| SaTEATCTT 
AATII'9 0 II 


Now as I have sixteen thousand wives, I 
am not qualified to have the care of it. It is not 
likely that Satyabh4ama will agree to the 
conditions that would entitle her to the 
possession of the jewel; and as to Balabhadra, 
he is too much addicted to wine and the 
pleasures of sense to lead a life of self-denial. 
We are therefore out of the question and all 
the Yadavas, Balabhadra, Satyabhama and 
myself, request you, most bountiful Akrira, to 
retain the care of the jewel, as you have done 
hitherto, for the general good; for you are 
qualified to have the keeping of it and in your 
hands it has been productive of benefit to the 
country. You must not decline compliance 
with our request." Akrira, thus urged, 
accepted the jewel and thenceforth wore it 
publicly round his neck, where it shone with 
dazzling brightness; and Akriira moved about 
like the sun, wearing a garland of light. 


seat wad faeanfioftaencat : waa, a Ta 
aafaernta 9 frentinfeniafa,  stearedfaar- 
feaeraramerranrcirfain 9 eit 

ofa sifrergray agaist wateyt: sera: ti 

He who calls to mind the vindication of the 
character of Krsna from false aspersions, shall 
never become the subject of unfounded 
accusation in the least degree and living in the 


full exercise of his sense shall be cleansed 
from every sin.’° 


NOTES 


I. The Agni acknowledges but four sons, but all 
the rest agree in the number and mostly in the 
names. Mahabhoja is sometimes read Mahabhaga. 


2. Krmi : Brahma, Agni, Kirma. 
3. Panava : Vayu. Kramana : Brahma. Krpana : 
Padma. Kinkina : Bhagavata. 


4. Dhrsthi : Bhagavata, Brahma. 
5. The Brahma and Hari Varhsa add to the first 
three Stira and Puranjaya and to the second Dasaka. 


6. By the Parnasa river : Brahma Purana : a 
river in Malva. 


7. These are made incorrectly the descendants 
of Babhru in the Hari VarhSa. 


8. The Bhagavata, Matsya and Vayu agree in 
the main, as to the genealogy that follows, with our 
text. The Vayu states that Vrsni had two wives, 
Madri and Gandhari by the former he had Yudhajit 
and Anamitra and by the latter Sumitra and 
Devamidhusa. The Matsya also names the ladies, 
but gives Sumitra to Gandhari and makes Madri the 
mother of Yudhajit, Devamidhusa, Anamitra and 
Sini. The Agni has a similar arrangement, but 
substitutes Dhrsta for Vrsni and makes him the 
fifteenth in descent from Satvata. The Linga, 
Padma, Brahma Purana and Hari Vamsa have made 
great confusion by altering, apparently without any 
warrant, the name of Vrsni of Krostri. 

9. The Bhagavata makes them sons of Yudhajit; 
the Matsya and Agni, as observed in the preceding 
note, his brothers as well as Sumitra's. 


10. This alludes to events detailed in the 
Mahabharata. 

11. The Vayu calls Sudhanvan or Satadhanvan 
king of Mithila. 


368 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





12. A rather violent anachronism to make 
Janaka contemporary with Balarama. 

13. The text gives the commencement of the 
prayer, but commentator does not say whence it is 


taken : GaaTd afradet fre geet safes ‘Oh, 


goddess! The murderer of a Ksatriya or Vaisya, 
engaged in religious duties, is the slayer of a 
Braéhmana;' i.e. the crime is equally heinous. 
Perhaps the last word should be *aft ‘is’. 


14. Some of the circumstances of this 
marvellous gem seem to identify it with a stone of 
widely diffused celebrity in the East and which, 
according to the Mohamedan writers, was given 
originally by Noah to Japhet; the Hijer al mattyr of 
the Arabs, Sang yeddat of the Persians and Jeddah 
tash of the Turks, the possession of which secures 
rain and fertility. The author of the Habib-us-Sier 
gravely asserts that this stone was in the hands of 
the Mongols in his day or in the tenth century. 

15. Krsna's_ reflecting, the commentator 
observes, is to be understood of him only as 
consistent with the account here given of him, as if 
he were a mere man; for, as he was omniscient, 
there was no occasion for him to reflect or reason. 
Krsna however appears in this story in a very 
different light from that in which he is usually 
represented; and the adventure, it may be remarked, 
is detached from the place in which we might have 
expected to find it, the narrative of his life, wh‘ch 
forms the subject of the next book. 

16. The story of the Syamantaka gem occurs in 
the Bhagavata. Vayu, Matsya, Brahma and Hari 
Vamsa and is alluded to in other Puranas. It may be 
considered as one common to the whole series. 
Independently of the part borne in it by Krsna, it 
presents a curious and no doubt a faithful picture of 
ancient manners, in the loose self-government of a 
kindred clan, in the acts of personal violence which 
are committed, in the feuds which ensue, in the 
public meetings which are held and the part that is 
taken by the elders and by the wo.uen in all the 
proceedings of the community. 

tek 


368 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


CHAPTER 14 
> Hears: 
(aftarrnardsrantay) 
WU SaraT 
scitmrenge: foraarag went wera 
— Maayan, aswataPg:, AT 


aftr:, Wepre sft san eu 


il: younger brother of Anamitra was Sini; 
his son was Satyaka; his son was Yuyudhdna, 
also known by the name of Satyaki; his son 
was Asanga; his son was Tini;' his son was 
Yugandhara.” These princes were termed 
Saineyas. 

srirdaray yist: wea sacs: ATA: 
aid Val wEcaer Hilaifgrrmat Aaa arat, 
Taran Mreeawasaqy aaraatay-yaor- faent- 
TRIGNATATS-MitareTGaT: UAT: YANN A SAM 
ear Seas seh yy-feyywqenirea 
YA AASHATN I 


WAN: FAT 3 


SINT ¥ I 

sgn tana et yal eaarecay yYeat 
tava fawenfe wear: ya ar gata 
seat caren stares aeeat saat a UT 
afr:1 we wat wa agqea sade) serenity 
HUM YAA-HY- MF TAY A- TPMA-FHALB- 
Vera: Yat:, HA Haat Yat WeTeit ag 
STA ATP RAT: 1 & Hh 


In the family of Anamitra, Prsni was born; 
his son was Svaphalka,’ the sanctity of whose 
character has been described : the younger 
brother of Svaphalka was named Citraka. 





BOOK IV, 14 369 
Svaphalka had by Gandini, besides Akrira, IU PTVT RATT YTS: yal: 
Upamadgu, Mrdura, Sarimejaya, Giri, Ks ayrnfzat:) yaar wat waar aie: 
atropaksatra. Satrughna, Arimarddana, 


Dharmadhris, Dhrstasarman, Gandhamojavaha 
and Prativaha. He had also a daughter, Sutara.* 

Devavat and Upadeva were the sons of 
Akrira. The sons of Citrika were Prthu and 
Vipritha and many others.” Andhaka had four 
sons, Kukkura, Bhajamana, Suci,° 
Sr eee The son of Kukkura was Vrst 

" his son was Kapotaroman; his son was 
Viloman:" his son was Bhava;” who was also 
called Candanodakadundubhi;'® he was a 
friend of the Gandharva Tumburu; his son was 
Abhijit, his son was Punarvasu; his son was 
Ahuka and he had also a daughter named 
Ahuki. The sons of Ahuka were Devaka and 
Ugrasena. The former had four sons, Devavat, 
Upadeva, Sudeva and Devaraksita and seven 
daughters, Vrkadeva, Upadeva, Devaraksita, 
Srideva, Santideva, Sahadeva and Devakti : all 
the daughters were married to Vasudeva. The 
sons of Ugrasena were Kansa, Nyagrodha, 
Sundman, Kanka, Sanku, Subhimi, Rast 
rapala, Yuddhamusthi and Tustimat; and his 
daughters were Kans4, Kansavati, Sutanu, Ras 
trapali and Kanki. 


wa fag: yalswaq) fagerd we: AT 
wt =o uifwa: wfaea:, wand waaRie:, ay 
MeHg 

TAT PCAN, TAT VATFEAMTGaTEN AYA: 1 911 

caigaar owt: «=o ena ota 
USMTATI ¢ 1k 

raat BM PATA aTYSATAL) ATT 
area =| Uae | Aa aaTCeaTeapal 
UpaRaeea Me SEIT AeA 

wiMearagedgmam went esau. 
SATA SATB -HeAH- ARTA AH GaI- VAT- PT - 
TUSNAM Aa UA AyG:, Yat yada saantht:, 
gaara: wenfedt a ageardat waftraitsway 
we a skisam warmed wet ugar 
gararerat fate yRseer ATT Tus eae! ARIST 


MA: YRISHAT Ro II 


The son of Bhajamana’! was Vidiratha; his 
son was Siira: his son was Samin;'* his son 
was Pratikgatra;’’ his son was Svayambhoja;"" 
his son was Hridika, whe had Krtavarman, 
Satadhanu, Devamidhusa and others.’> Stra, 
the son of Devamidhusa,'° was married to 
Marisa and had by her ten sons. On the birth of 
Vasudeva, who was one of these sons, the 
gods, to whom the future is manifest, foresaw 
that the divine being would take a human form 
in his family and thereupon they sounded with 
joy the drums of heaven; from this 
circumstance Vasudeva was also. called 
Anakadundubhi.'’ His brothers _—_ were 
Devabhaga, Devasravas, Anadhrsti, 
Karundhaka, Vatsabdlaka, Srijaya, Syama, 
Samika and Gandtisa; and his sisters were 
Prthd, Srutadeva, Srutakirtti, Srutasravas and 
Rajadhidevi. Stra had a friend named 
Kuntibhoja, to whom, as he had no children, 
he presented in due from his daughter Prtha. 
She was married to Pandu and bore him 
Yudhisthira, Bhima and Arjuna, who were in 
fact the sons of the deities Dharma, Vayu (air) 
and Indra, While she was yet unmarried, also, 
she had a son named Karna, begotten by the 
divine Aditya (the sun). 

TA VI Ast AMA) Tes Araercanat 
aHeaeeat wost: Gt Ah yatarg qayrat 
ATT TST SUNN) seat ea AMT eTYT aM 
TAA TANI SIN At wate: Te 
ear: Yat ayq: werfacemmeaat fareafact 
TATA VU 

geaaante dems eer seat Tet 
frryorerqerearara a fe yauurranfaatanral 
cenfagen fatoranfergeyq eit 

az | Ma Weaeieeeon = afta: 
Tas aA: «|| AAAS 
THAT SHASTA 83 U1 


370 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





wanes Watt waasfor at 

feeia:,  yaafema-areega: — ferqre- 

ATTA OS 

frymera a wad sparraarcoraradtosres 

nai sah teem = wear 
a 0 oReargqeiqea |= rT 

ce a 

area fe weat aenfiefad earft, snraatsta 

Fer fearyrs wart weresfarnn 2¢ 1 

ofa sitfamypgerat agaist ages: steara: | 


Pandu had another wife, named Madri who 
had by the twin sons of Aditya, Nasatya and 
Dasra, two sons, Nakula and Sahadeva."* 


Srutadeva was married to the Karusa prince 
Vrddhasarman and bore him the fierce Asura 
Dantavaktra. Dhrstaketu, Raja of Kaikeya,” 
married Srutakirtti and had by her Santarddana 
and four other sons, known as the five 
Kaikeyas. Jayasena, king of Avanti, married 
Rajadhidevi and had Vinda and Anuvinda. 
Srutagravas was wedded to Damaghosa, «aja 
of Cedi and bore him Sigupdla.”” This prince 
was in a former existence the unrighteous but 
valiant monarch of the Daityas, 
Hiranyakasipu, who was killed by the divine 
guardian of creation (in the man-lion Avatara). 
He was next the ten-headed sovereign Ravana, 
whose unequalled prowess, strength and 
power were overcome by the lord of the three 
worlds, Rama. Having been killed by the deity 
in the form of R&aghava, he had long enjoyed 
the reward of his virtues in exemption from an 
embodied state, but had now received birth 
once more as Sisupala, the son of Damaghosa, 
king of Cedi. In this character he renewed, 
with greater inveteracy than ever, his hostile 
hatred towards the god surnamed Pundarikaks 
a, a portion of the supreme being, who had 
descended to lighten the burdens of the earth; 
and was in consequence slain by him : but 
from the circumstance of his thoughts being 
constantly engrossed by the supreme being, 


Sisupdla was united with him after death; for 
the lord give to those to whom he 1s 
favourable whatever they desire and he 
bestows a heavenly and exalted even upon 
those whom he slays in his displeasure. 
NOTES 

1. Bhoti : Vayu. Kuni : 
Matsya. 

2. The Agni makes these all brother's sons of 
Satyaka and adds another, Rsabha, the father of 
Svaphalka. 

3. The authorities are not agreed here. 
Svaphalka, according to the Agni, as just remarked, 
comes from Simi, the son of Anamitra. The 
Bhagavata, instead of Prsni, has Vrsin, son of 
Anamitra; the Brahma and Hari VamSa have Vrsni; 
and the Agni, Prsni, son of Yudhajit. The Matsya 
also makes Yudhajit the ancestor of Akrira, 
through Rsabha and Jayanta. Yudhajit in the 
Brahma, is the son of Krostri. 

4. The different authorities vary in the reading of 
these names, though they generally concur in the 
number. 

5. The Matsya and Padma call them sons of 
Akrira, but no doubt incorrectly. 

6. Sami : Vayu. Sasi : Matsya. Sini : Agni. This 
last makes them the sons of Babhru and calls the 
first Sundara. 

7. Vrsni : Bhagavata, Vayu, Matsya, Dhrsta : 
Agni. Dhrsnu : Brahma, Hari VarhSa. 

8. The Bhagavata puts Viloman first. The Linga 
makes it an epithet of Kapotaroman, saying he was 
Vilomaja, ‘irregularly begotten.’ In place of 
Viloman we have Raivata, Vayu; Taittiri, Matsya; 
Tittiri, Agni. 

9. Nava : Agni. Bala : Linga. Nala : 
Tamas : Karma. Anu : Bhagavata. 

10. The Matsya, Vayu and Agni agree with our 
text. The Linga, Padma and Kirma_ read 
Anakadundubhi as a synonym of Bala. The Brahma 
and Hari Varnsa have no such name, but here insert 
Punarvasu, son of Taittiri. The Bhagavata has a 
different series or Anu, Andhaka, Dundubhi, Arijit, 
Punarvasu, Ahuka. 

11. This Bhajamana is the son of Andhaka, 
according to all the best authorities; so the Padma 
calls this branch the Andhakas. The Agni makes 
him the son of Babhru. 


Bhagavata. Dyumni : 


Matsya. 


BOOK IV, 15 371 





12. Vata, Nivata, Samin : Vayu. 

13. Sonasva : Matsya. Sonaksa : Padma. Sini : 
Bhagavata. 

14. Bhojaka : Agni. Bhoja : Padma. 

15. Ten sons : Matsya. 

16. Devarha : Vayu, Padma, Agni and Matsya; 
and a different series follows or Kambalavarhisa, 
Asamaujas, Samaujas, Sudanstra, Suvasa, Dhrsta, 
Anamitra, Nighna, Satrajit. They all make 
Vasudeva the son of Stra, however; but the three 
first leave it doubtful whether that Siira was the son 
of Bhajam4na or not. The Bhagavata and Brahma 
agree with the text, which is probably correct. The 
Brahma has Sara, son of Devamidhusa, although it 
does not specify the latter amongst the sons of 
Hridika. 

17. Anaka a larger and Dundubhi a smaller 
drum. 

18. The Mahabharata is the best authority for 
these circumstances. 

19. The Padma calls him king of Kashmir. 

20. The Brahma Purana and Hari Varhsa make 
Srutadeva mother of Sisupala and Prthukirtti of 
Dantavaktra. 

kk* 


BOOK IV, 15 


371 





CHAPTER 15 


Uaesseara: 


(RYU Ya-TAgGITs TCT A 

GAA AU!) 
Aaa Jaret 

feuaaryea uo tau a faa 

stay Freat aerate 

qd wa we Fred: & et TAs 

Beare: Feryparerca TART yea STH 

Uaearag ay waertyat az! 

SISAL, TET A aRTEPAI I 


Maitreya said— Most eminent of all who 
cultivate Piety, [ am curious to hear from you 
and you are able to explain to me, how it 
happened that the same being who when killed 
by Visnu as Hiranyakasipu and Rdavana 
obtained enjoyments which, though scarcely 


attainable by the immortals, were but 
temporary, should have been absorbed into the 
eternal Hari when slain by him in the person 
of Sisupala. 

tau y aararftactetrantcafarentatararsr 
aim yet Faun sfaearnfaspay aT 
frrrrenhrnfanyrafaeta 4 aTeN TTI VII 


Witenes «datsarareqat faa 
WatahaeraMlaasaanienl wr whraye- 
AAT Zl 

TAA Were rae att 


THAT HAA YI 


arercierarentqorenguayiavarand, aay 
SrA AAT: HOTT aNgfata 
HATA & I 

wregqdarud =  aAnemacr-savecvena- 


erateranrtiorent take Breer ¢ 
wa warfact wenfafeaq aTenfie afar: 
faqa weany ataaArT 2011 


ParaSara said~ When the divine author of 
creation, preservation and destruction of the 
universe accomplished the death of 


372 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





Hiranyakasipu, he assumed a body composed 
of the figures of a lion and a man, so that 
Hiranyakasipu was not aware that his 
destroyer was Visnu : although therefore the 
quality of purity, derived from exceeding 
merit, had been attained, yet his mind was 
perplexed by the predominance of the property 
of passion; and the consequence of that 
intermixture was, that he reaped, as the result 
of his death: by the hands of Visnu, only 
unlimited power and enjoyment upon earth, as 
Dasanana, the sovereign of the three spheres; 
he did not obtain absorption into the supreme 
spirit, that is without beginning or end because 
his mind was not wholly dedicated to that sole 
object. So also Dasdnana being entirely 
subject to the passion of love and engrossed 
completely by the thoughts of Janaki, could 
not comprehend that the son of DaSsaratha 
whom he beheld was in reality the divine 
Acyuta. At the moment of his death he was 
impressed with the notion that his adversary 
was a mortal and therefore the fruit he derived 
from being slain by Visnu was confined to his 


ineffable splendour in his own essence as the 
supreme being and all his passion and hatred 
ceased and he was purified from every defect. 
Being killed by the discus of Visnu at the 
instant he thus meditated, all his sins were 
consumed by his divine adversary and he was 
blended with him by whose might he had been 
slain. I have thus replied to your inquiries. He 
by whom the divine Visnu is named or called 
to recollection, even in enmity, obtains a 
reward that is difficult of attainment to the 
demons and the gods : how much greater shall 
be his recompense who glorifies the deity in 
fervour and in faith! 


ayeaeragey: Ulvat- Tegan Ara AgT- 
Saat- MPT TEA: USsAay 

TNG-PMNT-YS-saaa aA Ufevarara- 
Soha aeragisfe Yarat frerdteqat 
THE «Ais wita-Peatring-aagiorpa: 
PUTTS: 1 2H 

UHT-AFAK-GEA-T AMEN UIA: PETA: 1 V2 

Teercatare Afewarerat:: agraeafafer- 


birth in the illustrious family of the kings of yern:1 ameqt a alfrentanreraerangery: | 


Cedi and the exercise of extensive dominion. 
In this situation many circumstances brought 
the names of Visnu to his notice and on all 


thesc occasions the enmity that had 
accumulated through successive _ births 
influenced his mind; and in_ speaking 


constantly with disrespect of Acyuta, he was 
ever repeating his different appellations. 
Whether walling, eating, sitting or slceping, 
his animosity was never at rest and Krsna was 
evcr prescnt to his thoughts in his ordinary 
semblance, having eyes as beautiful as the leaf 
of the lotus, clad in bright yellow raiment, 
decorated with a garland, with bracelets on his 
arms and wrists and a diadem on his head; 
having four robust arms, bearing the conch, 
the disc, the mace and the lotus. Thus uttering 
his names, even though in malediction and 
dwelling upon his image, though in enmity, he 
beheld Krsna, when inflicting his death, 
radiant with resplendent weapons, bright with 


WCET: Fe Yat Wiatl aig wala chat 
UfaTaATTH 23 1 

Vasudeva, also called Anakadundubhi, had 
Rohini, Pauravi,' Bhadra, Madira, Devaki and 
sevcral other wives. His sons by Rohini were 
Balabhadra, Sdrana, Saru, Durmada and 
others. Balabhadra espoused Revati and had 
by her Nisatha and Ulmuka. The sons of 
Sdrana were Méarsti, Maéarstimat, Sisu, 
Satyadhrti and others. Bhadrasva, Bhadrabahu, 
Durgama, Bhita and others, were born in the 
family of Rohini (of the race of Puru). The 
sons of Vasudeva by Madira were Nanda, 
Upananda, Kritaka and others. Bhadra bore 
him Upanidhi, Gada and others. By his wife 
Vaisali he had one son named Kausika. 
Devaki bore him six sons, Kirttimat, Susena, 
Udayin, Bhadrasena, Rijudasa and 
Bhadradeha; all of whom Kana put to death.’ 


BOOK IV, 15 


373 


seta we mingua waq wie amg ae Ne-arecw-aneruee = war: 


Cavan wacaaRET Aradti evi 

HAUT ATA AUOTETAATT I 84 I 

ad: Weer = yeritanfaerarfe- 
AHAHUAL- A A-Aa- HATTEeN Say - 
TANS = wrenaf-waqna = watfadt 
WTAE SAAT MAA AYA: 11 VE I 

aaMeaakerarmntart w aaa vane 
aptarn aiafatydadti got 


When Devaki was pregnant the seventh 
time, Yoganidra (the sleep of devotion), sent 
by Visnu, extricated the embryo from its 
maternal womb at midnight and transferred it 
to that of Rohini; and from having been thus 
taken away, the child (who was Balarama) 
received the name of Sankarsana. Next, the 
divine Visnu himself, the root of the vast 
universal tree, inscrutable by _ the 
understandings of all gods, demons, sages and 
men, past, present or to come, adored by 
Brahma and all the deities, he who is without 
beginning, middle or end, being moved to 
relieve the earth of her load, descended into 
the womb of Devaki and was born as her son 
Vasudeva. Yoganidra, proud to execute his 
orders, removed the embryo to Yasoda, the 
wife of Nanda the cowherd. 
Raawreurenadawaq «=o ates Questia 
SIOL ici RAT 

At his birth the earth was relieved from all 
iniquity; the sun, moon and planets shone with 
unclouded splendour; all fear of calamitous 
portents was. dispelled; and _ universal 
happiness prevailed. 


wt a aafaedaa wartaft smefran 
Wasa Uieasadwra wepragavsanir- 
Vetta aloTTay! ares alanuiracamt- 
Waa Aereat- mS At UT: MIAT:1 ATY 


wach fe) 6oanurerat «oath aa 
Teel Ae shregishs afaror wa whit 
Qua Wawa) TATE aaiswaq) awe wictang: 
TMT Fars: 

From the moment he appeared, all mankind 
were led into the righteous path in him. While 
this powerful being resided in this world of 
mortals, he had sixteen thousand and one 
hundred wives; of these the principal were 
Rukmini, Satyabham4, Jambavanti, Jatahasini 
and four others. By these the universal form, 
who is without beginning, begot a hundred and 
eighty thousand sons, of whom thirteen are 
most renowned, Pradyumna, Carudesna, 
Samba and others. Pradyumna married 
Kakudvati, the daughter of Rukmin and had by 
her Aniruddha. Aniruddha married Subhadra, 
the grand-daughter of the same Rukmin and 
she bore him a son named Vajra. The son of 
Vajra was Bahu; and his son was Sucaru.” 

UAHA UH Yara 
aug wy + wea aad fe yelaray 
AAAI 2 0 UI 

fra: lea: MEATOTABETN eM eT 


PAT YeraraiaTarary YX Ta: 11 2 MAGA 
eat &: altar Wercraryi 

SATA HUTT PATA 2 I 

cargreat FY Svat: YuEaen:. 

STAT ARNT HAVA RATCATLOT: 11 2 3 I 

ATARI Ya Sar Tal: Her 

sadtut: Herd aaah FET ei 

fanart wearer a mya w erated: | 

Preyrentarereal ayq: Waaear: 11 4H 

In this manner the descendants of Yadu 

multiplied and there were many hundreds of 
thousands of them, so that it would be 
impossible to repeat their names in hundreds 
of years. Two verses relating to them are 


current; the domestic instructors of the boys in 
the use of arms amounted to three crores and 


374 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





eighty lacs (or thirty-eight millions). Who 
shall enumerate the whole of the mighty men 
of the Yadava race, who were tens of ten 
thousands and hundreds of hundred thousands 
in number?" Those powerful Daityas who 
were killed in the conflicts between them and 
the gods were born again upon earth as men, 
as tyrants and oppressors; and in order to 
check their violence, the gods also descended 
to the world of mortals and became members 
of the hundred and one branches of the family 
of Yadu. Visnu was to them a teacher and a 
ruler and all the Yadavas were obedient to his 
commands. 


wafa gfeneheront a: spout At: Wari 
aaa fayette wrerat 2« 11 
sia stifaeargerat aguish WEeey: STATA: 


Whoever listens frequently to this account 
of the origin of the heroes of the race of Vrsni, 
shall be purified from all sins and obtain the 
sphere of Visnu. 

NOTES 


1. Pauravi is rather a title attached to a second 
Rohini, to distinguish her from the first, the mother 
of Balarama : she is also said by the Vayu to be the 
daughter of Bahlika. 

2. The enumeration of our text is rather 
imperfect. The Vayu names the wives of Vasudeva, 
Pauravi, Rohini, Madira, Rudra, Vaisakhi, Devaki; 
and adds two bond-maids, Sugandhf and Vanarajf. 
The Brahma Purana and Hari Varhsa name twelve 
wives and two slaves; Rohini, Madira, Vaisakhti, 
Bhadra, Sundmni, Sahadeva, Santideva, Srideva, 
Devaraksité, Vrkadevi, Upadevi, Devaki; and 
Santanu and Barava. The children of the two slaves, 
according to the Vayu, were Pundra, who became a 
king and Kapila, who retired to the woods. In the 
Bhagavata we have thirteen wives, Pauravi, Rohini, 
Bhadra, Madira, Rocana, Ila, Devaki, Dhrtadevi, 
Santideva, Upadevi, Srideva, Devaraksita and 
Sahadeva : the last seven in this and the preceding 
list are the daughters of Devaka.. 

3. The wives and children of Krsna are more 
particularly described in the next book. The 
Brahma Purana and Hari Varmsa add some details 
of the descendants of Vasudeva's brothers : thus 


Devabhaga is said to be the father of Uddhava; 
Anadhrsti of Devasravas, a great scholar or Pandit. 
Devasravas, another brother of Vasudeva, had 
Satrughna and another son called Ekalavya, who 
for some cause being exposed when an infant, was 
found and brought up by the Nisadas and was then 
termed Nisaddin, Vatsavat (Vatsabalaka) and 
Gandiisa being childless, Vasudeva gave his son 
Kausika to be adopted by the former and Krsna 
gave Cérudesna and three others to the latter. 
Kanaka (Karundhak4) had two sons, Tantrija and 
Tantripala. Avaksrinjima (Srijaya) had also two, 
Vira and Agvahanu. The gracious Samika became 
as the son (although the brother) of Syama and 
disdaining the joint rule which the princes of the 
house of Bhoja exercised, made himself paramount. 
Yudhisthira was his friend. The extravagant 
numbers of the Yadavas merely indicate that they 
were, as they undoubtedly were, a powerful and 
numerous tribe, of whom many traces exist in 
various parts of India. 
kek 


374 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





CHAPTER 16 


GISIISeATT: 
( qagarenasy) 


WUT SATA 
Sae UNTAT Hla: Tara gran vi 


qaadereast: aaney:, Tay AMs:, TAT 
HIM:, TeNea wed: Bsawsvaq wey ua 
quad yanerqaa wa aaa adm: wha 
SVAUATATLN 2 

Sfa sttfereaqgaret aguist wey: sreaar:i 

Paradsara said— I shall now summarily give 
you an account of the descendants of Turvasu. 

The son of Turvasu was Vahni;' his son 
was Gobhanu:* his son was Traigamba;? his 
son was Karandhama; his son was Marutta. 
Marutta had no children and he therefore 
adopted Dusyanta, of the family of Puru; by 
which the line of Turvasu merged into that of 
Puru.* This took place in consequence of the 
malediction denounced on his son by Yayati.” 


BOOK IV, 18 375 





NOTES 

1. Varga : Agni. 

2. Bhanumat : Bhagavata, which also inserts 
Bhaga before him. 

3. Tribhanu : Vayu. Trisanu : Brahma. Traisali : 
Agni. Trisari : Matsya. 

4. Besides Bharata, who, as will be hereafter 
seen, was the son of Dusyanta, the Vayu, Matsya, 
Agni and Brahma Puranas enumerate several 
descendants in this line, for the purpose evidently 
of introducing, as the posterity of Turvasu, the 
nations of the south of India : the series is Varuttha, 
(Karutthama, Brahma), Andira (Akrira, Brahma); 
whose sons are Pandya, Karata, Cola, Kerala; the 
Hari Varnsa adds Kola and the Agni very 
incorrectly Gandhara. 

5. The curse alluded to is the failure of his line 
(Prajdsamuccheda), denounced upon Turvasu as the 
punishment of refusing to take his father's 
infirmities upon him (see Bk. IV. Ch. XI). He was 
also sentenced to rule over savages and barbarians, 
Mlecchas or people not Hindus. The Mahabharata 
adds that thc Yavanas sprang from Turvasu. As 
sovereign of the south-east, he should be the 
ancestor of the people of Arakan, Ava; but the 
authorities cited in the preceding note refer the 
nations of the Peninsula to him and consequently 
consider them as Mlecchas; and these and similar 
passages indicate a period prior to the introduction 
of Hinduism into the south of India. 

kek 


BOOK IV, 18 


375 





CHAPTER 17 
TASS: 
(FqawiaacwrT) 
WUT SarT 
SONY Tra By: Vl 


at: ag: AIGA SE AM, Aaa WNT:, 


aay et:, anig ga: gag gi:, at: weM:, 
Wada: — Yapaaetagenrat i a 
SO MORC TIC RET 

sia sitfeaenygtrot agaist aaa: Stata: I 


The son of Druhyu was Babhru; his son 
was Setu; his son was Aradvat;' his son was 
Gandhira;” his son was Dharma;° his son was 
Dhrita;* his son was Duryaman;° his son was 
Pracetas, who had a hundred sons and they 
were the princes of the lawless Mlecchas or 
barbarians of the north.° 


NOTES 


1. Also Araddha in MSS., and Aratta, Matsya, 
which last seems to be the preferable reading. The 
Vayu has Aruddha; the Brahma, Ang§rasetu; but 
Aratta is a northern country, contiguous to or 
synonymous with, Gandhara. 

2. Of Gandhara it is said in the Vayu that it is a 
large country named after him and is famous for its 
breed of horses : Grad Tea WET F Tease Aer! 
TR Vass Gen asta aa:i The Matsya ra 
the beginning of the second line, 
showing that Aratta and Gandhara are much a 
same. See Bk. II. Ch. III. n.83. 

3. The Brahma Purfna and Hari Varhsa, in 
Opposition to all the rest, make Dharma and his 
successors the descendants of Anu. 

4, Ghrta : Agni. 

5. Durddama : Vayu and Bhiagavata. The 
Matsya, Brahma and Agni insert a Vidupa, Duduha 
or Vidula, before Pracetas. 

6. So the Bhagavata and Matsya. The 
Mahabharata says the descendants of Durhya are 
the Vaibhojas, a people unacquainted with the use 
of cars or beasts of burden and who travel on rafts : 
they have no kings. 

kw 


BOOK IV, 18 


375 


CHAPTER 18 


SISTEM SEAT: 
(aarhqaerara srautay) 


WIP SATE! 

Taga Wet st: | WAT ay 
aagagad: UT Wyq:; AMAA: Ae: 
AAA GHI:, VHA YI:, TensMTa:, 
aay META: AE WEA: ACTEM A-fafaay 


376 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





a yaaa: syfatentt fafa-qu-at-aftrgaten: 
Ue YT ay: gued-qdn-daw-ugeeran: 
fafaga:, fates: yatsamn aa ta: aq 
gam:, wane afe:, wea aa chara ageag- 
HAR Ya- USK A TTT AAI i 

aaa wae fara ayqs BH 

Anu,' the fourth son of Yayati, had three 
sons, Sabhdnara, Caksusa and Parameksu.’ 
The son of the first was Kaldnara:* his son was 
Srfijaya; his son was Paranjaya; his son was 
Janamejaya; his son was Mahadmani;* his son 
was Mahdmanas, who had two sons, USinara 
and Titiksu. Usinara had five sons, Sivi, Trna,° 
Gara,® Krmi, Darvan.’ Sivi had four sons, Vrs 
adarbha, Suvira, Kaikeya and Madra.* Titiksu 
had one son, Usadratha;’ his son was Hema;'° 
his son was Sutapas; his son was Bali, on 
whose wife five sons were begotten by 
Dirghatamas or Anga, Banga, Kalinga, Suhma 
and Pundra;'' and their descendants and the 
five countries they inhabited, were known by 
the same names.” 


sgt: ue: amt fefaw:, wenq we, 
afer) aurea AT Yat eel aa Tey 
STAN GMA: wet aT amare sfaqea 
Fat 31! 

UU FTE: AAT YSN: AAT: | waa 
Frayregnra ¥ It 

Uae gae:, aa wget gest geenat a 
sands pad al TRS FEAT: TAT HAHM:, 

Teearareaayea wea fart am 

chats 

farmer gft garara wenfe qaga: ygatsu 
qtr Vera, Tenders: asa WP 
Ta aaerTd yarafag aut gavaran € i 

BONE FIAT SIT STN 

aes TU squedifan ¢ tt 

sfe sitfamygeret ugatyt srereg: steara: 


The son of Anga was Para;'* his son was 
Divaratha; his son was Dharmaratha;"* his son 


was Citraratha; his son was Romapada,’” also 
called Dasaratha, to whom, being childless, 
DaSaratha, the son of Aja, gave his daughter 
Santa to be adopted.’® After this, Romapdda 
had a son named Caturanga; his son was 
Prthulaksa; his son was Campa, who founded 
the city of Campa.'’ The son of Campa was 
Haryyanga; his son was Bhadraratha, who had 
two sons, Vrhatkarman and Vrhadratha. The 
son of the first was Vrhadbhanu;"* his son was 
Vrihanmanas; his son was Jayadratha, who, by 
a wife who was the daughter of a Ksatriya 
father and Brahmani mother, had a son named 
Vijaya,” his son was Dhrti; his son was 
Dhrtavrata; his son was Satyakarman; his son 
was Adhiratha”’ who found Karna in a basket 
on the banks of the Ganges, where he had been 
exposed by his mother, Prthd. The son of 
Karna was Vrsasena.”' These were the Anga 
kings. You shall next hear who were the 
descendants of Puru. 


NOTES 


1. By some unaccountable caprice the Brahma 
Purana and Hari VarhSa, unsupported by any other 
authority, here substitute for Anu the name of Kaks 
eyu, a descendant of Puru and transfer the whole 
serics of his posterity to the house of Puru. 

2. Paksa and Parapaksa : Vayu. Paramesu : 
Matsya. Paroksa : Bhagavata. 

3. Kalanala sVayu. Kolahala : Matsya. 

4. Mahasala: Agni. Mah4sila : Bhagavata. 

5. Nrga: Agni. Vana : Bhagavata. 

6. Nava : Matsya. Sama ; Bhagavata. 

7. Vrata : Agni. Suvrata : Matsya. Daksa : 
Bhagavata. According to the Brahma Purana and 
Hari Varhsa the five sons of USiInara were the 
ancestors of different tribes. Sivi was the progenitor 
of the Saivas; Nrga of the Yaudheyas; Nava of the 
Navarastras; Vrata of the Ambasthas; and Krmi 
founded the city Krmila. 

8. Bhadra and Bhadraka : Matsya, Agni. These 
sons of Sivi give name to different provinces and 
tribes in the west and north-west of India. 

9. Rusadratha : Agni. Tusadratha : Matsya. 

10. Phena: Agni. Sena : Matsya. 

11. Odra or in some copies Andhra : Bhagavata. 


BOOK IV, 19 


377 





12. See Bk. II. Ch. III. n. 3, 46, 49, 50 and 73. 
of Suhma it may be remarked, that it is specified in 
the Siddhanta Kaumudi as an example of Panini's 
rule; War WrRrd! 7.3.24; by which Nagara 
compounded with names of countries in the east 
becomes Nagara, as Sauhmanagara (er), 
‘produced, in a city of Suhma'. The descendants of 
Anu, according to the Mahabharata were all 
Mlecchas. The last named work, as well as the 
Vayu and Matsya Puranas, have an absurd story of 
the circumstances of the birth of Dirghatamas, who 
was the son of Ujasi or Utathya, the elder brother of 
Brhaspati by Mamata and of his begetting Anga 
and the rest. They agree in assigning descendants of 
all four castes to them; the Vayu stating that Bali 


had Yary AtqedvaHw! and the Matsya ascribing it to 
a boon given by Brahma to Bali : qu fraary aay 


a ! ‘Do you establish the four perpetual 
castes.' Of these, the Brahmanas are known as 
Baleyas : Sew: @ena#dt The Matsya calls Bali, 
the son of Virocana and aiqgncwattrs: | ‘existing 
for a whole Kalpa;' identifying him therefore, only 
in a different period and form, with the Bali of the 
Vamana Avatara. 

13. Anapana : Vayu. Khanapana : Bhagavata, 
Adhivahana : Agni. Dadhivahana : Matsya. 

14. This prince is said in the Vayu to have drunk 
the Soma juice along with Indra : a4 fa=qre frt ar: 
WHMIS J Tet AEA | 

15. The Matsya and Agni insert a Satyaratha. 

16. This is noticed in the Ramayana, in the story 
of the hermit Rsyasmiga, to whom Santa was given 
in marriage. Her adoptive father is called in the 
Ramayana, as he is in the Agni and Matsya, 
Lomapada : the meaning is the same, ‘hairy foot.’ 
Ramayana, IX. X. See also Prelude to the Uttara 
Rama Caritra, Hindu Theatre, I. 289. 

17. The Bhagavata differs here from all the other 
authorities in omitting Campa, the founder of 
Camp4puri, a city of which traces still remain in the 
vicinity of Bhagalpur, having inserted him 
previously amongst the descendants of Iksvaku (see 
Bk. IV. Ch. III. n. 12), Campa is every where 
recognised as the capital of Anga and the 
translators of the Ramayana were very wide off the 
truth, when they conjectured that it might be Angva 
or Ava. 

18. Vrhaddarbha : Brahma. The Bhagavata omits 
the two successors of Campa and makes 


Vrhadratha, Vrhatkarman and Vrhadbhanu, sons of 
Prthulaksa. 

19. The Vayu, Matsya and Hari Varhsa make 
Vijaya the brother of Jayadratha. The Bhagavata 
agrees with our text. The mother of Vijaya from her 
origin was of the Sita caste, the genealogist and 
chanioteer, Manu, X. 47. Her son was of the same 
caste, children taking the caste of the mother : 
consequently the descendants of Vijaya, kings of 
Anga, were Siitas; and this explains the 
contemptuous application of the term Sita to 
Karna, the half brother of the Pandus; for he, as 
will presently be mentioned, was adopted into the 
Anga family and succeeded to the crown. 

20. Some variety prevails in the series of princes 
here, but this arises from not distinguishing the 
collateral lines, the descendants of Jayadratha from 
those of Vijaya. The Vayu and Matsya give the 
latter as in our text, but they agree also with the 
Agni and Brahma in the successors of Jayadratha, 
as Drdharatha or Vrhadratha and Janamejaya or 
Visvayit. 

21. Sirasena : Vayu. Vikarna : Brahma. 

kk 


BOOK IV, 19 377 


CHAPTER 19 
Waltfagt: Sara: 


(Teayrenaqy!) 


Pasbinat oh accede ti 
mea VR: yasy dani gas wear: 
Yara swf avawentt wearfae:, aa: 
amar | feet) ayg:) «Satter, 9 aa? 
guadteangsant: Yt  wqa:, 

UTASMAG) TAAAea: Vetter MAA VA 

WaT Heat fag: gat Aa Tt: W Wa a! 

WE YA GUT AAT: VACA 3 
Yet: ya saafs awa! aera 


378 


RTT MAT WHAT TRIAS MePATCTI XU 


The son of Puru was Janamejaya; his son 
was Pracinvat; his son was Pravira; his son 
was Manasyu; his son was Bhayada;' his son 
was Sudyumna;" his son was Bahugava; his 
son was Samyati;* his son was Ahamyiti;’ his 
son was Raudraéva,° who had ten sons, Rteyu,’ 
Kakseyu, Sthandileyu, Ghrteyu, Jaleyu, 
Sthaleyu, Santateyu, Dhaneyu, Vaneyu and 
Vrateyu.® The son of Rteyu was Rantinara,” 
whose sons were Tansu, Apratiratha and 
Dhruva.'” The son of the second of these was 
Kanva and his son was Medhatithi, from 
whom the Kanvayana Brahmanas'' descended. 
Anila'* was the son of Tansu and he had four 
sons of whom Dusyanta was the elder.'? The 
son of Dusyanta was the emperor Bharata; a 
verse explanatory of his name is chanted by 
the gods; "The mother is only the receptacle; it 
is the father by whom a son is begotten. 
Cherish they son, Dusyanta; treat not 
Sakuntala with disrespect. Sons, who are born 
from the paternal loins, rescue their 
progenitors from the infernal regions. You are 
the parent of this boy; Sakuntald has spoken 
truth." From the expression _ ‘cherish’, 
Bharasva, the prince was called Bharata." 


WAT BT Uist J AT Yat ay: Aa Waren: 
Yat Seafatearetaray Wey: UPI ARTN G1 


Ws! ae grefind wt ght Few 

art agarat frat wrenrerreaay io ust 
wey aa faat fara weeta:, adr 
faqragTATaran 6 U 

fatal weary: Yas eqra-verdtd-ar- 
THEN Waza) Ae deala:, wfeei- 
treat, oanifesfrerdt meat: yer: aartar 
faoreray YZ: 8 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


werieaererat aM yaisyq! ae weATEOT- 
ator aftesr garam wa fare were 
Fam Fel AAA YeA:, YRS Tait, a 
é sferrarmnivarara swenite-faite-qeritereaat 
CeAera:, shite ava:, avare venfete:, 
Ta: HOA FEAT: 1 Yo tt 

smears: fray aeey: gefestgegg:, aaa 
Gena, Weta: dasta faa, aweey 
wafry Srs-arya-ge-aqdd-aaqaa: Valea: 
Fats) Berea: sg wea UT: UTE AT: 
aaa yay, wat wer: = anftaeateraft: 
AAT QM 


Bharata had by different wives nine sons, 
but they were put to death by their own 
mothers, because Bharata remarked that they 
bore no resemblance to him and the women 
were afraid that he would therefore desert 
them. The birth of his sons being thus 
unavailing, Bharata sacrificed to the Maruts 
and they gave him Bharadvdaja, the son of 
Brhaspati by Mamata the wife of Utathya, 
expelled by the kick of Dirghatamas, his half 
brother, before his time. This verse explains 
the purport of his appellation; " 'Silly woman,’ 
said Brhaspati, ‘cherish this child of two 
fathers' (bhara dvda-jam). ‘No, Brhaspati,’ 
replied Mamata, do you take care of him.’ So 
saying, they both abandoned him; but from 
their expressions the boy was called 
Bharadvaja." He was also termed Vitatha, in 
allusion to the unprofitable (vitatha) birth of 
the sons of Bharata.'° The son of Vitatha was 
Bhavanmanyu;!® his sons were many and 
amongst them the chief were Vrhatksatra, 
Mahavirya, Nara and Garga.'’ The son of Nara 
was Sankrti; his sons were Ruciradhi, and 
Rantideva.'® The son of Garga was Sini;'’ and 
their descendants called Gargyas and Sainyas, 
although Ksatriyas by birth, became 
Brahmanas.”” The son of Mahavirya was 
Uruksaya,”’ who had three sons, Trayydruna, 
Puskarin and Kapi;”’ the last of whom became 
a Brahaman. The son of Vrhatksatra was 


BOOK IV, 19 


379 





Suhotra” , whose son was Hastin, who 
founded the city of Hastinapur.”* The son of 
Hastin were Ajamidha,” Dvimidha and 
Purumidha. One son of Ajamidha was Kanva, 
whose son was Medhitithi;”* his other son was 
Brhadisu, whose son was Brhadvasu;”’ his son 
was Brhatkarman;”* his son was Jayadratha;”” 
his son was Visvajit;” his son was Senaijit, 
whose sons were’ Rucirasva, KdAsya, 
Drdhadhanus and Vasahanu.! The son of 
Ruciradsva was Prthusena; his son was Para; his 
son was Nipa; he had a hundred sons, of whom 
Samara, the principal, was the ruler of 
Kampilya.*” Samara had three sons, Para, 
Sampara, Sadasva. 

PATENT U-AM- ASMA: FAT: | UT, FY: 
wat: woft:, gpdfawe:, away: a a 
Yagert He ava ez 

Syere Welad:, ait faear:, wealenes:, 
aa VaNe:, Tea feats: fatter adracaz:, 
wena gira, aa: aeag:, Aer geri: Aer 
aut: aa:, guft:, wave wafra, wafera:, 
parse t fewer Ureacaara, aatgfagric 
WRATATA TAIT ASAT: 1 83 Ut 

The son of Para was Prthu; his son was 
Sukrti; his son was Vibhratra;? his son was 
Anuha, who married Krtvi, the daughter of 
Suka (the son of Vyasa) and had by her 
Brahmadatta;** his son was Visvaksena; his 
son was Udaksena;*° and his son was Bhallat 
a. 

The son of Dvimidha®’ was Yavinara; his 
son was Dhrtimat;* his son was Satyadhrti; 
his son was Drdhanemi; his son was 
Suparsva;” his son was Sumati; his son was 
Sannatimat; his son was Krta, to whom 
Hiranyanadbha taught the philosophy of the 
Yoga and he compiled twenty-four Samhitas 
(or compendia) for the use of the eastern 
Brahmanas, who study the Simaveda.”” 


PUAMGT: BT WyAlOT FATT: Fes evi 
SAGI AA: TA Ya:, TI FWHA:, Aat 
ag: Sead dar: same Aer, arr Ue, 


wea aera: yaiswaqe wenefe wmft:, yr: 
Genta: Yd: Yeny: wagyy:, a sery:, 
TaN Rg Hea-Feleg-walt-HUTEAT: | 
warmest farant yworanemdt wqa:, sf 
frarfafear: , ST TSTET GH 

gare «odieeat: «oareitter fart ayq: 
yarn FeU:, Feu fedter:, ae a 
PY WMEMSeeM a MAPeIsMaT! PAPAL 
wag: aqderen ae way atreacaqedsit 
GRaT Va: That PICS TTA 8G I 

wa fea HI: Hata W swag 
TRAIN: MGeal FIM FATES Voit 

Wt: UHM: HI:, SM asa wat Hit 
SOTA 


The son of Krta was Ugrayudha, by whose 
prowess the Nipa race of Ksatriyas was 
destroyed;*' his son was Ksemya; his son was 
Suvira, his son was Nrpafijaya;” his son was 
Bahuratha. These were called Pauravas. 

Ajamidha had a wife called Nilini and by 
her he had a son named Nila; his son was 
Santi; his son was Susanti; his son was 
Purujanu;” his son was Caksu;“ his son was 
Haryyasva,” who had five sons, Mudgala, 
Sriijaya,”° Vrhadisu, Pravira’’ and Kampilya.” 
Their father said, "These my five (pafica) sons 
are able (alam) to protect the countries;" and 
hence they were termed the Paficalas.” From 
Mudgala descended the §$Maudgalya 
Brahmanas;” he had also a son named 
Bahvaégva,’! who had two children, twins, a 
son and daughter, Divodasa and Ahalya. The 
son of Satadvat of Gautama by Ahalyd was 
Satdnanda;** his son was Satyadhrti, who was 
a proficient in military science. Being 
enamoured of the nymph Urvasi, Satyadhrti 
was the parent of two children, a boy and girl. 
Santanu, a Raja, while hunting, found these 
children exposed in a clump of long Sara 
grass; and compassionating their condition, 
took them and brought them up. As they were 
nurtured through pity (krpa), they were called 


380 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





Krpa and Krpi. The latter became the wife of was Soméapi;” 


Drona and the mother of Asvatthdman. 


fearcreasfarg:, farteraatt am wad, 


wat Yera:, ad: aela: wWeea:, wenfy 
amaG:, dat Wy: Wayaeisvaq ast adlay 


Yot:, Fade FE:, TENE IETA:, THE gwAY:| 
The son of Divodasa was Mitrayu;”* his son 
was Cyavana; his son was Sudasa; his son was 
Sauddsa, also called Sahadeva; his son was 
Somaka; he had a hundred sons, of whom 
Jantu was the eldest and Prsata the youngest. 
The son of Prsata was Drupada; his son was 
Dhrstadyumna; his son was Drstaketu. 
SANSA HAA WRIST RAT WaM:, 
AAU HE:, WSs TAA BENT WATT 2211 
weightage: get: YT ag: 
Gays: Yea:, aaeaa:, waa Haa:, 
aaNet = AQ) «=—|- FeRU-Weay-HyMa- way 
AINE Fa: Yat: AAA Fey Hee: 
THIGH:, dd: GAay, Tid Gia, cq a 
W:1 TMI: wager war afeat 
WN A AML Wea: AEM eea:, Aa: 
aa: At: YANAT:. SAS AMA HIT Le I 
ofa sifaorgarat agaist wearafast: sera: i 
Another son of Ajamidha was named Rks 
a;* his son was Samvarana; his son was Kuru, 
who gave his name to the holy district Kuruks 
etra; his sons were Sudhanus, Jahnu, Pariksit 
and many others.°’ The son of Sudhanus was 
Suhotra; his son was Cyavana; his son was 
Krtaka;*° his son was Uparicara the Vasu,° 
who had seven’ children, Vrhadratha, 
Pratyagra, Kusdmba, Mavella, Matsya and 
others. The son of Vrhadratha was Kusagra; 
his son was Rsabha;”* his son was Puspavat; 
his son was Satyadhrta;” his son was 
Sudhanvan; and his son was Jantu. Vrhadratha 
had another son, who being born in two parts, 
which were put together (sandhita) by a 
female fiend named Jata, he was denominated 
Jardsandha;” his son was Sahadeva; his son 


his son was Srutasravas.” 
These were kings of Magadha. 


NOTES 
1. Abhayada Vayu. Vitamaya Agni. 
Vatayudha : Matsya. Carupada : Bhagavata. The 


Mahabharata, Adi Parva, p. 136, 138, has two 
accounts of the descendants of Puru, differing 
materially in the beginning from each other and 
from the lists of the Puranas. In the first, Pravira is 
made the son of Puru; his son is Manasyu, who has 
three sons, Sakta, Sanhanana and Vagmin; and 
there the line stops. Another son of Puru is 
Raudrasva, whose sons are Riceyu and the rest, as 
in our text; making them the second in descent, 
instead of the eleventh. In the second list,-the son of 


Puru is Janamejaya, whose successors are 
Pracinvat, Samyati, Ahamyati, Sarvabhauma, 
Jayatsena, Avacina, Ariha, Mahabhauma, 


Ayutanayin, Akrodhana, Devatithi, Ariha, Riksa, 
Matindra, who is therefore the fifteenth from Puru, 
instead of the fourth as in the first account or the 
twelfth as in the text. 

2. Dhundu : Vayu. Sambhu : Agni, Sudhanvan : 
Brahma. 

3. Bahuvidha : Agni and Matsya. 

4. Sampati : Agni. 

5. Omitted : Vayu. Bahuvadin : Matsya. 

6. Bhadrasva : Matsya. 

7. Rajeyu : Vayu. Riceyu : Agni. They were the 
sons of the Apsards Ghrtaci : or of Misrakesi : 
Mahabharata. The Brahma Purana and Hari Varnsa, 
have very unaccountably and in opposition to all 
other authorities, transferred the whole of the 
descendants of Anu of this family; substituting for 
Anu the second name in our text, Kakseyu, (Bk. IV. 


7 Ch. XVIL) 


8. The V4yu names also ten daughters, Rudra, 
Sidra, Madra, Subhag4, Amalaja, Tala, Khala, 
Gopajala, Tamrarasé and Ratnakiti; and adds that 
they were married to Prabhakara, a Rsi of the race 
of Atri. The Brahma Purana and Hari VamSa have a 
legend of the birth of Soma, the moon, from him 
and one of these ten; who succeeded to the power 
and prerogatives of Atri. The sons of the other 
wives were less distinguished, but they formed 
families eminent amongst holy Brahmanas, called 
Svastyatreyas. 


BOOK IV, 19 


9, Atimara or Atibhara : Bhagavata. Antindra : 
Matsya. Matinara Mahabharata, Agni and 
Brahma. According to the Matsya and Han Varhsa 
(not in the Brahma Purana), Gauri the daughter of 
this prince, was the mother of Mandhatri, of the 
family of Iksvaku. 

10. In place of these the Matsya has 
Amirttirayas and Nrcandra and there are several 
varieties in the nomenclature. In place of the first 
we have Vasu or Trasu, Vayu; Tansurogha, Agni; 
Tarisurodha, Brahma; and Sumati, Bhagavata. 
Pratiratha is read for the second of the Agni and 
Brahma; and for the third, Suratha, Agni; Subahu, 
Hari VarnSa. 

11. Medhatithi is the author of many hymns in 
the Rgveda and we have therefore Brahmanas and 
religious teachers descended from Ksatriyas. 

12. Malina Vayu. Raibhya Bhagavata. 
Dharmanetra: Brahma Purana. The Hari Vamsa 
omits him, making sad blundering work of the 
whole passage. Thus the construction is such as to 
intimate that Tafisu or Tarisurodha had a wife 
named 114, the daughter of Medhatithi; that 1s, os 
brother's great- granddaughter 
qenfefaeqere..... Sa AG | Te, He a — 
gaaieay ct a dyervatesdi! but this, as the 
commentator observes, is contrary to common 
sense (3etahraleqth) and he would read it therefore, 
sell AM Bearcat! 'The daughter of him who was 
named Ilin,’ a Raja so called : but in the Vayu and 
Matsya we have Ilina, the daughter of Yama, 
married to Tansu and mother of Malina or Anila; 
more correctly perhaps Ailina : Sel ¢ GATT 
a a GT aa (aa) Gefad Ws afer wera 
seal dd AN agar! Wadia! The 
blunder of the Hari VarnSa therefore arises from the 
compiler's reading Yasya, ‘of whom’, instead of 
Yamasya, ‘Yama’. It is not an error of transcription, 
for the metre requires Yasya and the remark of the 
commentator proves the correctness of the reading. 
The name occurs lina (sft), the son of Tarisu, in 
the Mahabharata, agreeably to the Anuvansa Sloka, 
which is there quoted. 'Sarasvati bore Tansu to 
Matinara and Tansu begot a son, Ilina, by K4lingi :' 
dq wert aierosiea ver sree afer 
SRT | 

13. The Vayu, Matsya and Bhagavata agree with 
out text in making these the grandsons of Tansu : 
even the Brahma Purana concurs, but the Han 


381 


Varmnsa makes them his sons, having apparently 
transformed Tarisosuta (Za! Ga:), the son of Tanisu, 
into a synonym of Tarisu or Tarisurodha as in these 
parallel passages : dat qaisemfyeetta: yarvart 
Sera Ad YA BARISAN |! 'The son of Tansu 
was the illustrious sage Dharmanetra : Upadanavi 
had from him four excellent sons.': Brahma Purana 
dqidiseamiy daha: vasa sia adt gaa aA 
Udeegqued: 1! 'Tansurodha was a royal sage, the 
illustrious institution of laws. Upadanavi had four 
sons from Tarnsurodha.! Hari Varnsa. The 
commentator explains Dharmanetra (473) to be 
‘institution of laws' (wtwads:). We have 
Upadanavi before, as the daughter of Vrsaparvan 
the Daitya, married to Hiranyaksa. Homilton 
(Buchanan) calls her the wife of Sughora. The four 
sons are named in other authorities, with some 
variations : Dusyanta, Susyanta or Rsyanta or 
Sumanta, Pravira and Angaha or Naya. The 
Mahabharata enumerates five, Dusyanta, Sira, 
Bhima, Vasu and Pravasu, but makes them the sons 
of Ilina and grandson of Tansu. 

14. These two Slokas are taken from the 
Mahabharata. Adi Parvan and are part of the 
testimony borne by a heavenly messenger to the 
birth of Bharata. They are repeated in the same 
book, in the account of the family of Puru. They 
occur, with a slight variation of the order, in other 
Puranas, as the Vayu, etc., and show the greater 
antiquity of the story of Sakuntala, although they 
do not narrate it. The meaning of the name Bharata 
is differently explained in Sakuntala; he is said to 
be so called from 'supporting' the world : he is also 
there named Sarvadamana, 'the conqueror of all.’ 

15. The Brahma Purdna and Hari Varhsa, the 
latter especially, appear to have modified this 
legend, with the view perhaps of reconciling those 
circumstances which are related of Bharadvaja as a 
sage with his history as a king. While therefore they 
state that Bharadvaja was brought by the winds of 
Bharata, they state that he was so brought to 
perform a sacrifice by which a son was born, whom 
Bharadvaja also inaugurated udaaay afi 
Teka 41 soar vets: wafafed v4 g fara 
TS Ha YT adised faa Aa wea Uais va 
In the Vayu, Matsya and Agni, however, the story 
is much more consistently narrated; and 
Bharadvaja, being abandoned by his natural parent, 
is brought by the winds, as a child, not as sage; and 


382 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





being adopted by Bharata, is one and the same with 
Vitatha, as our text relates. Thus in the Vayu, the 
Maruts bring to Bharata, already sacrificing for 
progency (*et Wd: Ya Aeeqei), Bharadvaja, the 
son of Brhaspati; and Bharata receiving him says. 
"This Bharadvaja shall be Vitatha :', dd: @fadel ara 
WgEsTeteeae | The Matsya also says, the Maruts in 
compassion took the child and being pleased with 
Bharata's worship, gave it to him and he was named 
Vitatha : Weed Rest Wea: Soa: | da I ASAE 
Fea Wea: | Say est yonef ears a Gor g faaei 
afeay Ha A yas tag fated aA age FA star 
And the Agni tells the whole story in one verse : dd 
Tees TR A geet: 1 Ged ace: salt 
feasts Taq | ‘Then the son of Brhaspati, being taken 
by the winds. Bharadvaja was transferred with 
sacrifice and was Vitatha.' The account given in the 
Bhagavata is to the same purpose. The 
commentator on the text also makes the matter 


clear enough : maqacemat faaefrary i 'The 


18. Guruvirya and Trideva : Vayu. The first is 
called Gurudhi, Matsya; and Guru, Bhagavata : 
they agree in Rantideva. The Bhagavata describes 
the great liberality of this prince and his practice of 
Yoga. According to a legend preserved in the 
Megha Duta, his sacrifices of kine were so 
numerous, that their blood formed the river 
Carmanvati, the modern Cambal. 

19. Sivi : Matsya. 

20. The other authorities concur in _ this 
statement; thus furnishing an additional instance of 
one caste proceeding from another. No reason is 
assigned : the commentator says it was from some 
cause : hifdd HRINGI MAINA: | 

21. Durbhaksaya : Vayu. Uruksat : 
Duritaksaya : Bhagavata. 

22. Trayaruni, Puskararuni, Kavi; all became 
Brahmanas : Sead: Fala Ped HMA AA: | Matsya : 
and there were three chief branches of the Kavyas 
or descendants of Kavi : Steal Y Atala Wa: Wea 


Matsya, 


name of Bharadvaja in the condition of son of Weda: Wh: Gpaa: Bren: eaatat farsi Gargas, 


Bharata was Vitatha.' It is clear that a new-born 
infant could not be the officiating priest at a 
sacrifice for his own adoption, whatever the 
compiler of the Hari VarhSa may please to assert. 
From Bharadvaja, a Brahmana by birth and king by 
adoption, descended Brahmanas and Ksatriyas, the 
children of two fathers : deTeéa western: afar 
qfal emperor: wa feta ai The 
Mahabharata, in the Adi Parvan, tells the story very 
simple. In one place, v. 3710, it says that Bharata, 
on the birth of his children proving vain, obtained 
from Bharadvaja, by great sacrifices, a son, 
Bhimanyu; and in another passage it makes 
Bhtmanyu the son of Bharata by Sunanda, 
daughter of Sarvasena, king of Kasi; p. 139, v. 
3785. The two are not incompatible. 

16. Manyu : Bhagavata. Suketu : Agni. But the 
Brahma and Hari Vamsa omit this and the next 
generation and make Suhotra, Anuhotra, Gaya, 
Garga and Kapila the sons of Vitatha : they then 
assign to Suhotra two sons, Kasika and Ghrtsamati 
and identify them and their descendants with the 
progeny of Ayu, who were kings of K4si (see Bk. 
IV. Ch. VIII. n. 15); a piece of confusion 
unwarranted by any other authority except the 
Agni. 

17. Vrhat, Aharya, Nara, Garga : Matsya. 


Sankrtis and K4vyas. Ibid. 

23. In the Mahabharata, Suhotra is the son of 
Bhimanyu; and in one place the father of 
Ajamidha, etc., and in another of Hastin. The 
Brahma Purana in some degree and the Hari Varnsa 
in a still greater, have made most extraordinary 
confusion in the instance of this name. In our text 
and in all the best authorities we have three 
Suhotras, perfectly distinct : 1. Suhotra, great- 
grandson of Amdavasu, father of Jahnu and ancestor 
of Visvamitra and the KauSikas (see Bk. III. Ch. 
XI.); 2. Suhotra son of Ksatravrddha and grandson 
of Ayus and progenitor of the race of Kasi kings 
(Bk. IV. Ch. VIII.); and 3. Suhotra the son of 
Vrhatksatra, grandson of Vitatha and parent of 
Hastin. In the two  blundering compilations 
mentioned, we have, first (Hari Vamsa c. 20), a 
Suhotra son of Vrhatksatra, of the race of Puru; his 
descent is not given, but, from the names which 
follow Suhotra, the dynasty is that of our present 
text : secondly (Hari Varnsa c. 27), Suhotra son of 
Kancana, of the line of Amavasu and father of 
Jahnu, etc. thirdly (Hari Vamsa c. 29), Suhotra the 
son of Ksatravrddha and progenitor of the Kasi 
kings : fourthly (Hari Vamsa 32), we have the first 
and third of these personages confounded; Suhotra 
is made the son of Vitatha and progenitor of the 
Kasi kings, the dynasty of whom is repeated; thus 


BOOK IV, 19 


383 





connecting them with the line of Puru instead of 
.1yu3, in opposition to all authority. Again, we have 
a notable piece of confusion and Suhotra the son of 
Vitatha is made the father of Vrhat, the father of the 
three princes who in our text and in the Hari Varhsa 
(c. 20) are the sons of Hastin; and amongst whom 
Ajamidha is made the father of Jahnu and ancestor 
of the Kausikas, instead of being, as in c. 27 and as 
every where else, of the family of Amavasu. The 
source of all this confusion is obvious. The 
compilers extracted all the authentic traditions 
accurately enough, but, puzzled by the identity of 
name, they have also mixed the different accounts 
together and caused very absurd and needless 
perplexity. It is quite clear also that the Hari Vamsa 
does not deserve the pains taken and taken 
fruitlessly, by Hamilton and M. Langlois to reduce 
it to consistency. It is of no weight whatever as an 
authority for the dynasties of kings, although it 
furnishes some particular details, which it has 
picked up possibly from authentic sources not now 
available. 

24. It was finally ruined by the encroachments of 
the Ganges, but vestiges of it were, at least until 
lately, to be traced along the river, nearly in a line 
with Delhi, about sixty miles to the east. 

25. In one place, son of Suhotra; in another, 
grandson of Hastin : Mahabharata. 

26. The copies agree in this reading, yet it can 
scarcely be correct. K.anva has already been noticed 
as the son of Apratiratha. According to the 
Bhagavata, the elder son of Ajamidha was 
Priyamedhas, from whom a tribe of Brahmanas 
descended. The Matsya has Vrhaddanus and names 
the wife of Ajamidha, Dhimini. It also however, 
along with the Vayu, makes Kanva the son of 
Ajamidha by his wife Kesini. 

27. Vrhaddanus Bhagavata. 
Vrhaddarman : Hari VarsSa. 

28. Vrhatkaya : Bhagavata. 

29. Satyajit : Hari VarhSa. 

30. ASvajit : Matsya, Visada : Bhagavata. 


Also called 


31. Bhagavata Matsya Hari VamSa 
Ruciasva Rucirasva Rucira 
Kasya Kasya Svetaketu 
Drdhahanu Drdhasva Mahimndara 
Vatsa Vatsak.of Vatsak. of 
Avanti. Avanti. 


32. Kampilya appears to be the Kampil of the 
Mohammedans, situated in the Doab. It was 
included in southern Paficala. The Matsya makes 
Samara the son of Kasya. 

33. Vibhraja in MSS., also in the Vayu, 

34. The Bhagavata omits the descents 
subsequent to Nipa and makes Brahmadatta the son 
of Nipa by Sukrti. In the Hari VarhSa is a curious 
legend of the different transmigrations of 
Brahmadatta and his six companions, who were 
successively as many Brahmanas, then foresters, 
then deer, then water-fowl, then swans and finally 
Brahmanas again, when with the king they obtained 


liberation. According to the  Bhagavata, 
Brahmadatta composed a treatise on the Yoga, a 
Y ogatantra. 


35, Dandasena : Hari Vamsa. 

36, Bhallaka : Vayu. Bhallada : Bhagavata. The 
Vayu makes him the last of the race. The Hari 
Vamsa adds that he was killed by Karna. The 
Matsya names his successor Janamejaya, when the 
race of the Nipas was exterminated by Ugrayudha; 
as noticed below. 

37. So the Vayu and Bhagavata. The Matsya and 
Hari Varhsa, with less consistency, derive this 
family also from Ajamidha. 

38. Krtimat : Bhagavata. 

39. Between these two the Vayu inserts Mahat 
and Rukmaratha. The Matsya, Sudhanvan, 
Sarvabhauma., Mah4apaurava and Rukmadhara. The 
Brahma Purana, Sudharman, Sarvabhauma, Mahat 
and Rukmaratha. 

40. The Bhagavata says he was the author of six 
Samhitas of the Simaveda. (See Bk. III. Ch. VI). 

41. The Hari Varma says he killed Nipa, the 
grandfather of Prsata, but it had previously stated 
that it was the son of Bhallata, several descents 
after Nipa, who was killed by Ugrayudha : and 
again (c. 32), Prsata, conformably to other 
authorities, appears as the father of Drupada, in the 
family of Srfijaya. The Hari Varhsa relates the 
destruction of Ugrayudha by Bhisma, in 
consequence of his demanding in marriage the 
widow of Santanu : after which, Prsata, it is said, 
recovered possession of Kampilya. 

42. Puranjaya : Bhagavata. 

43. Purujati : Vayu. Puruja : Bhagavata. The 
Brahma Purana and Hari VamSa omit Nila and 
Santi. 


384 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





44, Riksa : Vayu. Prthu : 
Bhagavata. Omitted : Brahma. 

45. Bahyaésva : Agni. Bhadrasva : 
Bharmyasva : Bhagavata. 

46. Jaya : Matsya. Sanjaya : Bhagavata. 

47, Yavinara : Agni and Bhagavata, Javinara : 
Matsya. 

48. Kapila : Matsya. Krmilasva : Brahma. 

49. Paficala was at first the country north and 
west of Delhi, between the foot of the Himalaya 
and the Cambal. It was afterwards divided into 
northern and southern Paricdla, separated by the 
Ganges. M4akandi on the Ganges and Kampilya 
were the chief cities of the latter; Ahiksetra in the 
former. The Paficdlas, according to the 
Mahabharata, expelled Samvarana from 
Hastindpur, but it was recovered by Kuru. The 
purpose of the term P4ficala is similarly explained 
in other Puranas. In the Mahabh4rata they are the 
grandsons of Ajamidha. 

50. The Matsya says that they, as well as the 
Kanvas, were all followers or partisans of Angiras : 
qaerentiaigen: esr feo: weafgea: aa fer: 
@vayeet: | The Har Vamsa has nearly the same 
words. 

51. Bhadrayasva : Vayu. Parcadsva : Agni. 
Bandhyasva : Matsya. Bharmya : Bhagavata. But 
there is some indistinctness as to his descent. The 
Matsya and Hari Varhsa give the son of Mudgala 
only his patronymic Maudgalya. According to the 
first, his son was Indrasena; and his son, 
Bandhyasva. The second makes Badhryasva the 
scn of Maudgalya by Indrasena. The Bhagavata 
makes Bharmya, the patronymic of Mudgala, the 
son Of Bharmyasva and who is the father of 
Divodasa and Ahalya : a4 Ysoreral fgateara: 
Fara! The commentator has, wah TATA 

52. In the Ramayana, Satdnanda appears as the 
family priest of Janaka, the father of Sita. 

53. From whom the Maitreya Brahmanas were 
descended : Hari Varhsa, In the Matsya and Agni 
the son of Mitrayu is called Maitreya (Bk. I. Ch. I). 
The Brahma Purana and Hari Vamsa here close the 
lineage of Divodasa : the Agni adds but one name, 
Som4pi. They then proceed with the descendants of 
Srijaya, one of the Paficalas or Paficadhanus, 
Somadatta, Sahadeva and then as in our text. The 
Vayu and Bhagavata agree with the latter in making 
the line continuous from Divoddsa. According to 


Matsya. Arka : 


Matsya 


the Matsya and Brahma Purana the race of 
Ajamidha became extinct in the person of 
Sahadeva, but Ajamidha was thence called. the 
Somaka family. It was in the reign of Drupada that 
the possessions of the Pdaficalas were divided; 
Drona, assisted by the Pandavas, conquering the 
country and proceeding the southern portion again 
to Drupada, as related in the Mahabharata. The two 
princes last named in the list figure in the great war. 

54. The Hari Varmmsa gives him two brothers, 
Dhimravarna and Sudarsana. In the Mahabharata 
one list agrees with the text; the other calls 
Samvarana the son of Ajamidha by his wife Riksé. 

55. One other is named in the Bhagavata, 
Matsya, Brahma and Agni;  Animejaya, 
Arimarddana and Nisadhasva. The Har1 VamSa has 
Sudhanvat in place of Jahnu; having also Sudhanus. 

56. Krta : Vayu. Krtayajfia : Brahma. Krmi : 
Matsya, Krti : Bhagavata. 

57. The story of Uparicara or a Vasu who by 
command of Indra became king of Cedi, is told in 
the Mahabh4rata, Adi Parvan. He is there said to 
have at first five sons, Vrhadratha, king of 
Magadha, Pratyagra, Kusaémba, also _ called 
Manivahana, Mavella and Yadu, by his wife 
Girika; afterwards he has, by Adrika, an Apsaras 
condemned to the form of a fish, Matsya a son and 
Satyavati or Kali a daughter : the latter was the 
mother of Vyasa. The same legend is referred to in 
the accounts of Uparicara and his family in the 
Bhagavata, Matsya, Hari Varhsa, etc. 

58. Vrsabha : Matsya. 

59. Satyajita : Vayu. Satyahita : Bhagavata. 
Satyadhrtra or Pusya : Matsya. 

60. This story is told in the 16th section of the 
Sabha Parvan of the Mahabharata, where also he is 
called the son of Vrhadratha. In the Vayu he is the 
son of Satyajita. The Agni has Satyahita, Urjja, 


Sambhava, Jardsandha; and the Matsya, 
Satyadhrita, | Dhanusa, Sarva, Sambhava, 
Jarasandha. 

61. Somadhi : Vayu. Udipa : Agni. Udayus : 


Brahma. Somavit : Matsya. 
62. Srutakarman : Agni. SrutaSarman : Brahma. 
we 


BOOK IV, 20 


CHAPTER 20 
fasiseara: 
(qeayrearty) 
WIP Sara 
ufeerat SATT- AAAS AAAI 
aT: | et 
TERY GA ATS BTA VI 
was fee: fag  araniin:, 
wranineaat:, = eet, «= aT: 
saaaernte:, = cee taf: = ret 
ANSATN SN 
mane dinea:, aay feria:, fecior walc:, 
wet taft-seg-agiadareaa: Yar ag: 
tarftater wareud ferret x1 
4 oa ama wyfa sot steat a 
Witaretta PAA Bo At PT! UI 


Parasara said— Pariksit, thc son of Kuru, 
had four sons, Janamejaya, Srutasena, 


Ugrasena and Bhimsena.’ The son of Jahnu. 


was Suratha; his son was Vidtratha; his son 
was Sarvabhauma; his son was Jayasena, his 
son was Ar§avin; his son was Ayutayus; his son 
was Akrodhana; one of his sons was Devatithi 
and another was called Riksa, his son was 
Dilipa; his son was Pratipa, who had three 
sons, Devapi, Sdntanu and Bahlika. The first 
adopted in childhood a forest life and Santanu 
became king. Of him this verse is spread 
through the earth; "Santanu is his name, 
because if he Jays his hands upon an old man, 
he restores him to youth and by him men 
obtain tranquillity (Santi)." 


TET Mira TY gaMaUifer sat FA Ta GI 

ATTN TT Fara eTT ATA Tt PVA, 
at: | menefer Us sat a ala, wt WaraTeT sfe 
a Wag: Aseanafareaa yead, uaa 
ay, Sqm: @ eye, fawn faeahaa F 


aay: | 
aS) AA WIT: VAT: sere At TT! 
sea aaaae, Wirt  $vwaadagieen: 
VAM SAAR MietagaaAETTAUTI «feta 
arnt tq uftae waft, sqm: ~— 
TIS  acaefatwaeauefad 

Raster wd egamafsernatheardd a 


TTA TARTS 1 
In the kingdom over which Santanu ruled 
there was no rain for twelve years. 


Apprehensive that the country would become 
a desert, the king assembled the Brahmanas 
and asked them why no rain fell and what fault 
he had committed. They told him that he was 
as it were a younger brother married before an 
elder, for he was in the enjoyment of the earth, 
which was the nght of his elder brother 
Devapi. "What then am I to do?" said the Raja 
: to which they replied, "Until the gods shall 
be displeased with Devdpi, by his declining 
from the path of righteousness, the kingdom is 
his and to him therefore you should resign it." 
When the minister of the king Asmarsdarin, 
heard this, he collected a number of ascetics 
who taught doctrines opposed to those of the 
Vedas and sent them into the forest; where 
meeting with Devapi, they perverted the 
understanding of the simple-minded prince 
and led him to adopt heretical notions. In the 
meantime, Santanu being much distressed to 
think that he had been guilty of the offence 
intimated by the Brahmanas, sent them before 
him into the woods and then proceeded thither 
himself, to restore thc kingdom to his elder 


386 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





brother. When the Brahmanas arrived at the 
hermitage of Devapi, they informed him, that, 
according to the doctrines of the Vedas, 
succession to a kingdorh was the right of the 
elder brother : but he entered into discussion 
with them and in various ways advanced 
arguments which had the defect of being 
contrary to the precepts of the Vedas. When 
the Braéhmanas heard this, they turned to 
Santanu and said, "Come hither, Raja; you 
need give yourself no further trouble in this 
matter; the dearth is at an end; this man is 
fallen from his state, for he has uttered words 
of disrespect to the authority of the eternal, 
uncreated Veda; and when the elder brother is 
degraded, there is no sin in the prior espousals 
of his junior." Santanu thereupon returned to 
his capital and administered the government as 
before, and his elder brother Devapi being 
degraded from his caste by repeating doctrines 
contrary to the Vedas, Indra poured down 
abundant rain, which was followed by 
plentiful harvests.’ 


agar ainet: wise serene ai 
afisa: wearer: fia yeaa 


faa yanmar fefsrr weet eta garam 
arent uw dineaea waa WANA Wedars fasrar 
Gea we yt wear RYTTT Testa 


Fatt aeskainsd oo 
Ta: AHA UGCA TATA 
SUMNTTAT-MUsT ATA YAararraney Thay 
FRI VU 


ast wera wauserratsnatt ara 
PORE TL 


sfa stfaeygeor agate fest: sears: 

The son of Bahlika was Somadatta, who 
had three sons, Bhori, Bhorisravas and Sala.* 
The son of Santanu was the illustrious and 
learned Bhisma, who was born to him by the 
holy river-goddess, Ganga; and he had by his 
wife Satyavati two sons, Citringada and 
Vicitravirya. Citrangada, while yet a youth, 
was killed in a conflict with a Gandharva, also 
called Citrangada. Vicitravirya married Amba 
and Ambalika, the daughters of the king of 
Kasi; and indulging too freely in connubial 
rites, fell into a consumption, of which he 
died. By command of Satyavati, my son Krs 
na-dvaipayana, ever obedient to his mother's 


agama Fafa qaUy-Ws wishes,’ begot upon the widows of his brother 


conteryisteareras fasta TearATA Ro I 
galet-g-mreienat =| ya 
aregraruy 


Us gat: nea led ce Ge 
gas 48=6oufafaea:, «=o iar grata: 
qaaatiefa, wantet seend, grant wetarn 


~~ 


the princes Dhrtarastra and Pandu and upon a 
female servant, Vidira. Dhrtarastra had 
Duryodhana, Duhsdsana and other sons, to the 
number of a hundred. Pandu having incurred 
the curse of a deer, whose mate he had killed 
in the chase, was deterred from procreating 
children; and his wife Kunti bore to him in 
consequence three sons, who were begotten by 
the deities Dharma, Vayu and Indra, namely, 
Yudhisthira, Bhima and Arjuna : and his wife 


3rqt WUNWSATATAITST: , aq —Ahereht DIG IESATd Madri had two sons, Nakula and Sahadeva, by 


the celestial sons of ASvini. These had each a 


BOOK IV, 20 


387 





son by Draupadi. The son of Yudhisthira was 
Prativindhya; of Bhima, Srutasoma; of 
Arjuna, Srutakirtti; of Nakula, Satanika: and of 
Sahadeva, Srutakarman. The Pandavas had 
also other sons.” By his wife Yaudheyi, 
Yudhisthira had Devaka. The son of Bhima by 
Hidimbaé was Ghatotkaca and he had also 
Sarvatraga by his wife Kasi. The son of 
Sahadeva by Vijaya was Suhotra; and 
Niramitra was the son of Nakula_ by 
Karenumati. Arjuna had Iravat by the serpent- 
nymph Ulupi; Babhruvahana, who was 
adopted as the son of his maternal grandfather, 
by the daughter of the king of Manipura; and 
by his wife Subhadra, Abhimanyu, who even 
in extreme youth was renowned for his valour 
and his strength and crushed the chariots of his 
foes in fight. The son of Abhimanyu by his 
wife Uttara was Pariksit, who, after the Kurus 
were all destroyed, was killed in his mother's 
womb by the magic Brahma weapon, hurled 
by ASsvatth4man : he was however restored to 
life by the clemency of that being whose feet 
receive the homage of all the demons and the 
gods and who for his own pleasure had 
assumed a human shape (Krsna). This prince, 
Pariksit, now reigns over the whole world with 
undivided sway.° 


NOTES 


1. This, although it occurs in other authorities, 
appears to be an error, for these are the sons of a 
subsequent Pariksit (see the next chapter). The 
Matsya omits Pariksit here and the Bhagavata states 
that he had no children. In most of the Puranas, 
however, the line of Pariksat is continued, but there 
is very great confusion in the lineage. According to 
the Va4yu, Janamejaya was the son of Pariksit, 
whose son was Srutasena, whose son was 
Bhimasena, Janamejaya had also a son named 
Suratha; but Suratha was also the name of the son 
of Jahnu, from whom the line continues as in the 
text. The Brahma Purana and Hari Varhsa also 
make Suratha the son both of Janamejaya and of 
Jahnu; and they observe that there are two Riksas, 
two  Pariksits, three Bhimsenas and_ two 


Janamejayas, in the lunar race. Some of the 
confusion probably originates with the 
Mahabharata, which, as before noticed, gives two 
lists from Puru to Santanu, differing from one 
another and from all the lists of the Puranas. In the 
first of these lists such collateral names have been 
retained as appear to have furnished our text and 
that of other Puranas with distinct persons : thus 
making the members of one fraternity so many 
descents. Of the two lists, however, the second is 
probably to be regarded as the more recent, if not 
more correct; for VaisAémpayana repeats it at 
Janamejaya's request, because the latter is not 
satisfied with the summary account which the 
former had first communicated to him. 
Mahabharata vol. I. p. 136 and p. 138. 

2. The Mahabharata merely states that Dev4p1 
retired to a religious life. The story of his heresy is 
narrated, much as in the text, in the Bhagavata, 
Vayu. The Matsya adds, that he was also leprous; 
on which account his subjects contemned him. He 
was probably set aside in favour of his younger 
brother, either on that account or on that of his 
heresy; such a disposition being conformable to 
Hindu law. According to the Bhagavata and Matsya 
he is still alive at a place called Kalaépa grama, 
where, in the Krta age of the next Mahdyuga, he 
will be the restorer of the Ksatriya race. 

3. The Matsya says that Bahlika had a hundred 
sons or lords of the Bahlikas. 

4, Before her marriage to Santanu, Satyavati had 
a son, Krsna-dvaipayana or Vyasa, by Pardsara : he 
was therefore the half brother of Vicitravirya and 
legally qualified to raise up offspring to him by his 
widow. This law is abrogated in the present age. 
The whole story of the sons of Santanu is told at 
length in the Mahabharata. 

5. The Mahabharata names some of them rather 
differently and adds some particulars. Thus 
Yaudheya was the son of Yudhisthira by his wife 
Devika, daughter of Govasana of the Saivya tribe. 
The son of Bhimasena was Sarvaga by Balandhari, 
princess of K4si; he had also Ghatotkaca by 
Hidimb4. Abhimanyu was the son of Arjuna by 
Subhadrad. The wives and sons of the other two are 
the same but Karenumati is termed a princess of 
Cedi and Vijaya of Madra. 

6. In the details immediately preceding, the 
Puranas generally concur, deriving them probably 


388 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





from the same source, the Adi Parvan of the 
Mahabharata and employing very frequently the 
same words. The period at which the chapter closes 
is supposed to be that at which the Vy4sa, who 
arranged or compiled the Puranas, is believed to 
have flourished. Pariksit died of the bite of a snake, 
according to the Mahabharata, Adi Parva. The 
Bhagavata is supposed to have been narrated to him 
in the interval between the bite and its fatal effect. 
kK 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





388 
CHAPTER 21 
Walfagisena: 

(aifagadtat faacary) 

WUT SAT 


aa; wt afar afer arisen asa 
armerat:, Te | Ta aeTaa- 
WAT: Yaa afawrrearn vi 

aaa: water afew: atsat armaceane 
aera «= Teeuaaray «Ss fwafamafeer 
virrarrenefaararanr: wt Fatorrarceafai 211 

varataaden wfaa, weaned: 
aera frafer:, at ugamedt efera 
atirent = farait weraer: feat staan 
sonfyaw:, aa: Yfaa:, Tere gfe, aa: 
qam:, weneta gia:, gaea:, aay yay:, 
TNT Yara: THN kets: , Ta WAa:, Aa 
Rearat, Tenfaal yosar:, adt ye: ae fera:, 
frre. Gess:, «Tee «oaYer:, «= aatswT: 
Vas: 113 UI 

THN IA:, IASAT:, Ay Gueniu:, 
wat frefer: went ares) Aa Vos: | 

Tea A atretet ware: | 

ch Wea Ua BAe Wea Het sil 

sfa stifamyqeat agaist wafagt: sear: 


I will now enumerate the kings who will 
reign in future periods.’ The present monarch, 
Pariksit,” will have four sons, Janamejaya, 


Srutasena, Ugrasena and Bhimasena.’ The son 
of Janamejaya will be Satanika,’ who will 
study the Vedas under YA&jfiyavalkya and 
military science with Krpa; but becoming 
dissatisfied with sensual enjoyments, he will 
acquire spiritual knowledge from _ the 
instructions of Saunaka and ultimately obtain 
salvation. His son will be ASvamedhadatta (a 
son given by the gods in reward for the 
sacrifice of a horse);’ his son will be Asima- 
Krsna;° his son will be Nicakra,’ who will 
remove the capital to Kausambi, in 
consequence of Hastinapura being washed 
away by the Ganges; his son will be Usna;’ his 
son will be Citraratha; his son will be Vrs 
nimat;’ his son will be Sunitha;’° his son will 
be Rica;'! his son will be Nrcaksu;’” his son 
will be Sukhibala;'* his son will be Pariplava; 
his son will be Sunaya;'* his son will be 
Medhavin; his son will be Nrpafijaya;’” his son 
will be Mrdu;!® his son will be Tigma;”’ his 
son will be Vrhadratha; his son will be 
Vasudana;’® and his son will be another 
Satanika; his son will be Udayana;” his son 
will be Ahinara;’ his son will be 
Khandapani;”’ his son will be Niramitra;”” his 
son will be Ksemaka;” of him this verse is 
recited; “The race which gave origin to 
Brahmanas and Ksatriyas and which was 
purified by regal sages, terminated with Ks 
emaka in the Kali age.”*" 


NOTES 


]. The style now adopted is that of prophecy, as 
Vyasa could not consistently have recorded the 
events which were posterior to his time. 

2. Also read Pariksita, Pariksa and Pariksi. 

3. See Bk. IV. Ch. XX. The Vayu and Matsya 
relate, rather obscurely, a dispute between 
Janamejaya and Vaisampayana, in consequence of 
the former's patronage of the Brahmanas of the 
Vajasaneyi branch of the Yajurveda, in opposition 
to the latter, who was the author of the black or 
original Yajus (see Bk. III. Ch. V). Janamejaya 
twice performed the ASvamedha according to the 
Vajasaneyi ritual and established the Trisarvi or use 


BOOK IV, 22 389 





of certain texts of Asmaka and others by the states the number of princes twenty-five. The 
Brahmanas of Anga and by those of the middle specification however, commencing with Satanika, 
country. He perished however in consequence, is twenty-six or twenty-seven. The passage is, 
being cursed by Vaigampayana. Before their Vafarryued sfaem: Yodan: sqareectasa il 
disagreement  Vaisampayana related the -‘fad: Quas:1 See A Gitden tale Gena: 1 Aah WH 
Mahabharata to Janamejaya. Mahabharata Adi wai deat wreqia a oot 
Parvan. Kk 
4, The reading of the text is rather, ‘his ((Pariks 
it's) other son will be Satanika;' Tem: ware 
afaeati! but the commentator refers ‘his' to 
Janamejaya; TIAATIeAT! The Vayu, Matsya and 
Bhagavata also make Satanika the son of Jan 
amejaya. The Brahma Purana has a totally different 
series or Pariksit; Siryapida, Candrdapida, 
Janamejaya, Satyakarna, Svetakarna, Sukumara and 
Ajasyama. 
5. The Bhagavata interposes Sahasranika. The 
Vrhatkatha has the same descent, but calls the son 
of Shasranika, Udayana or Vatsa. The Bhagavata 
has Asvamedhaja. 
6. Adhiséma K. : Vayu. Adhisoma K. : Matsya. 
The former states that the Vayu Purana was 
narrated in this king's reign, in the second year of a 
three years' sacrifice at Kuruksetra. 
7. Nemicakra : Bhagavata. Vicaksus : Matsya. 
They agree with the text as to the removal of the 
capital and the cause. 
8. Ukta :Bhagavata. Bhitrijyestha : Matsya. 
9. Sucidratna, Vayu : Sucidrava. Mats.; 
Kaviratha, Bhagavata; is interposed between 
Citraratha and Vrsnimat. 
10. Sutirtha : Vayu. 
11. Ruci : Vayu. Omitted : Matsya and 
Bhagavata. 
12. Citraksa : Vayu. 
13. Sukhinala : Bhagavata. 
14. Sutapas : Matsya. 
15. Purafijaya :Matsya. 
16. Urva : Matsya. Dirva : Bhagavata. 
17. Tigmatman : Matsya. Timi : Bhagavata. 
18, Sudasa : Bhagavata. Vasud4man : Matsya. 
19, The Matsya concurs with the text (see above, 
note 5), the Bhagavatas has Durdaman. 
20. Vahinara : Bhagavata. 
21. Dandap4ni : Bhagavata, Vayu, Matsya. 
22. Nimi : Bhagavata. 
23. Ksepaka : Vayu. 
24. The same memorial verse is quoted in the 
Matsya and Vayu Purana, preceded by one which 


BOOK IV, 22 389 





CHAPTER 22 
Elfaynseara: 
(mifa-aretPeargayita-yaot qr) 
WU Sara 


srfearHar ufaeat: ual: ead Pecaerel 
Gal FRAT VM 

THIS YENT:, AAT AT:, AMS ANE:, Ad: 
wiceara:, weata fearat:, wa Weean VN 

Wa Feea:, Aequiqe:, wenfa gudts:, at 
weca:, Wedel] yaa: ae feHar:, 
feateake:, ae Gaul: want aaa 
germ, dente ai, aft: Hawe:, Haw 
WHa:, WHA AHA:, ASML MT:, WM 
QYSet:, TNE Uget:, Tt: Werf, aay ae:, 
Wai: HUSh:, Teele qea:, ay yfraisa:, 
Sad WAaTHAa FECAATAATT: | STATTSPTVANA: 

Searaunad aor: Yaar afacaten 

Aa WAT Ur a Meat wea Heit 3 

sta sifaraygeray wquisr Enfagr: Steet: 

I will not repeat to you the future princes of 
the family of Iksvaku.' 

The son of Vrhadbala’ will be Vrhatksana;° 
his son will be Uruksepa;* his son will be 
Vatsa;> his son will be Vatsavytha;° his son 
will be Prativyoman;’ his son will be 
Divakara; his son will be Sahadeva;® his son 
will be Vrhadagva;? his son will be 
Bhanuratha;'° his son will be Supratitha;'! his 
son will be Marudeva;” his son will be Sunaks 


atra, his son will be Kinnara;'? his son will be 
Antariksa; his:son will be Suvarna;'* his son 


390 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





will be Amitrajit;’° his son will be Vrhadraja; °° 
his son will be Dharman;'’ his son will 
Krtafyaya, his son will be Ranafyjaya; his son 
will be Sanjaya; his son will be Sakya;’* his 
son will be Suddhodana,’? his son will be 
Ratula,” his son will be Prasenajit, his son 
will be Ksudraka, his son will be Kundaka;”’ 
his son will be Suratha;” his son will be 
Sumitra. These are the kings of the family of 
Ikshwaku, descended from Vrihadbala. This 
commemorative verse is current concerning 
them; “The race of the descendants of 
Ikshwaku will terminate with Sumitra: it will 
end in the Kali age with him.”” 


NOTES 


1. See Bk. IV. Ch. II. 

2. Vrhadratha : Vayu. 

3. Vrhatksaya : Vayu. Vrhadrana : Bhagavata. 
Omitted : Matsya. | 

4. Omitted : Vayu. Uruksaya : Matsya. Urukriya 
: Bhagavata. 

5. Omitted by all three. 

6. Vatsavrddha : Bhagavata. 

7. Prativytiha : Vayu. 

8. The Bhagavata inserts Bhanu. The Matsya 
says that Ayodhyd was the capital of Divakara. The 
Vayu omits the next twelve names; probably a 
defect in the copies. 

9. Druvasva : Matsya. 

10. Bhanumat : Bhagavata, Bhavyaratha or 
Bhavya : Matsya. 

11. Pratikasva : Bhagavata. Pratipasva : Matsya. 

12. The Bhagavata and Matsya prefix a 
Supratipa or Supratika. 

13. Puskara : Bhagavata. 

14. Suparvan or Sumantra : Matsya. Sutapas : 
Bhagavata. 

15. Amantravit : Matsya. 

16. Vrhadbraja : Bhagavata. 

17. Omitted : Matsya Varhis : Bhagavata. 

18. The Bhagavata and Vayu have Sakya. My 
copy of the Matsy has Sadhya, but the Radcliffe 
MS., more correctly, no doubt. Sakya (31#:). 

19. In some copies Krodhodana; but it is also 
Suddhodana, Matsya and Vayu; Suddhoda, 
Bhagavata. 


20. Rahula : Vdyu. Siddhartha or Puskala : 
Matsya Langala : Bhagavata. This and the two 
preceding names are of considerable chronological 
interest; for Sakya is the name of the author or 
reviver of Buddhism, whose birth appears to have 
occurred in the seventh and death in the sixth 
century before Christ (B.C. 621-543). There can be 
no doubt of the individual here intended, although 
he is out of his place, for he was the son, not the 
father, of Suddhodana and the father of Rahula; as 
he is termed in the Amara and Haima Kosas, 
Saudhodani or Suddhodana suta the son of 
Suddhodana and Rahulasu the parent of Rahula : so 
also in the Mahavarnga, Siddhartha or Sakya is the 
son of Suddhodano and father of Rahula. Turnour's 
translation, p. 9. Whether they are rightly included 
amongst the princes of the race of Iksvaku is more 
questionable, for Suddhodana is usually described 
as a petty prince, whose capital was not Ayodhya, 
but Kapilavastu. At the same time it appears that 
the provinces of the Doab had passed into the 
possession of princes of the lunar line and the 
children of the sun may have been reduced to the 
country north of the Ganges or the modern 
Gorakhpur, in which Kapila was situated. The 
Buddhists do usually consider their teacher Sakya 
to be descended from Iksv4ku. The chronology is 
less easily adjusted, but it is not altogether 
incompatible. According to the lists of the text, 
Sakya, as the twenty-second of the line of Iksvaku, 
is contemporary with Ripufijaya, the twenty-second 
and last of the kings of Magadha, of the family of 
Jarasandha; but, agreeably to the Buddhist 
authorities, he was the friend of Bimbas4ra, a king 
who in the Pauranik list appears to be the fifth of 
the Saigunaga dynasty and tenth from Ripufijaya. 
The same number of princes does not necessarily 
imply equal duration of dynasty and Iksvaku's 
descendants may have out-lasted those of 
Jarasandha; or as is more likely for the dynasty was 
obscure and is evidently imperfectly preserved - 
several descents may have been omitted, the 
insertion of which would reconcile the Pauradnik 
lists with those of the Buddhists and bring Sakya 
down to the age of Bimbasara. It is evident, from 
what occurs in other authorities, that the Aiks 
vakava princes are regarded as contemporaries 
even of the Saigunaga dynasty : see c. 24, n. 17. 


BOOK IV, 23 


21. Ksulika : Vayu. Kulaka or Ksullaka : 
Matsya. Omitted : Bhagavata. In the Mahdvira 
Caritra, a work written by the celebrated 
Hemacandra, in the twelfth century, we have a 
Prasenajit, king of Magadha, residing at Rajgrha, 
succeeded by Srenika and he by Kilika. The 
Buddhists have a Prasenajit contemporary with 
Sakya, son of Mahadpadma, king of Magadha. There 
is some confusion of persons wither in the Pauranik 
genealogies or in the Buddhist and Jain traditions, 
but they agree in brining the same names together 
about the same period. 

22. Omitted : Bhagavata. 

23. The Vayu and Bhagavata have the same 
stanza. We have here twenty-nine or thirty princes 
of the later solar line, contemporary with the 
preceding twenty-six or twenty-seven of the later 
dynasty of the moon., 

deme 


391 


BOOK IV, 23 391 


Srutavat;* his son will be Ayutayus;’ his son 
will be Niramitra;* his son will be Sukstra;” his 
son will be Vrhatkarman;° his son will be 
Senajit;’ his son will be Srutafijaya;” his son 
will be Vipra;” his son will be Suci;'° his, son 
will be Ksemya, his son will be Suvrata;! his 
son will be Dharma,” his son will be 
Susuma;" his son will be Drdhasena,’” his son 
will be Sumati,’® his son will be Suvala,’” his 
son will be Sunita,'* his son will be Satyajit,’” 
his son will be Visvajit,” his son will be 
Ripufijaya.”” These are the Varhadrathas, who 
will reign for a thousand years.” 


NOTES 


1. Somadhi; Vayu, Matsya : and they now affect 
greater precision, giving the years of the reigns. 
SomAdhi 58, V.; 50, M. 

2. Srutagravas, 67 years V.; 64, M. 


CHAPTER 23 3. 36 years V.; Apratipa, 26, M. 
: 4, 100 years V.; 40, M. 
walfagiseaa: : ae 
5. 58 years V.; 56, M.; Sunaksatra, Bhagavata. 
( : : } 6. 23 years V. and M.; Vrhatsena, Bhagavata. 


7, 23 years V.; 50, M.; Karamyit, Bhagavata. 
8. 40 years V. and M. 
, 9. Mahabala, 25 years V.; Vidhu, 28, M. 


AMAT ATesAMAT ASTON HTTP 8 10, 58 years V.; 64, M. 


11. 28 years V. and M. 
OA FE AM MTA ATTA AYA: 1 2 12. 60 years V.; 64, M. 


WUT GA Veta UNaNt:, eM Ata, 13. 5 years V.; Sunetra, 35, M.; Dharmanetra, 
aeaTgary:, aaa Peta: at 7a: Yaa:, Taafy Bhagavata. 


seq aay aah TET AHA 14. 38 years V.; Nivrtti, 58, M.; Sama, 
reat Fem, Bhagavata. 


qe UT WA: raat ufacrin wenta ary » TET 15. 48 years V.; Trinetra, 28, M.; Dyumatsena, 
Yaa at:, at: , GaA:, wat SEU: at: yatt:, Bhagavata. 
ToT , : waht 16. 33 years V.; Mahatsena, 48, M. 
F ee ee ie 6 a ee 17. 22 years V.; Netra, 33, M. 
feral a, i 18. 40 years V.; Abala, 32, M. 
qo aaa afar 3 11 19. 80 years V.; omitted, M. 
aftr sttferayy erat aautst Aa: SAT 20. 35 years V.; omitted, M. 


21. 50 years V. and M.; Parafijaya and Visvajit 
I will now relate to you the descendants of ,., identified, Bhagavata. 


Vrhadratha, who will be the kings of 99 Opr list and that of the Vayu specifies 
Magadha. There have been several powerful twenty-one kings after Sahadeva : the Bhagavata 
princes of this dynasty, of whom the most specifies twenty and in another passage states that 
celebrated was Jaradsandha, his son was to be the number. My copy of the Matsya names 
Sahadeva, his son is Somapi;' his son will be but nineteen and the Radcliffe but twelve; but both 


392 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





agree in making the total thirty-two. They all 
concur with the text also in stating that 1000 years 
had elapsed from the great war, at the death of the 
last Varhadratha prince; and this is more worthy of 
credit than the details, which are obviously 
imperfect. 

deo a 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





392 
CHAPTER 24 
aaagsearay : 

(aferarctead-Faon aires A CAT 
Wares aA T aT!) 
WIT Sata 


asa frat aa aeeisaa:, wea girat 
araTaTea afeeakeT V1 

a SI aM ey verre 
Tay wea yar vfs ar faymaa:, 
qaqa, wWa:, Ta a Arad, sad 
sBhrgATat TaN: "erat Mea 2 

The last of the Brhadratha dynasty, 
Ripufijaya, will have a minister named 
Sunika,’ who having killed his sovereign, will 
place his won Pradyota upon the throne;’ his 
son will be Palaka;? his son will be 
Visdkhayipa,’ his son will be Janaka® and his 
son will be Nandivardhana.° These five kings 
of the house of Pradyota will reign over the 
earth for a hundred and thirty-eight years.’ 

aay forgarmt:, aaa araant wfaa aga: 
ana, ai eaaht:, daar faaan:, 
qaITAGTA:, «Te ah: «9 aastenreeary:, 
Tenate arqaaet:, Tat verre, saa MYATT 
a 86 tamer «= agra | fae afernty 
afew 3 

The next prince will be Sisunaga,* his son 
will be Kakavarna,’ his son will be Ks 
emadharman,”’ his son will be Ksatraujas, 
his son will be Vidmisara,'* his son will be 
Ajatasatru, his son will be Dharbaka;" his 
son will be Udayasva;'? his son will also be 


Nandivarddhana; and his son will be 
Mahdnandi.'° These ten Saigunagas will be 
kings of the earth for three hundred and sixty- 
two years.’ 


werega: wearienalsfacean wera: 
UIT Sas Racers Afra ¥ 

wa: wif wa afta vast, a 
URSA SAMA Mera: Yrs wether & A 

wast YT: Yue want: wa a 
Teer yeat seat wemerenqgaey Uh 
agenda vfaeaten ada ay wer alferat 
IT: ATE & 


The son of Mahdnanda will be born of a 
woman of the Sidra or servile class; his name 
will be Nanda, called Mahapadma, for he will 
be exceedingly avaricious.’® Like another 
Parasgurama, he will be the annihilator of the 
Ksatriya race; for after him the kings of the 
earth will be Stidras. He will bring the whole 
earth under one umbrella : he will have eight 
sons, Sumalya and others, who will reign after 
Mahdpadma; and he and his sons’” will govern 
for a hundred years. The Brahmana Kautilya 
will root out the nine Nandas.”” 


vara «wai yfadt steak alfeer wa 
aay Teastraeafan oi 

vam wt fagat xafasain wena 
MMAGA:, AI: YAM:, Aa SMMA:, Ad: UPA: 
ad: Wieys:, Tan Brat, Ten weer, 
Tera gee ata wa dat ae qua 
viata seayd wafer dared feel we 
Ween 

Upon the cessation of the race of Nanda, 
the Mauryas will possess the earth, for Kaut 
ilya will place Candragupta’' on the throne : 
his son will be Vindusara;” his son will be 
Asokavarddhana;”* his son will be Suyasas;* 
his son will be Dasaratha; his son will be 
Sangata; his son will Salistka; his son will be 
SomaSarmman; his son will be Sasadharman;”” 
and his successor will be Vrhadratha. These 


BOOK IV, 24 


393 





are the ten Mauryas, who will reign over the 
earth for a hundred and thirty-seven years.”° 


ad: water: wanfa: wit eat we 
aafver fet & i 


sTeremstatia:, Ta FAS:, Add agiaz:, 
TENS: Ta: Uferam:, aa wway:, Tenefa 
aaa: , Tay APTAAI oll 

aang sayfe:, sad aT yet wemat ave 
Yaa trea aa: Haren yarerfr gen 

The dynasty of the Sungas will next 
become possessed of the sovereignty; for Pus 
pamitra, the general of the last Maurya prince, 
will put his master to death and ascend the 
throne :”’ his son will be Agnimitra;” his son 
will be Sujyestha;”’ his son will be 
Vasumitra;*’ his son will be Ardraka;*! his son 
will be Pulindaka;” his son will be Ghos 
avasu;’ his son will be Vajramitra;** his son 
will be Bhagavata;’ his son will be 
Devabhiti.*° These are the ten Sungas, who 
will govern the kingdom for a hundred and 
twelve years.’ 
AAeaAaT Nae waa | aT: a at 
quia: wenfe aat:, Aare yal, wa 


CHIARA: cesrerenfgrasin query Fee 


Devabhiti, the last Sunga prince, being 
addicted to immortal indulgences, his minister, 
the Kanva named Vasudeva will murder him 
and usurp the kingdom : his son will be 
Bhiamimitra; his son will be Narayana; his son 
will be Susarman. These four Kanvas will be 
kings of the earth for forty-five years.** 


aera ava yea aon faa wear 


aa: forearana:, aay aradga:, aga: gfe, 
aaa wanuit forast:, ad: foraenet:, dat 
aye: aa fara: aaarit:, vente genta, 
wand figerardegata wens gfe 
WeArT SNA: | 


SusSarman the Kanva will be killed by a 
powerful servant named Sipraka, of the 
Andhra tribe, who will become : king and found 
the Andhrabhrtya dynasty;*” he will be 
succeeded by his brother Krsna;"" his son will 
be Sri S&takarni;*’ his son will be 
Pirnotsanga;” his son will be Sa&takarni 
(2nd); his son will be Lambodara;™ his son 
will be Ivilaka;* his son will be Meghasvati;” 
his son will be Patumat;”’ his son will be Arist 
akarman;” his son will be Hala;” his son will 
be Talaka; his son will be Pravilasena;”: his 
son will be Sundara, named Satakarni;”* his 
son will be Cakora Satakarni;”’ his son will be 
Sivasvati;** his son will be Gomatiputra;”° his 
son will be Pulimat;* his son will be Sivasri 
Satakarni;”’ his son will Sivaskandha;™ his son 
will be Yajfiagri;” his son will be Vijaya;” his 
son will be Candrasri; *! his son will be 
Pulomarcis.” These thirty Andhrabhrtya kings 
will reign four hundred and fifty-six years.” 


SANT Vs Wee wfaerA V3 1 

dd: SSM Vet yy vfs) AAT sel Aaat: 
ages Fai:, yser waar sht:, ut, yet 
TEM Aina Aaraeaats wear evi 

way Uh ware worasemnt aftr wd 
TAT 24 UI 

wey defaen gaa yor wfacaen 
Tathataerecat fereargrita: 1 26 1 


srr aget weft aa ROAM AMAT «oat: YRara:, adl Uaas:, Teng aat:, ani 
quia wea arcait:, wat quintge:, aug:, parer:, yfeare:, areaem:, fereravanit 
aya oyideafel:, we watet:, Ta WwW ated = wguiftr wi safest 
fefacta:, aat Waraft:, aa: WAM, was aaemateievla, amines xa: aa: gufaave faa 
sian, dat gle: sled Yaem:, ad: wafwaraa:, ay Anas, waalenag ada 
wawyet:, dd: Get: wa aul, dena: qua ufaatn twa wat wa wort 
VATU 2211 afaeatTi 91k 


394 


After these, various races will reign, as 
seven Abhiras, ten Garddhabas, sixteen Sakas, 
eight Yavanas, fourteen Tusaras, thirteen 
Mundas, eleven Maunas, altogether seventy- 
nine princes,” who will be sovereigns of the 
earth for one thousand three hundred and 
ninety years; and then eleven Pauras will be 
kings for threc hundred years.’ When they are 
destroyed, the Kailakila Yavanas will be 


kings; the chief of whom will be 
Vindhyasakti; his son will be Parafjaya; his 


son will be Rdmacandra; his son will be 
Adharma, from whom will be Varanga, 
Krtanandana, Sudhinandi, Nandiyasas, Sisuka 
and Pravira; these will rule for a hundred and 
six years.” From them will proceed thirteen 
sons; then three Bahlikas and Puspamitra, 
Patumitra and others, to the number of 
thirteen, will rule over Mekala.”’ There will be 
nine kings in the seven Kosalas; and there will 
be as many Naisadha princes.” 
amar fayanfedgisary ant afar dad- 
waragat 
RTI ara WAT aerate wees 
(Gags) wafer waregia aria vferafen 
afrgaietrmesie yer eaten vare-AHfie- 
aleTmtar SATE Alera eaten ary 
Gama) afaasruay axargar dean 
WparrEMqerayaris sen faniesrer 
waa 
STN THT: Vat: Weahat 
In Magadha a sovereign named Visvasphat 
ika will establish other tribes; he will extirpate 
the Ksatriya or martial race and elevate 
fishermen, barbarians and Brahmanas and 
other castes, to power.” The nine Nagas will 
reign in Padméavati, Kantipuri and Mathura; 
and the Guptas of Magadha along the Ganges 
to Prayaga.’”’ A prince named Devaraksita will 
reign, in a city on the sea-shore, over the 
Kogalas, Odras, Pundras and Tamraliptas.”’ 
The Guhas will possess Kalinga, Mdahihaka 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


and the mountains of Mahendra.” The race of 
Manidhanu will occupy the countries of the 
Nisadas, Naimisikas and Kalatoyas.’* The 
people called Kanaks will possess the Amazon 
country and that called Miasika. ™ Men of the 
three tribes, but degraded and Abhiras and 
Stidras, will occupy Saurastra, Avanti, Sura, 
Arbuda and Marubhitimi and Siidras, outcastes 
and barbarians will be mastcrs of the banks of 
the Indus, Darvika, the Candrabhaga and 
Kashmir.” 


UW wT yedarn: wa vest wat afacaten 
SeUMTaTaT Teh: 9 Adaregaaeas: Tl- 
AlA- Manat: UTTEA SAA SCTAT 
Sfeareaframrn: « aeargat weet sracuenigy 
WATT 1211 


These will all be contemporary monarchs, 
reigning over the earth; kings of churlish 
spirit, violent, temper and ever addicted to 
falsehood and wickedness. They will inflict 
death on women, children and cows; they will 
seize upon the property of their subjects; they 
will be of limited power and will for the most 
part rapidly rise and fall; their lives will be 
short, their desires insatiable and they will 
display but little piety. 

qs fafaer wauvererdieatia tuerayfarn 
HTT faraeaur ada: wa: 
eTafereafari 22 I 


The people of the various countries 


fanectaral-asurm-areafaqar, intermingling with them will follow their 


example and the barbarians being powerful in 
the patronage of the princes, whilst purer 
tribes are neglected, the people will perish.”° 


aagemencrgrng waasag maar: 
Para wfaeafai2 ott 


Wa BasT WM 


BOOK IV, 24. | 
adore statue: ATTEN AUT 
UNGSAVT: 1 23 
ava qaleg:, MeIda MgYeareg:ll VN 


Wealth and piety will decrease day by day, 
until the world will be wholly depraved. Then 
property alone will confer rank; wealth will be 
the only source of devotion; passion will be 
the sole bond of union between the sexes; 
falsehood will be the only means of success in 
litigation; and women will be objects merely 
of sensual gratification. Earth will be 
venerated but for its mineral treasures;’’ the 
Brahmanical thread will constitute a 
Brahmana; external types (as the staff and red 
garb) will be the only distinctions of the 
several orders of life; dishonesty will be the 
universal means of subsistence; weakness will 
be the cause of dependence; menace and 
presumption will be substituted for learning; 
liberality will be devotion; 

faaneed:, 


aeareta ut queria deifirdantadtiet 
quusel dati at a aa a oa 
worifaeaia wasniaqernae: wearer 


395 


life will exceed three and twenty years. Thus 
in the Kali age shall decay constantly proceed, 
until the human race approaches its 
annihilation. 

siren facaneraquma aod 7 
HUAI TT 
Teas =a «= AT Rae: 
WMATA ye  swPyN hs 
wnfad:, afenedt wera anercrary- 
GerMTATAT TUT RaTAATeA I: ATT 
HATE 2 & I 

When the practices taught by the Vedas 
and the institutes of law shall nearly have 
ceased and the close of the Kali age shall be 
nigh, a portion of that divine being who exists 
of his own spiritual nature in the character of 
Brahma and who is the beginning and the end 
and who comprehends all things, shall descend 
upon earth : he will be born in the family of 
VisnuyaSas, an eminent Brahmana_ of 
Sambhala village, as Kalki, endowed with the 
eight superhuman faculties. By his irresistible 
might he will destroy all the Mlecchas and 
thieves and all whose minds are devoted to 


Zit: wet: dasa wpaqeneagegannsy iniquity. 


afaeatd, A GACH CMT AUT AAA : 
Viearnwadeet «Maer 6FlU CaM: 


waanig ufaet | or Weerufeeatifan 


THfanftasifn sifsafa saad ua afagh Wuermnceaeatygnrat afar 1 


egTIATATNaeNag VA: eAytETaA 24 1 


simple ablution will be purification;” 
mutual assent will be marriage; fine clothes 
will be dignity;” and water afar off will be 
esteemed a holy spring. Amidst all castes he 
who is the strongest will reign over a 
principality thus vitiated by many faults. The 
people, unable to bear the heavy burdens 
imposed upon them by their avaricious 
sovereigns, will take refuge amongst the 
valleys of the mountains and will be glad to 
feed upon wild honey, herbs, roots, fruits, 
flowers and leaves : their only covering will be 
the bark of trees and they will be exposed to 
the cold and wind and sun and rain. No man's 


He will then re-establish righteousness 
upon earth; and the minds of those who live at 
the end of the Kali age shall be awakened and 
shall be as pellucid as crystal. 


we dheyarmyeqen ufwaraa a 
SUA HAA AAT TATA 2 C1 

wm 8 8d | oven =| [HATEATTarftr 
WTA AT 2 FU 

The men who are thus changed by virtue of 

that peculiar time shall be as the seeds of 
human beings and shall give birth to race who 
shall follow the laws of the Krta age or age of 
purity. 

arent 


396 


aa way yaar can frear-geendt 
Tarren wae watt Far HATZ ott 


As it is said : "When the sun and moon and 
the lunar astrism Tisya and the planet Jupiter, 


are in One mansion, the Krta age shall 
801 


Ut avy yore: Herat YRATAN 3 8 
Mad Wife Wat area 
Wagar aay HA VASMAATTN 3 2 


Thus, most excellent Muni, the kings who 
are past, who are present and who are to be, 
have been enumerated. From the birth of 
Pariksit to the coronation of Nanda it is to be 
known that 1015 years have elapsed.”! 


aagiongy at yal ayaa sfact fafa 
way Hered sad aq ae Fafer 
ot BANA BRAVA ARG FOTN 3 3M 


When the two first stars of the seven Rsis 
(the great bear) rise in the heavens and some 
lunar asterism is seen at night at an equal 
distance between them, then the seven Rsis 
continue stationary in that conjunction for 
hundred years of men.” 


ty untied arer wararay fester 

AAT WMT Hferalayreayrgvareyrs 1 3 XI 

aaa wTafgetrten arat feat fiat 

THCAPHMAT ATMS HATTA 3 4 I 

At the birth of Pariksit they were in Magha 
and the Kali age then commenced, which 
consists of 1200 (divine) years. When the 
portion of Visnu (that had been born from 
Vasudeva) returned to heaven, then the Kali 
age commenced. 

Wad WT Wau Tega TENT 

ara qectotears aaat ante afer: 13 11 

Ta wareTae fairest yar faq 


TNT UTA Tet Tega Bafsr: 1 39 1 
As long as the earth was touched by his 
sacred feet, the Kali age could not affect it. As 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


soon as the incarnation of the eternal Visnu 
had departed, the son of Dharma, Yudhisthira, 
with his brethren, abdicated the sovereignty. 


fart gear a fafa a wea: | 
Ae HO Darea aisha wera 3 2 
Waa Aer I A Yaraeat ETA: | 

dal Tar MyRE aAferates wfEaer 3 ¢ 


Observing unpropitious portents, 
consequent upon Krsna's disappearance, be 
placed Pariksit upon the throne. When the 
seven Rsis are in Pirvasddha, then Nanda will 
begin to reign® and thence-forward the 
influence of the Kali will augment. 


area Fon fed aaefeaa aareh 

yieost afore wet teat Fata A voll 

Aor santo autor fest! wgTaerat 

afesa ugar ufaerete a afer: ya 

wea att feentt wa Uae a Werat 

Fgh aaratery afaeaa ga: HAT VI 

The day that Krsna shall have departed 

from the earth will be the first of the Kali age, 
the duration of which you shall hear; it will 
continue for 360,000 years of mortals. After 


twelve hundred divine years shal] have 
elapsed, the Krta age shall be renewed. 


Tent: afra ayvar: yay feral 
Bl BY Wea: Waa: WEA ¥ ZU 
agra Uttar Het Hell 
Yremageay 7 war ufratfrar x ¥ i 
carta: eat Tea WeBeaHa MT: | 
Wea aA HATTA TAT YG I 
wal FT serra aaweaat fe ah 
afar Tae aang Saher ¥ EU 
Ua era Agta TT 
PAs BMP Aor ysAt xo 
wel y Shaped fer faster waren 
ada taiy-weE Und Waal ¥ cI 


Thus age after age Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, 
Vaisyas and Stidras, excellent Brahmana, men 


BOOK IV, 24 


of great souls, have passed away by 
thousands; whose names and tribes and 
families I have not enumerated to you, from 
their great number and the repetition of 
appellations it would involve. Two persons, 
Devapi of the race of Puru and Maru of the 
family of Iksvaéku, through the force of 
devotion continue alive throughout the whole 
four ages, residing at the village of Kalapa; 
they will return hither in the beginning of the 
Krta age and becoming members of the family 
of the Manu, give origin to the Ksatriya 
dynasties." In this manner the earth is 
possessed through every series of the three 
first ages, the Krta, Treté and Dvapara, by the 
sons of the Manu; and some remain in the Kali 
age, to serve as the rudiments of renewed 
generations, in the same way as Devapi and 
Maru are still in existence. 

WH Fepal AMAA FPS AAT 

faftact fed wreat ta saree sei 

wl aa a wren aes fexferavset 

Sad AU Aeraers Peraeray: 11 & oI 

at AMET A Gat wet Het 

meereata ferarat Ay FUT: 4 Vi 

MI: TAA TATA 

vaera arate aaaet a ASAI & IMI 

faetrerenaea-ararerary Ae 

FUITa: Me Tata TAT & 3M 

tata! yeahien: yoteranst Prater ary 

are ateafay sara AAG vi 


I have now given you a summary account 
of the sovereigns of the earth; to recapitulate 
the whole would be impossible even in a hun- 
dred lives. These and other kings, who with 
perishable frames have possessed this ever- 
during world and who, blinded with deceptive 
notions of individual occupation, have 
indulged the feeling that suggests, ‘‘This earth 
is Mine-it is my son’s-it belongs to my 
dynasty,’’ have all passed away. So, many 
who reigned before them, many who 


397 


succeeded them and many who are yet to 
come, have ceased or will cease, to be. Earth 
laughs, as if smiling with autumnal flowers, to 
behold her kings unable to effect the 
subjugation of themselves. I will repeat to you, 
Maitreya, the stanzas that were chanted by 
Earth and which the Muni _ Asita 
communicated to Janaka, whose banner was 
virtue. 


Hane ALOT Ural afagraraiay 

Sq Trereratans wafer epee: 1 & GN 

yearns Feat Nefraara Alar: | 

dat year Uiey feet cer TG GI 

Prthvi said— ‘‘How great is the folly of 
princes, who are endowed with the faculty of 
reason, to cherish the confidence of ambition, 
when they themselves are but foam upon the 
wave. Before they have subdued themselves, 
they seek to reduce their ministers, their 
servants, their subjects, under their authority; 
they then endeavour to overcome their foes. 

UOT Tea at yeat WaT! 

saree Bet A uvaatagTTTN & Vl 

AURA At UAVS AMA! 


FRUSTRATE & 6 I 


‘Thus,’ say they, ‘will we conquer the 
ocean-circled earth ;’ and, intent upon their 
project, behold not death, which is not far off. 
But what mighty matter is the subjugation of 
the sea-girt earth to one who can subdue 
himself. Emancipation from existence is the 
fruit of sclf-control. 


SYST YS Ae At aera a: Fira: 
at wafa faqeragfireastr urferar:14 eu 
Tepe Taggart srgunanta fare: 
WASNT TAATGAATATTI & 0 I 
Wat Aaa Tat WET 





398 THE VISNU-PURANAM 
qua Walenta ART UTA SF OTA TATA: 11 G GI 
faera ai yrqued aera ATA ATT MA TSAT Sasa: | 
TATA Set WAS greantact det weret erferqaar:g ott 


Carers Tas HUA G VU 

It is through infatuation that kings desire to 
possess me, whom their predecessors have 
been forced to leave, whom their fathers have 
not retained. Beguiled by the sclfish love of 
sway, fathers contend with sons and brothers 
with brothers, for my possession. Foolishness 
has been the character of every king who has 
boasted, ‘All this earth 1s mine—-everything is 
mine~it will be in my house for ever;’ for he is 
dead. How is it possible that such vain desires 
should survive in the hearts of his descendants, 
who have seen their progenitor, absorbed by 
the thirst of dominion, compelled to relinquish 
me, whom he called his own and tread the path 
of dissolution? 


qeat Waar ufeastat aaa a arya: WaT 
vary = afteTa: ST (as 
SANTUAT & 3 


When J] hear a king sending word to 
another by his ambassador, ‘This earth is 
mine; immediately resign your pretensions to 
it;’ I am moved to violent laughter at first, but 
it soon subsides in pity for the infatuated fool.” 


UU Sara 

SAS TAI Vetter Ata! a: set: 1 

and facet anit aaa Get FATE YI 

See St: WAS ANAM Aa Tal 

aa fafingaer faroitgrtgret Far: & 

These were the verses, Maitreya, which 

Earth recited and by listening to which 
ambition fades away like snow before the sun. 
J have now related to you the whole account of 
the descendants of the Manu; amongst whom 
have flourished kings endowed with a portion 


of Visnu, engaged in the preservation of the 
earth. 


TOPS S SH MEM ATA HATL 


AUG -HEq-AMG-ATT- FaaTAT, THA! 
qatd-AeMaigs Brat Pera 
TRACY Wea ANAT ATT Il & 6 
HAM Hert Tea HMPA TATA 
aT A YAaRTAl Teanga TM 
FMA A HAMM WAS HET ATVI 


Whoever shall listen reverently and with 
faith to this narrative, proceeding from the 
posterity of Manu, shall be purified entirely 
from all his sins and, with the perfect 
possession of his faculties, shall live in 
unequalled affluence, plenty and prosperity. 
He who has heard of the races of the sun and 
moon, of Iksvaku, Jahnu, Mandhatri, Sagara 
and Raghu, who have all perished; of Yayati, 
Nahusa and their posterity, who are no more; 
of kings of great might, resistless valour and 
unbounded wealth, who have been overcome 
by still more powerful time and are now only a 
tale; he will learn wisdom and forbear to call 
either children or wife or house or lands or 
wealth, his own. 


SEATS HATO ATA 
SEY Gat afertsfadtear: 
PAY BIE HATA: 1119 0 I 


The arduous penances that have been 
performed by heroic men obstructing fate for 
countless years, religions rites and sacrifices 
of great efficacy and virtue, have been made 
by time the subject only of narration. 


WY: AAA WANT Ha 
Teed ais fefaerkterm! 

@ aicrarafiedt fare: 
far gar greaferqenrritii 9 gi 


The. valiant Prthu traversed the universe, 
every where triumphant over his foes; yet he 


BOOK IV, 24 


399 





was blown away, like the light down of the 
Simal tree, before the blast of time. 


a: ariateal Hyer Wary 

BU AAT SANTA: | 
SaMaS wanetaan: 

A Ud eUaHeTE: 19 Vl 


He who was. Kartavirya subdued 
innumerable enemies and conquered the seven 
zones Of the earth; but now he is only the topic 
of a theme, a subject for affirmation and 
contradiction. 


treatqenfaaeqarrt 
vente wid A ae a 
Qaguad er 9 311 


Fie upon the empire of the sons of Raghu, 
who triumphed over Dasdnana and extended 
their sway to the ends of the earth; for was it 
not consumed in an instant by the frown of the 
destroyer? 


RIAA aq a 
ARMA Ala HAT 

sata at asf aif arg- 
WATT HAT 9 ¥ I 


Mandhata, the emperor of the universe, is 
embodied only in a legend; and what pious 
man who hears it will ever be so unwise as to 
cherish the desire of possession in his soul? 


SNE: WI: HAHA 
SOMATA WHT HAUT TT 
gases ayrgta 
wet 7 feat wat FA a fata 
Bhagiratha, Sagara, Kakutstha, Dasanana, 
Rama, Laksmana, Yudhisthira and others, 


have been. Is it so? Have they ever really 
existed? Where are they now? we know not! 


a arn BI a Za afaew: 

Wreat war faraterarar:| 
aq aaa a afer: 

aa aac ada gag 


The powerful kings who now are or who 
will be, as I have related them to you or any 
others who are unspecified, are all subject to 
the same fate and the present and the future 
will perish and be forgotten, like their 
predecessors. 


ure faferar a ator are 
wma asset 


Frey Mad TNSTEM: 
RATA A | PATATS=A Vio it 


she sitfamygtrer agaist ugly: sears: It 


Aware of this truth, a Wise man will never 
be influenced by the principle of individual 
appropriation; and regarding them as only 
transient and temporal possessions, he will not 
consider children and posterity, lands and 
property or whatever else is personal, to be his 
own. 


NOTES 


1. Munika, Vayu 
Bhagavata. 

2. For 23 years, V. and M. 

3. 24 years V.; Tilaka or Balaka, 28, M. 

4.50 years V.; 53, M. 

5. Ajaka, 21 years V.; Stiryaka, 21, M.; Rajaka, 
Bhagavata. 

6. 20 years V. and M. 

7, This number is also specified by the Vayu and 
Bhagavata and the several years of the reigns of the 
former agree with the total. The particulars of the 
Matsya compose 145 years, but there is no doubt 
some mistake in them. 

8. Sisundka, who according to the Vayu and 
Matsya relinquished Banarasa to his son and 
established himself at Girivraja or Rajgrha in Bihar, 
reigns 40 years V. and M. 

9. 36 years V. and M. 

10. Ksemakarman, 20 years V.; Ksemadharman, 
36, M. 

11. 40 years V.; Ksemajit or Ksem§frcis, 36, M.; 
Ksetrajfia, Bhagavata. 

12. Vimbisara, 28 years V.; Vindusena or 
Vindhyasena, 28, M.; Vidhisara, Bhagavata. 

13. 25 years V.; 27, M.; but the latter inserts a 
Kanvayana, 9 years and Bhimimitra’ or 


: Pulika, Matsya; Sunaka, 


400 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





Bhimiputra, 14 years before him. In this and the 
preceding name we have appellations of 
considerable celebrity in the traditions of the 
Buddhists. Vidmisaéra, read also Vindhusara, 
Vilvisara, etc., is most probably their Vimbasara, 
who was born at the same time with Sakya and was 
reigning at Rajgrha when the began his religious 
career. The Mahdvamsa says that Siddhatto and 
Bimbisaro were attached friends, as their fathers 
had been before them. Sakya is said to have died in 
the reign of AjataSatru, the son of Vimbasara, in the 
eighth year of his reign. The Vayu transposes these 
names and the Matsya still more alters and order ‘of 
Ajatasatru; but the Bhagavata concurs with our text. 
The Buddhist authority differs from the Puranas 
materially as to the duration of the reigns, giving to 
Bimbisaro 52 years and to Ajatasattu 32 : the latter, 
according to the same, murdered his father. 
Mahavamsa, p. 10. We may therefore with some 
confidence claim for these princes a date of about 
six centuries B.C. They are considered 
contemporary with Sudhoddhana, in the list of the 
Aiksvakavas (p. Bk. IV. Ch. XXII. n. 20). 

14. Harsaka, 25 years V.; Vansaka, 24, M. 

15. 33 years V.; Udibhi or Udasin, 33, M. 
According to the Vayu, Udaya or Udaydsva 
founded Kusumapur or Pataliputra, on the southern 
angle of the Ganges : 4 a Yat wen Yferett SATE 
Tet: afarrary agsee afta The legends of 
Sakya, consistently with this tradition, take no 
notice of this city in his peregrinations on either 
bank of the Ganges. The Mahdvarhsa calls the son 
and successor of Ajatasatru, Udayibhadako 
(Udayinbhadraka) : Bk. I. Ch. IT. 

16. 42 and 43 years V.; 40 and 43, M. The 
Mahavarhsa has in place of these, Anuruddhako, 
Mundo and Nagadaso; all in succession patricides : 
the last deposed by an insurrection of the people. 

17. The several authorities agree in the number 
of ten Saigundgas and in the aggregate years of 
their reigns, which the Matsya and the Bhagavata 
call 360 : the Vayu has 362, with which the several 
periods correspond : the details of the Matsya give 
363. The Vayu and Matsya call the Saigunagas, Ks 
atrabandhus, which may designate an inferior order 
of Ksatriyas : they also observe, that contemporary 
with the dynasties already specified, the Pauravas, 
the Varhadrathas and Magadhas, there were other 
races of royal descent; as, Aiksvakava princes, 24 : 


Pancalas, 25, V.; 27, M. : Kalakas or Kasakas or 
Kaseyas, 24 : Haihayas, 24, V.; 28, M.: Kalingas, 
32, V.; 40, M. : Sakas, V.; Asmakas, M, 25 : 
Kuravas, 26 : Maithilas, 28 : Stirasenas, 23 : and 
Vitihotras, 20. 

18. The Bhagavata calls him Mahapadmapati, 
the lord of Mahaépadma; which the commentator 
interprets, 'sovereign of an infinite host’ or ‘of 
immense wealth;' Mahapadma signifying 100,000 
millions. The Vayu and Matsya, however, consider 
Mahapadma as another name of Nanda. 

19. So the Bhagavata also; but it would be more 
compatible with chronology to consider the nine 
Nandas as so many descents. The Vayu and Matsya 
give eighty-eight years to Mahapadam and only the 
remaining twelve to SumAalya and the rest of the 
remaining eight; these twelve years being occupied 
with the efforts of Kautilya to expel the Nandas. 
The Mahavarhga, evidently intending the same 
events, gives names and circumstances differently : 
it may be doubted if with more accuracy. On the 
disposal of Nagadasa, the people raised to the 
throne the minister Susundgo, who reigned eighteen 
years. This prince is evidently confounded with the 
Sisunaga of the Puranas. He was succeeded by his 
son Kalasoka, who reigned twenty years; and he 
was succeeded by his sons, ten of whom reigned 
together for twenty-two years : subsequently there 
were nine, who, according to their seniority, 
reigned for twenty-two years. The Brahmana 
Canaka put the ninth surviving brother, named 
Dhana Nando (Rich-Nanda), to death and installed 
Chandagupta Mahdvarnsa p. 15 and 21. These 
particulars, notwithstanding the alteration of some 
of the names, belong clearly to one story; and that 
of the Buddhists looks as if it was borrowed and 
modified from that of the Brahmanas. The 
commentary on the Mahavarhsa, translated by 
Turnour (Introduction, p. xxxviii), calls the sons of 
Kalasoka the 'nine Nandas;' but another Buddhist 
authority, the Dipavarhga, omits Kalasoko and says 
that Susunégo had ten brothers, who after his 
demise reigned collectively twenty-two years. 
Journal of the As. Soc. Of Bengal Nov. 1838, p. 
930. 

20. For the particulars of the story here alluded 
to see the Mudra Raksasa, Hindu Theatre, vol. II. 
Kautilya is also called, according to the 
commentator on out text, Vatsyayana, Visnugupta 


BOOK IV, 24 


401 





and Canakya. According to the Matsya Purana, 
Kautilya retained the regal authority for a century 
but there is some inaccuracy in the copies. 

21. This is the most important name in all the 
lists, as it can scarcely be doubted that he is the 
Sandrocottus or as Athenaeus writes more 
correctly, the Sandrocoptus, of thc Greeks, as I 
have endeavoured to prove in the introduction to 
the Mudra Radksasa. The relative position of 
Candragupta, Vidmisara or Bimbisdra and 
AjataSatru, serve to confirm the identification. 
Sakya was contemporary with both the latter, dying 
in the eighth year of AjataSatru reign. The 
Mahavamsa says he reigned twenty-four years 
afterwards; but the Vayu makes his whole reign but 
twenty-five years, which would place the close of it 
B.C, 526. The rest of the Saigunaga dynasty, 
according to the Vayu and Matsya, reigned 143 or 
140 years; bringing their close to B.C. 383. Another 
century being dcducted for the duration of the 
Nandas, would place the accession of Candragupta 
B.C. 283, Candragupta was the contemporary of 
Seleucus Nicator, who began this reign B.C. 310 
and concluded a treaty with him B.C. 305. 
Although thercfore his date may not be made out 
quite correctly from the Pauranik premises, yet the 
error cannot be more than twenty or thirty years. 
The result is much nearer the truth than that 
furnished by Buddhist authorities. According to the 
Mahdavarhsa a hundred years had elapsed from the 
death of Buddha to the tenth year of the reign of 
Kalasoko. He reigned other ten years and his son s 
forty-four, making of total of 154 years between 
the death of Sakya and the accession of 
Candragupta which is consequently placed B.C. 
389 or above seventy years too early. According to 
the Buddhist authorities, Chan-ta-kutta or 
Candragupta commenced his reign 396 B.C. 
Burmese Table; Prinsep's Useful Tables. Turnour, 
in his Introduction, giving to Kalisoko eighteen 
years subsequent to the century after Buddha, 
places Candragupta's accession B.C. 381, which, he 
observes, is sixty years too soon; dating, however, 
the accession of Candragupta from 323 B.C or 
immediately upon Alexander's death, a period too 
early by eight or ten years at least. The discrepancy 
of dates, turnour is disposed to think, proceeds 
from some intentional perversion of the 
Buddhistical chronology. Introduction P.L. The 


commentator on our text says that Candragupta was 
the son of Nanda by a wife named Mura, whence 
he and his descendants were called Mauryas : 4774 
ee US estes aos eA! Tod 
considers Maurya a corruption of Mori, the name of 
a Rajput tribe. ‘The Tika on the MahavarhSa builds a 
story on the fancied resemblance of the word to 
Mayira, S. Mori, Pr. ‘a peacock’. There being 
abundance of pea-fowl in the place where the 
Sakya tribe built a town, they called it Mori and 
there princes were thence called Mauryas. Turnour, 
Introduction to the MahdvamSa, pp. XXxix. 
Candragupta reigned, according to the Vayu P., 24 
years; according to the Mahavarmsa, 34; to the 
Dipavasanso, 24. 

22. So the Mahfavarsa, Bindusdra. Burmese 
Table, Bin-tu-sara. The Vayu has Bhadrasara, 25 
years; the Bhagavata, Varisara. The Matsya names 
but four princes of this race, although it concurs 
with the others in stating the series to consist of ten. 
The names are also differently arranged and one is 
peculiar : they are, Satadhanvan, Vrhadratha, Suka 
and DaSaratha. 

23. Agoka, 36 years, Vayu; Suka, 26, Matsya; 
ASokavarddhana, Bhagavata; Asoka and 
Dhammasoka, MahavarhSa. This king is the most 
celebrated of any in the annals of the Buddhists. In 
the commencement of his reign he followed the 
Brahmanical faith, but became a convert to that of 
Buddha and a zealous encourager of it. He is said to 
have maintained in his palace 64,000 Buddhist 
priests and to have erected 84,000 columns or topes 
throughout India. A great convocation of Buddhist 
priests was held in the eighteenth year of his reign, 
which was followed by missions of Ceylon and 
other places. According to Buddhist chronology he 
ascended the throne 218 years after the death of 
Buddha, B.C. 325. As_ the’ grandson’ of 
Candragupta, however, he must have been some 
time subsequent to this or agreeably to the joint 
duration of the reigns of Candragupta and 
Bindusara, supposing the former to have 
commenced his reign about B.C. 315, forty-nine 
years later or B.C. 266. The duration of his reign is 
said to have becn thirty-six years, bringing it down 
to B.C. 230 : but if we dcduct these periods from 
the date assignable to Candragupta, of B.C. 283, we 
shall place Asoka's reign from B.C. 234 to 198. 
Now it is certain that a number of very curious 


402 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





inscriptions, on columns and rocks, by a Buddhist 
prince, in an ancient form of letter and the Pali 
language, exist in India; and that some of them 
refer to Greek princes, who can be no other than 
members of the Seleucidan and _ ptolemaean 
dynasties and are probably Antiochus the Great and 
Ptolemy Euergetes, kings of Syria and Egypt in the 
latter part of the third century before Christ. 
Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, February 
and March, 1838. The Indian king appears always 
under the appellation Piyadasi or Priyadarsin, 'the 
beautiful;' and his entitled Devanam-piya, ‘the 
beloved of the gods.’ According to Buddhist 
authorities, the Rasavahini and Dipavarhga, quoted 
by Turnour (/. As. Soc. Of Bengal, Dec., 1837, p. 
1056 and Nov. 1838, p. 930), Piyadasi or 
Piyadasano is identificd both by name and 
circumstances with Asoka and to him therefore the 
inscriptions must be attributed. Their purpose 
agrees well enough with his character and their 
wide diffusion with the traditionally report of the 
number of his monuments. His date is not exactly 
that of Antiochus the great, but it is not very far 
different and the corrections required to make it 
correspond are no more than the inexact manner 1n 
which both Brahmanical and Buddhist chronology 
is preserved may well be expected to render 
necessary. 

24. The name of DaSaratha, in a similar ancient 
character as that of Piyadasi's inscriptions, has been 
found at Gaya amongst Buddhist remains and like 
them deciphered by Prinsep, Journal, As. Society 
Bengal, August, 1837, p. 677. A different series of 
names occur in the Vayu; or Kusala, 8 years; 
Bandhupalita, Indrapdlita, Dasavarman, 7 years; 
Satadhara, 8 years; and Vrhadasva, 7 years. The 
Bhagavata agrees in most of the names and its 
Omission of Dasaratha is corrected by the 
commentator. 

25. Satadhanvan, Bhagavata. 

26. The Vayu says nine Sumiirttyas reigned 137 
years. The Matsya and Bhagavata have ten 
Mauryas and 137 years. The detailed numbers of 
the Vayu and Matsya differ from their totals, but 
the copies are manifestly corrupt. 

27. The Bhagavata omits this name, but states 
that there were ten Sungas, although, without Pus 
pamitra, only nine are named. The Vayu and 
Matsya have the same account of the circumstances 


of his accession to the throne; the former gives him 
a reign of sixty, the latter of thirty-six years. In a 
play attributed to Kalidasa, the Malavikagnimitra, 
of which Agnimitra is the hero, his father is alluded 
to as the Senani or general, as if he had deposed his 
master in favour, not of himself, but of his son. 
Agnimitra is termed king of Vidisa, not of 
Magadha. Puspamitra is represented as engaged in 
a conflict with the Yavanas on the Indus; thus 
continuing the political rclations with the Greeks or 
Scythians of Bactria and Ariana. See Hindu 
Theatre, vol. I. 347. 

28. 8 years V.; omitted M. 

29. 7 years V. and M.; but the latter places him 
after Vasumitra; and in the drama the son of 
Agnimitra is called Vasumitra. 

30. 8 years V.; 10 years M. 

31. Andraka, V. Antaka, M. : they agree in his 
reign, 2 years, Bhadraka, Bhagavata. 

32.3 years V. and M. 

33. 3 years V.; omitted, M.; Ghosa, Bhagavata. 

34. 9 years M. 

35. Bhagavata M.; 32 years V. and M. 

36. Ksemabhimi, V.; Devabhimi, M.; 
both. 

37. The Bhagavata says, 'more than a hundred,’ 
wae! The commentator explains it 112, srexnfere 
The Vayu and Matsya have the same period. 

38. The names of the four princes agree in all the 
authorities. The Matsya transfers the character of 
Vyasani to the minister, with the further addition of 
his being a Brahmana; Dvija. In the lists given by 
Jones and Wilford, the four Kanvas are said to have 
reigned 345 years; but in seven copies of the Visnu 
Purana, from different parts of India, the number is, 
as given in the text, forty-five : Ud Sarria: 

“fast! There is however 
authority for the larger number, both in the text of 
thc Bhagavata and the comment. The former has, 
ara Sy fe UekereT Ta wah aii seat 
astti a set ain and the latter, avarrtaasii 
Aiea tracers 3 steafat There is no 
doubt therefore of the purpose of the text; and it is 
only surprising that such a chronology should have 
been inserted in the Bhagavata, not only in 
opposing to all probability, but to other authority. 
The Vayu and Matsya not only confirm the lower 
number by stating it as a total, but by giving it in 
detail; thus Vasudeva will reign 9 years, 


10 years 


BOOK IV, 24 


403 





Bhimimitra, 14, Narayana, 12 and Susarman, 10. 
Total - 45. And six copies of the Matsya concur in 
this statement. 

39.The expressions Andhrajatiyas and 
Andharbhrtyas have much perplexed Wilford, who 
makes three races out of one Andhras, 
Andharjatiyas and Andharbhrtyas. As. Res. 1X. 101. 
There is no warrant for three races in the Puranas, 
although the Matsya and perhaps the Vayu, 
distinguishes two, as we shall hereafter see. Our 
text has but one, to which all the terms may be 
applied. The first of the dynasty was an Andhra by 
birth or caste (jatiya) and servant (bhrtyas) of the 
last of the Kanva reace. So the Vayu; 
fayarerorda: | the Matsya; @rmarretal Yeu: Geet 
yaa a RSIS: Bas: wea agqenii and the 
Bhagavatas; eaerd grat aged gue acl Ti 
wera: AacHeaay! The terms 'an Andhra by 
caste’ and 'a Bhrtya or srvant,' with the additon, in 
the last passage, of Vrsala, ‘a Sadra,' all apply to 
one person and one dynasty. Wilfor has made wild 
work with his triad. The name of the first of this 
race is variously read : Sindhuka, Vayu; Sisuka, 
Matsya; Balin, Bhagavata; and according to Wilfor, 
Chismaka in the Brahmanda P. and Stdraka or 
Straka in the Kumariké Khanda of the Skanda 
Purana As. Res. 1X. 107. He reigned 23 years, Vayu 
and Matsya. If the latter form of his name be 
correct, he may be the king who is spoken of in the 
prologue to the Mrcchakati. 

40. 10 years V.; 18, M. 

41. 56 years V.; 18, M.; 10, Brahmanda, Wilfor; 
Sim4lakarni, Matsya; Santakarna, Bhagavata. 

42. Omitted. V.; 18 years, M.; Paurnamasa, 
Bhagvata. 

43. Omitted, V. and Bhagavata; 56 years m.; but 
the latter has before him a Srivasvani, J8 years. 

44. 18 years M. 

45. Apilaka, 12 years V. and M.; Civilika or 
Vivilika, Bhagavata. 

46. Omitted, V. and M. 


47. Patumavi, 24 years V.; Drrhamana, 
Bhagavata. 

48. Nemi Krsna, 25 years. V.; Arista-karni, 25 
years M. 


49. Hala, 1 year V.; 5 years. M.; Haleya, 
Bhagavata. 
50. Mandalaka, 5 years M.; omitted, Bhagavata. 


51. Purisasena, 21 years V.; Purindrasena, 5 
years, Matsya; Purisataru, Bhagavata. 

52. Satakarni only, V. and M.; the first give him 
three years, the second but one. Sunanda, 
Bhagavata. 

53. Cakora, 6 months, V.; Vikarni, 6 months, M. 

54. 28 years V. and M. 

55. Gautamiputra, 2] years V. and M. 

56. Pulomat, 28 years M.; Purimat, Bhagavata. 

57. Omitted, V.; 7 years M.; Medhasiras, 
Bhagavata. 

58. Omitted, V.; 7 years, M. 

59. 29 years V.; 9 years M. 

60. 6 years V. and M. 

61. Dandasri, 3 years V.; Candrasri, 10 years M.; 
Candravijaya, Bhagavata. 

62. Pulovapi 7 years V.; Pulomat, 7 years M.; 
Sulomadhi, Bhagavata, 

63. The Vayu and Bhagavata state also 30 kings 
and 456 years; the Matsya has 29 kings and 460 
years. The actual enumeration of the text gives but 
24 names; that of the Bhagavata but 23; that of the 
Vayu but 17. The Matsya has the whole 29 names, 
adding several to the list of our text; and the 
ageregate of the rcigns amounts of 435 years and 6 
months. The difference between this and the total 
Specified arises probaly from some inaccuracy in 
the MSS. As this list appears to be fuller than any 
other, it may be advisable to insert it as it occurs in 
the Radcliffe copy of the Matsya Purana - 

1. Siguka, 23 years, 2. Krsna, 18, 3. Simalakarni, 
18, 4. Purnotsanga, 18, 5S. Srivasvani, 18, 6. 
Satakarni, 56, 7. Lambodara, 18, 8. Apitaka, 12, 9. 
Sangha, 18, 10. Satakarni, 18, 11. Skandhasvati, 7, 
12. Mrgendra, 3, 13. Kuntalasvati, 8, 14. 
Svatikarna, 1, 15. Pulomavit, 36, 16. Goraksasvasri, 
25, 17. Hala, 5, 18. Mantalaka, 5, 19. Purindrasena, 
5, 20. Rajadasvati, 6 months, 21. Sivasvati, 28, 22. 
Gautamiputra, 21, 23. Pulomat, 28, 24. Sivasri, 7, 
25. Skandhasvati, 7, 26. Yajfiasri, 9, 27. Vijaya, 6, 
28. Vadasri, 10, 29. Pulomat, 7. Total 435 years 6 
month. Several of the names vary in this list from 
those in my copy. The adjuncts Svati and Satikarna 
appear to be conjoined or not with the other 
appellations, according to the convenience of the 
metre and seem to be the family designations or 
titles. The dynasty is of considerable chronological 
interest, as it admits of some plausible verifications. 
That powerful race of Andhra princes ruled in 


404 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





India in the beginning of the Christian era, we learn 
from Pliny, who describes them as possessed of 
thirty fortified cities, with an army of 100,000 men 
and 1000 elephants. The Andhra of this writer are 
probably the people of the upper part of the 
peninsula, Andhra being the proper designation of 
Telingana. The Peutingerian tables, however, place 
the Andre-Indi on the banks of the Ganges and the 
southern princes may have extended or shifted the 
site of their power. Towrds the close of the dynasty 
we find names that appear to agree with those of 
princes of middle India, of whom mention is made 
by the Chinese; as, Yue-gnai (Yajfiasri), king of 
Kiapili, A.D. 408; Des Guignes, I. 45; and Ho-lo- 
mien (Pulom4n), king of Magadha in 621; ibid, I. 
56. The Pauranik lists place these two princes more 
nearly together, but we cannot rely implicitly upon 
their accuracy. Calculating from Candragupta 
downwards, the Indian date of Yajiia and the 
Chinese Yue-gnai corresponds; for we have, 10 
Mauryas, 137 years 10 Sungas, 112. 4 Kanvas, 45. 
27 Andhras, 437. Total 731. Deduct for 
Candragupta's date 312 B.C. Total 419 A.C. A date 
remarkably near that derivable from the Chinese 
annals. If the Indian Puloman be the same with the 
Chinese Ho-lo-mien, there must be some 
considerable omission in the Pauranik dynasty. 
There is a farther identification in the case of Ho- 
lo-mien, which makes it certain that a prince of 
Magadha is intended, as the place of his residence 
is called by the Chinesc Kia-so-mo-pulo-ching and 
Potoli-tse-ching; or in Sanskrit, Kusuma-pura and 
Patali-putra. The equivalent of the latter name 
consists, not only in the identiy of the sounds Patali 
and Po-to-li, but in the translation of 'putra' by ‘tse’; 
each word meaning in their respective languages 
‘son’. No doubt can be entertained therefore that the 
city intended is the metropolis of Magadha, Pat 
aliputra or Pali-bothra. Wilform identifies Pulomat 
or Puloman with the Po-lo-muen of the Chinese; 
but Des Guignes interprets Po-lo-muen_ kue, 
'royaume des Brahmanes'. Buchanan (Hamilton), 
following the Bhagavata as to the name of the last 
king, Sulomadhi, would place him about A.D. 846; 
but his premises are far from accurte and his 
deduction in this instance at least is of no weight. 
Geneal. of the Hindus, Introduction p. 16. He 
supposes the Andhra kings of Magadha to have 
retained their power on the Ganges until the 


Mohammedan invasion or the twelfth century, 
when they retired to the south and reigned at 
Warankal in Telingand. Inscriptions and coins, 
however, confirm the statement of the Purana, that 
a different dynasty succeeded to the Andhras some 
centuries before the Mohammedan conquests; and 
the Chines also record, that upon the death of thc 
king of Magadha, Ho-lo-mien (Puloman?), some 
time before A.D. 648, great troubles in India took 
place. Des Guignes. Some very curious and 
authentic testimony to the actual existence of these 
Andhra kings has been lately afforded by the 
discovery of an ancient inscription in Gujarat, in 
which Rudra Dama, the Ksatrapa or Satrap of Surds 
tra, is recorded to have repeatedly overcome 
Satakarni, king of the southern country (Daks 
inapatha). The inscription is with out date, but it is 
in an old character and makes mention of the two 
Maurya princes, Candragupta and ASoka, as if not 
very long prior to its composition. Prinsep, to 
whom we are indebted for the deciphering and 
translating of this important document, has been 
also successfull in deciphering the legends on a 
series of coins belonging to the princes of SurAstra, 
amongst whom the name of Rudra Dama occurs; 
and he is inclined, although with hesitation, to place 
these princes about a century after Asoka or Rudra 
Dama abcut 153 B.C. J. As. Soc. Bengal, May 1837 
and April 1838. According to the computation 
hazarded above from our text, the race of Andhra 
kings should not commence till about 20 years 
B.C., which would agree with Pliny's notice of 
them; but it is possible that they existed earlier in 
the south of India, although they established their 
authority in Magadha only in the first centuries of 
the Christian era. 

64. These parallel dynasties 
particularised in our other authorities : 

Abhiras, 7, M.; 10, V.; kings of Avabhrti, 7, 
Bhagavata Garddabhins, 10, M. V. Bhagavata 
Sakas, 18, M.V.; Kankas, 16, Bhagavata Yavanas, 
8, M.V. Bhagavata, Tusaras, 14, M.V.; Tuskaras, 
14, Bhagavata Marindas, 13, V.; Purtindos, 13, M.; 
Suriindas, 10, Bhagavata Mannas, 18, V.; Hinas, 
19, M.; Maulas, 11, Bhagavata. Total 85 kings, 
Vayu; 89, Matsya; 76 and 1399 years, Bhagavata. 

The other two authorities give the years of each 
dynasty severally. The numbers are apparently 
intendcd to be the same, but those of the Matsya are 


are thus 


BOOK IV, 24 


405 





palpable blunders, although almost all the MSS. 
agree in the reading. The chronology of the Vayu is 
Abhiras, 67 years; Garddabhins, 72; Sakas, 380; 
Yavanas, 82; Tusdras, 500 (all the copies of the 
Matsya have 7000); Mariindas, 200; and Mlecchas, 
intending perhaps Maunas, 300 years. Total 1601 
years or less than 19 years to a reign. They are not 
however continuous, but nearly contemporary 
dynasties; and if they comprise, as they probably 
do, the Greek and Scythian princes of the west of 
India, the periods may not be very wide of the 
truth. The Matsya begins the list with one more 
dynasty, aother Andhra (see n. 39), of whom there 
were seven : Sami Gere Wea A Yara FT| Wea 
waaay Tae Til "When the dominion of the 
Andhras has ceased, there shall be seven other 
Andhras, kings of the race of their servants; and 
then nine Abhiras.' etc. The passage of the Vayu, 
although somewhat similar in terms, has a different 
purporse : ara denma a a dm aA Fz! 
adage 7: il "Of these, the Andhras 
having passed away, there shall be seven 
contemporary races; as, ten Abhiras.' The passage 
is differently read in different copies, but this is the 
only intelligible reading. At the same time it 
subsequently specifies a period for the duration of 
the Andhra dynasty different from that before given 
or three hundred years, as if a different race was 
referred to : ren sheafa aqui wa & 4 wd @ 4 'The 
Andhras shall possess the earth two hundred years 
and one hundred.’ The Matsya has twice five 
hundred : an stuediena 4% & ward wal ‘The 
Sriparvatiya Andhras twice five hundred years.' 
One MS. has more consistently fifty-two years : 
feta AAT: 1 But there is evidently something faulty 
in all the MSS. The expression of the Matsya, 
'Sriparvatiya Andhras,' is remarkable; Sriparvat 
being in Telingaéna. There is probably some 
confusion of the two races, the Magadha and 
Tailinga kings, in these passages of the Puranas. 
The Bhagavata has a dynasty of seven Andhra 
kings, but of a different period (see n. 39). Wilfor 
has attempted a verification of these dynasties; in 
some instances perhaps with success, though 
certainly not in all. The Abhiras he calls the 
shepherd kings of the north of India : they were 
more probably Greeks or Scythians or Parthians, 
along the lower Indua : traces of the name occur, as 
formelry observed, in the Abiria of Ptolemy and the 


Ahirs as a distinct race still exist in Gujarat. Raish 
Mehfil. The Sakas are the Sace and the duration of 
their power 1s not unlikely to be near the truth. The 
eight Yavana kings may be, as he suppose, Greek 
princes of Bactria, or rather of western India. The 
Tusaras he makes the Parthians. If the Bhagavata 
has the preferable reading Tusk4ras, they were the 
Tocari, a Scythian race. The Muriindas, as he has it, 
Maurundas, he considers to be a tribe of Huns, the 
Morundae of Ptolemy. According to the Matsya 
they were of Mleccha origin, Mleccha-samohava. 
The Vayu calls them Arya-mlecchas; quere, 
Barbarians of Ariana. Wilford regards the Maunas 
as also a tribe of Huns; and the word is in all the 
MSS. of the Matsya, Hiinas; traces of whom may 
be still found in the west and south of India. 
Inscription at Merritch. Jour, R. As. Soc. Vol. Ill. p. 
103. The Garddabhins Wilford conjectures to be 
descendants of Bahram Gor, king of Persia; but this 
is very questionable. That they were a tribe in the 
west of India may be conjectured, as some strange 
tales prevail there of a Gandharva, changed to an 
ass, marrying the daughter of the king of Dhar. As. 
Res. VI. 35 and IX. 147; also 'Cutch' by Mrs. 
Postans, p. 18 : fables suggested no doubt by the 
name Garddabha, signifying as ass. There is also 
evidently some affinity between these Garddabhins 
and the old Gadhia Pysa or assmoney, as vulgarly 
termed, found in various parts of western India and 
which is unquestionably of ancient date. Journ. As. 
Soc. Bengal, Dec. 1835, p. 688. It may be the 
coinage of the Garddabha princes; Garddabha, 
being the original of Gadha, meaning also an ass. I 
have elsewhere conjectured the possibility of their 
being current about a century and a half before our 
era. Journ. R. As. Soc. Vol. lil. 385. Tod, quoting a 
parallel passage in Hindi, reads, instead of 
Garddhabhin, Gor-ind, which he explains the 
Indras or lords of Gor; but the reading is 
undoubtedly erroneous. 

65. The copies agree in reading Pauras, but the 
commentator remarks that it is sometimes Maunas, 
but they have already been specified; unless the 
term be repeated in order to separate the duration of 
this dynasty from that of the rest. Such seems to be 
the purpose of the similar passage of the 
Bhagavata. "These kings (Andhras etc.) will possess 
the earth 1099 years and the eleven Maulas 300:' ud 
Hear ula eradseants a aati a vals Aten wares 


406 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





fata wearer att) No such name as Pauras 
occurs in the other authorities. The analogy of 
duration identifies them with the Mlecchas of the 
Vayu : 'Eleven Mlecchas will possess the earth for 
three centuries:' waft sift sara terest THTeslag 
and the Vayu may refer to the Maunas, as no other 
period is assigned for them. The periods of the 
Bhagavata, 1099 and 300, come much to the same 
as that of our text, 1390; the one including the three 
centuries of the Maunas, the other stating it 
separately. The Vayu apparently adds it to the rest, 
thus making the total 1601, instead of 1390. It is 
evident that the same scheme is intended by the 
several authorities, although ‘some inaccuracy 
affects either the original statement or the existing 
manuscripts. 

66. Kilakila, Kolakila, Kolikila, Kilinakila, as it 
is variously read. Sir Wm. Jones's Pandit stated that 
he understood it to be a city in the Mahratta country 
(As, Res. XI. 142); and there has been found a 
confirmation of his belief in an inscription, where 
Kilagila, as it is there termed, is called the capital of 
Narasimha Deva, king of the Konkan, Journ, R. As. 
Soc. Vol. IV. p. 282. This inscription dates A.D. 
1058. The Purdnas refer probably to a long 
antecedent date, when the Greek princes or their 
Indo-Scythic successors, following the course of 
the Indus, spread to the upper part of the western 
coast of the peninsula. The text calls them Yavanas; 
and the Vayu and Matsya say they were Yavanas in 
institutions, manners and policy ; wa: Bratsea: | 


The Bhagavata names five of their princes,, 


Bhitananda, Bangiri, Sisunandi, Yasgonandi and 
Pravira, who will reign 106 years and they are 
therefore imperfect representatives of the series in 
our text. The Matsya has no farther spccific 
enumeration of any dynasty. The Vayu makes 
Pravira the son of VindhyaSakti; the latter reigning 
96 years and the former 60 : the latter is king of 
KAficanapuri, ‘the golden city’ and is followed by 
four sons, whose names are not mentioned. 
Between Vindhyasakti and Pravira, however, a 
dynasty of king is introduced, some of the names of 
which resemble those of the Kilakila princes of the 
text. They are, Bhogin the son of Sesaniga, 
Sadacandra, Nakhavat, Dhanandhamita, VinSaja, 
Bhitinanda—at a period before the end of the 
Surigas? (the copies have Wm 4 
@eeard)—Madhunandi, his younger _ brother 


NandiyasSas; and in his race there will be three other 
Rajas, Dauhitra, Siguka and Ripukayan. These are 
called princes of Vidisa or Videsa; the latter 
meaning perhaps ‘foreign’ and constitute the Naga 
dynasty. Our text calls VindhyaSakti a 
Murddhabhisikta, a warrior of a mixed race, sprung 
from a Brahmana father and Ksatriya mother. 


67. The text of this passage runs thus : 
STH AATEA: | qerarety 
TeaateMseans! ‘Their sons,’ dat the 


commentator explains by faeayrieat auras 
FATIH: | ‘thirteen sons of VindhyaSakti and the 
rest.'| The Bhagavata has a different statement, 
identifying the sons of the Vindhya race with the 
Bahlikas and making them thirteen : 75i WalewrgaT 
wfadnaarelat: | 'The Bahlikas will be their thirteen 


sons. As the commentator : *QM<eri aaa 
Teemrsaaerga wae) ‘There will be 
severally thirteen sons, called Bahlikas, of 


Bhitananda and the rest.’ The following verse 1s, 
qf usta: fAitisa aaa 'Puspamitra, a king 
and then Durmitra :’ who or what they were does 
not appear. The commentator says. Puspamitra was 
another king and Durmitra was his son : 
qaarraisat weraise a arr yR:! Here is 
evidently careless and inaccurate compilation. The 
Vayu, though not quite satisfactory, accords better 
with our text. 'Pravira', it says, 'will have four sons : 
when the Vindhya race is extinct, there will be 
three Bahlika kings, Supratika, Nabhira, who will 
reign thirty years and Sakyamanabhava (quere this 
name), king of the Mahisas. The Puspamitra will 
then be and the Patumitras also, who will be seven 
kings of Mekala. Such is the generation.’ 74 
(Wake) Taq want vara aot: fara 
Heasdd JU aA aetna: 1 Gad aia gar seata 
Aed:) wear ust aston Fersta:1 qeaftan 
sfaara ugtardlad (or aghast) Aacrai T: 
we staeraifa aaa: The plural verb with only two 
Bahlika names indicates some omission, unless we 
correct it to Mead 'they two will reign;' but the 
following name and title, Sakyam4nabhava, king of 
the Mahisas, seems to have little connection with 
the Bahlika. If, in a subsequent part of the citation, 
the reading 'trayodaSa' be correct, 1t must then be 
thirteen Patumitras, but it will be difficult to know 
what to do with Sapta, 'seven'. If for Sayitati we 
might read Saptati, 'seventy,' the sense might be, 
‘these thirteen kings ruled for seventy-seven years." 


BOOK IV, 24 


407 





However this may be, it seems correct to separate 
the thirteen sons or families of the Vindhya 
princess most from the three Bahlikas and them 
from the Puspamitras and Patumitras, who 
governed Mekala, a country on the Narbada (see 
Bk. II. Ch. III. n. 18). What the Bahlikas or princes 
of Balkh, had to do in this part of India is doubtful. 
The Durmitra of the Bhagavata has _ been 
conjectured by Tod (Trans. R. As. Soc. 1. 325) to be 
intended for the Bactrian prince Demetrius : but it 
is not clear that cven the Bhagavata considers this 
prince as ore of the Bahlikas and the name occurs 
nowhere else. 

68. For the situation of Kosala, see Bk.II. Ch. III. 
n. 79. The three copies of the Vayu read Komala 
and call the kings, the Meghas, more strong than 
Sapient : HAT J Wa sae vera: Fer fa 
ware afgadt a a 4 ql The Bhagavata agrees 
with our text. The Vayu says of the Naisadhas or 
kings of Nisadha, that they were all of the race of 
Nala; Acta Wa: ! The Bhagavata adds two other 
races, seven Andhras (see note 63) and kings of 
Vaidira, with the remark that these were all 


contemporaries, being, as the commentator 
observes, petty or provincial rulers 
OTe: | 


69. The Vayu has Visvasphani and Visvasphini : 
the Bhagavata, Visvasphirtti or in some Mss. 
Visvaphirji. The castes he establishes or places in 
authority, to the exclusion of the Ksatriyas, are 
called in all the copies of our text Kaivarttas, Patus, 
Pulindas and Brahmanas. The Vayu (three MSS.) 
has Kaivarttas, Paficakas, Pulindas and Brahmanas : 
aay taaisa aererareraeat| The Bhagavata has, 
Pulindas, Yadus and Madrakas. The Vayu describes 
Visvasph4ni as a great warrior and apparently as a 
eunuch : fasemth wera qe fase ae 
farenfircafa seta fapfeeadi He worshipped the 
gods and manes and dying on the banks of the 
Ganges went to the heaven of Indra : sfedtdiarara 
WA eA Tet FAI WK Ff owes MCA | 

70. Such appears to be the purport of our text : 
7a AM: Garaen arieaqeat Beprarsay | TTTaT APTA 
eat] The nine Nagas might be thought to mean 
the same as the descendants of Sesanaga, but the 
Vayu has another series here, analogous to that of 
the text : ‘The nine Naka kings will possess the city 
Campavati and the seven Nagas (?) the pleasant 
city Mathura. Princes of the Gupta race will posses 


all these countries, the banks of the Ganges to 
Prayaga and Saketa and Magadha :' 7a Wereqleata 
GO wenadt ga: Aad a Ye Tai aT shear oa a 
APT UTA Beet TTA | Car HATA Beal] AAA 
Wa: || This account is the most explicit and 
probably most accurate, of all. The Nakas were 
Rajas of Bhagalpur; the Nagas, of Mathura; and the 
intermediate countries along the Ganges were 
governed by the Guptas or Rajas of the Vaisya 
caste. The Bhagavata seems to have taken great 
liberties with the account, as it makes Visvasphirtti 
king over Anuganga, the course of the Ganges from 
Haridvara, according to the commentator, to 
Prayaga, residing at Padmavati : dtefary eayraread 
wae a a yt apart asi dear Ate 
omitting the Nagas altogether and converting 
‘gupta’ into an epithet of ‘medini,' the preserved or 
protected earth. Wilford considers the Nagas, 
Nakas and Guptas to be all the same : he says, 
'Then came a dynasty of nine kings, called the nine 
Nacas or Nagas; these were an obscure tribe, called 
for that reason Guptavansas, who ruled in 
Padmavati’. That city he calles Patna, but in the 
Malati and Madhava Padm§avati lies amongst the 


: Vindhya hills Kantipuri he makes Kotwal, near 


Gwalior. The reading of the Vayu, Campavati, 
however, obviates the necessity of all vague 
conjecture. According to Wilford there is a 
powerful tribe still called Nakas between the 
Yamuna and the Betva. Of the existence and power 
of the Guptas, however, we have recently had 
ample proofs from inscriptions and coins, as in the 
Candragupta and Samudragupta of the Allatabad 
column; Journ. As. Soc. Bengal, March and June, 
1834; and Kumiéaragupta, Candragupta, 
Samudragupta, Sagigupta, on the Archer coins, 
found at Kanauj and elsewhere; As. Res. XVII. pl. 
1. fig. 5, 7, 13, 19; and Journ. As. Soc. Bengal, 
Nov. 1835, pl. 38 and 39; and in other numbers of 
the same Journal : in all which, the character in 
which the legends are written is of a period prior to 
the use of the modern Devanagari and was current 
in all probability about the fifth century of our era, 
as conjectured by Prinsep : see his table of the 
modifications of the Sanskrit alphabet from 543 
B.C. to 1200 A.D. Journ. As. Soc. Bengal, March, 
1838. 

71.. The Vayu also mentions the descendants of 
Devaraksita or Daivaraksitas as kings of the 


408 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





Kosalas, Tamralipta and the sea coast; so far 
conforming with our text as to include the western 
parts of Bengal, Tamluk, Midnapur and Orissa. One 
copy reads Andhra, perhaps for Odra, Orissa; and 
one has Campa for the capital, which is probably an 
error, although the two other MSS., being still more 
faulty, do not offer the means of correction. 

72. The Vayu has the same. The countrics are 
parts of Orissa and Berar. 

73. The Vayu has sons of Manidhanya for the 
ruling dynasty, but names the countries those of the 
Naisadhas, Yudakas, Saisikas and Kalatoyas. The 
first name applies to a tract of country near the 
Vindhya mountains, but the last to a country in the 
north. The west or south-west, however, is 
probably intended in this place. 

74. The Stri Rajya is usually placed in Bhote. It 
may perhaps here designate Malabar, where 
polyandry equally prevails. Misika or the country 
of thieves, was the pirate coast of the Konkan. The 
Vayu reads Bhoksyaka or Bhokhyaka for Misika : 
eke teriza tea aaa: The Bhagavata 
omits all these specifications subsequent to the 
notice of Visvasphirtti. 

75. From this we might infer that the Visnu 
Puréna was compiled when the Mohammedans 
wcre making their first encroachments on the west. 
They scem to have invaded and to have settled in 
Sindh early in the eighth century, although Indian 
princes continued on the Indus for a subsequent 
period. Scriptor, Arab. De rebus  Indicis. 
Gildemeister, p.6. They were engaged in hostilitics 
in 698 or 700 with prince of Kabul, in whose name, 
however disguised by its Mohammedan 
representations of Ratil, Ratbal or Ratibal, it is not 
difficult to recognise the genuine Hindu appellation 
of Ratanpal or Ratnapdl. Their progress in this 
direction has not been traced; but at the period of 
their invasion of sindh they advanced to Multan 
and probably established themselves there and at 
Lahore within a century. Kashmir they did not 
occupy till a much later date and the Raja 
Tarangini takes no notice of any attacks upon it; 
but the Chinese have recorded an application from 
the king of Kashmir, Chin-tho-lo-pi-li, evidently 
the Candrapida of the Sanskrit, for aid against the 
Arabs, about A.D. 713. Gildemeister, p. 13. 
Although, therefore, not actually settled at the 
Punjab so early as the beginning, they had 


commenced their incursions and had no doubt 
made good their footing by the end of the eighth or 
commencement of the ninth century. This age of 
the Purana is compatible with reference to the 
contemporary race of Gupta kings, from the fourth 
or fifth to the seventh or eighth century; or if we are 
disposed to go farther back, we may apply the 
passage to the Greek and Indo-Scythian princes. It 
seems more likely to be the former period; but in 
all such passages in this or other Puranas there is 
the risk that verses inspired by the presence of 
Mohammedan rulers may have been interpolated 
into the original text. Had the Mohammedans of 
Hindustan, however, been intended by the latter, 
the indications would have bcen more distinct and 
the localities assigned to them more central. Even 
the Bhagavata, the date of which we have good 
reason for conjecturing to be the middle of the 
twelfth century and which influenced the form 
assumed about that time by the worship of Visnu, 
cannot be thought or refer to the Mohammedan 
conquerors of upper India. It is there stated, that 
‘rulers fallen from their castes or Siidras, will be the 
princes of Saurastra, Avanti, Abhira, Siira, Arbuda 
and Malava; and barbarians, Sidras and other 
outcastcs, not enliglitened by the Vedas, will 
possess Kashmir, Kaunti and the banks of the 
Candrabhagd and Indus :' hres 
seen: | area feat sfacata yeorm: sefert | 
fret aqui Stet areticqrsch seat Yer arearen 
Ree Baad Now it was not until the 
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries that the 
Mohammedans established themselves in Gujarat 
and Malva and the Bhagavata was unquestionably 
well known in various parts of India long before 
that time. (Account of Hindus Sects. As. Res. Vol. 
XVI). It cannot therefore allude to Mohammedans. 
By specifying the princes as seceders from the 
Vedas, there is no doubt that the barbarians and 
outcastes intended are so only in a religious sense; 
and we know from indisputable authorities that the 
western countries, Gujarat, Abu, M4lav4, were the 
chief seats, first of the Buddhists and then of the 
Jainas, from a period commencing perhaps before 
the Christian era and scarcely terminating with the 
Mohammedan conquest. Inscriptions from Abu, As. 
Res. Vol. XVI. 

76. The commentator, having no doubt the 
existing state of things in view, interprets the 


BOOK IV, 24 


409 





passage somewhat differently : the original is, 
qafattan TT aaa 
Rasisersay ane: wat: afaatt The 
comment explains {fm 'strong' (afer:), and adds, 
'the Mlecchas will be in the centre and the Aryyas 
at the end: ran wea salad selaqay STAM: | 
meaning, if any thing, that the unbelievers are in 
the heart of the country and the Hindus on the 
borders : a description, however, never correct, 
except as applicable to the governments; and in that 
case inconsistent with the text, which had 
previously represented the bordering countries in 
the hands of outcastes and heretics. All that ihe text 
intends, is to represent infidels and foreigners high 
in power and the Brahmanas depressed. It is not 
unlikely that the reading is _ erroneous, 
notwithstanding the copies concur and that the 
passage should be here the same as that of the 
Vayu; sfafter save rormiseeda: fara ay 
afar a wail:! ‘Intermixed with them, the 
nations, adopting everywhere barbaric institutions, 
exist in a state of disorder and the subjects shall be 
destroyed.' The expression Mlecchacarasca being 
used instead of Mlecchascarydsca. A passage 
similar to that of the text, noticing the intermixture 
of Hindus and Barbarians, occurs in a different 
place (see Bk.II. Ch. III. n. 4) and designates the 
conditions of India in all ages : at no period has the 
Whole of the population followed Brahmanical 
Hinduism. 

77, That is, there will be no Tirthas, places held 
sacred and objects of pilgrimage; no particular spot 
of earth will have any cspecial sanctity. 

78. Gifts will be made from the impulse of 
ordinary feeling, not in connection with religious 
rites and as an act of devotion; and ablution will be 
performed for pleasure or comfort, not religiously 
with prescribed ceremonies and prayers. 

79. The expression Sadvegadharian (azanft) is 
explained to mean either one who wears fine 
clothes or who assumes the exterior garb of 
sanctity. Either interpretation 1s equally allowable. 

80. The Bhagavata agrees with the text in these 
particulars. The chief star of Tisya is in the 
constellation Cancer. 

81. All the copies concur in this reading; 
aaah WT erat waited gg wa 
Fae! Three copies of the Vayu assign to the 
same interval 1050 years : Walsrgdti and of the 


Matsya five copies have the same, VaWEnt! or 
1050 years; while one copy has 1500 years; 
Tawi! The Bhagavata has 1115 years; tassaees 
q wa Tae! which the commentator explains, a 
thousand years and a hundred with fifteen over;' 
avaed Tae wd wi He notices nevertheless, 
although he doesn't attempt to account for the 
discrepancy, that the total period from Pariksit to 
Nanda was actually, according to the duration of 
the different intermediate dynasties, as enumerated 
by all the authorities, fifteen centuries; viz. 
Magadha kings ... 1000 years, Pradyota etc. . .138 
years. Sigunaga. . . 362. Total 1500 years. The 
shorter period is best proportioned to the number of 
kings; for reckoning from Sahadeva, who was 
contemporary with Pariksit and taking the number 
of the Varhadrathas from the Matsya, we have 
thirty-two of them, five of the Pradyota race and 
ten Saigunagas or in all forty-seven; which, as the 
divisor of 1050, gives rather more twenty-two years 
to a reign. The Vayu an the Matsya further specify 
the interval from Nanda to Pulomat, that last of the 
Andhra kings, as being 836 years; a total that does 
not agree exactly with the items previously 
specified : 9 Nandas. . .100 years, 10 Mauryas. . 


137, 10 Sungas. . .112, 4 Kanvas. . .45. 29 
Andhras. . .460. Total 62 kings, 854 years. In either 
case the average duration of reign is not 


improbable, as the highest number gives less than 
fourteen years to each prince. It is important to 
remember that the reign of Pariksit is, according to 
Hindu chronology, coeval with the commencement 
of the Kali age; and even therefore taking the 
longest Pauranik interval we have but sixteen 
centuries between Candragupta—or considering him 
as the same with Sandrocoptos, nineteen centuries 
B.C.-for the beginning of the Kali age. According 
to the chronology of our text, however, it would be 
but B.C. 1415; to that of the Vayu and Matsya, 
B.C. 1450; and to that of the Bhagavata, 1515. 
According to Wilford's computations (As. Res. Vol. 
IX. Chron. Table, p. 116) the conclusion of the 
great war took place B.C. 1370; Buchanan 
conjectures it to have occurred in the thirteenth 
century B.C. Vy4sa was the putative father of 
Pandu and Dhrtardstra and consequently was 
contemporary with the heroes of the great war. 
Colebrooke infers from astronomical date that 
arrangement of the Vedas attributed to Vyasa took 


410 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





place in the fourteenth century B.C. Bentley brings 
the date of Yudhisthira, the chief of the Pandavas, 
to 575 B.C. (Historical View of Hindu Astronomy, 
p. 67); but the weight of authority is in favour of 
the thirteenth or fourteenth century B.C. for the war 
of the Mahabharata and the reputed commencement 
of the Kali age. 

82. A similar explanation is given in the 
Bhagavata, Vayu and Matsya Puranas; and like 
accounts from astronomical writers are cited by 
Colebrooke, As. Res. Vol. [X. P. 358. The 
commentator on the Bhagavata thus explains the 
notion : "The two stars (Pulaha and Kratu) must 
rise or be visible before the rest and whichever 
asterism 1s in a line south from the middle of those 
stars, is that with which the seven stars are united; 
and so they continue for one hundred years." 
Wilford has also given a like explanation of the 
revolution of the Rsis; As. Res. Vol. IX. P. 83. 
According to Bentley the notion originated in a 
contrivance of the astronomers to show the quantity 
of the precession of the equinoxes. "This was by 
assuming an imaginary line or great circle passing 
through the poles of the ecliptic and the beginning 
of the fixed Magh4, which circle was supposed to 
cut some of the stars in the Great Bear. The seven 
stars in the Great Bea the circle so assumed was 
called the line of the Rsis and being fixed to the 
beginning of the lunar asterism Magha, the 
precession would be solved by stating the degree 
etc., of any moveable lunar mansion cut by that 
fixed line or circle as an index. Historical View of 
Hindu Astronomy, p.65. 

83. The Bhagavata has the same; and this agrees 
with the period assigned for the interval between 
Pariksit and Nanda of 1050 years; as, including 
Magha, we have ten asterisms to Purvasadha or 
1000 years. The Vayu and Matsya are so very 
inaccurate in all the copies consulted, that it is not 
safe to affirm what they mean to describe 
apparently they state that at the end of the Andhra 
dynasty the Rsis will be in Krttikd, which furnishes 
other ten asterisms; the whole being nearly in 
accordance with the chronology of the text, as the 
total interval from Pariksit to the last of the 
Andhras is 1050+836=1886 and the entire century 


of each asterism at the beginning and end of the 
series need not be taken into account The copies of 
the Matsya read, ata aeq: welt ati ‘The 
seven Rsis are on a line with the brilliant Agni;’ 
that is, with Krttika, of which Agni 1s the presiding 
deity . The Vayu intends in all probability the same 
phrase, but the three copies have, waa ufs! a very 
unintelligible clause. Again, it seems as if they 
intended to designate the end of the Andhra race as 
the period of a complete revolution or 2700 years; 
for the Vayu has, aafae: wd vfsen sryronras-aat yA: | 
‘The races at the end of the Andhras will be after 
2700 years:’ the Matsya has, wefan Wer 
srurmnrrerad (7) Fa: and at the close of the passage, 
after specifying as usual that ‘the seven Rsis were 
in Magna in the time of Pariksit.’ art wage: ae 
Tifa: Fai the Vayu adds, srura a ddfas vfs a a 
Wal! a passage which, though repeated in the MSS., 
is obviously most inaccurate; although it might 
perhaps be understood to intimate that the Rsis will 
be in the twenty-fourth asterism after the Andhra 
race : but that would give only 1400 years from 
Pariksit to Puloma; whilst if the twenty-fourth from 
Magha was intended, it would give 2400 years : 
both periods being incompatible with previous 
specifications. The Matsya has a different reading 
of the second line, but one not much more 
Satisfactory; “facia sean: 1 ‘A hundred 
years of Brahma will be in the twenty-fourth 
(asterism?).’ In neither of these authorities, 
however, is it proposed by the last-cited passages to 
illustrate the chronology of princes or dynasties: the 
specification of the period, whatever it may be, is 
that of the era at which the evil influence of the 
Kali age is to become most active and irresistible. 

84. The Bhagavata has the same. Devapi, as the 
commentator observes, being the restorer of the 
lunar and Maru of the solar race. 

85. To be the cause of Samkalpa. ‘conviction,’ 
‘belief and Vikalpa, ‘doubt,’ ‘disbelief.’ The 
Bhagavata indulges in a similar strain and often in 
the same words. The whole recalls the words of the 
Roman satirist; I, demens et saevas curre per Alpes, 
Ut pueris placeas, et declamatio fias. 

e*k* 


END OF THE FOURTH BOOK 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


BOOK V 
USAT: 
CHAPTER I FITTS aN: STATE BT 
Wor: ayers: Fensihrats WararetersTaq i 9 11 


(ayea-carAfaare:, TAT: WAY Yet WaT, 
faut: waa aaa ot faeries) 
iq sara 
zon aise: wal waar ayrfereac: 
amqaitasa anacqatetagi en 
SIMTaAA TAN Aisa UgHeteya:| 
feronired Ferettorré sig iresreagraa: 11 2 
want af salir war Fearn: | 
simsrradatert ax ath Wa! aan 3 


Maitreya said'-You have related to me a 
full account of all the different dynasties of 
kings and of their successive transactions. I 
wish now to hear a more particular 
description, holy Rsi, of the portion of Visnu’ 
that came down upon earth and was born in 
the family of Yadu. Tell me also what actions 
he performed in his descent, as a part of a part 
of the supreme, upon the earth.’ 


WIS Sard 
Aaa! sae Bel TEIsetas AM 
faanrigig-amrfa-ated serat fer vu 
Parasara said— I will relate to you, 
Maitreya, the account which you have 
requested; the birth of a pare of a pare of Vis 


nu and the benefits which his actions 
conferred upon the world. 


cael Yat Ys Ysa ETAT 
Say WEIN saat SaATTATTN & I 
HAMMAN WATT AA: | 
aqeam cae: Wary Aas I 


ama aga We! We wal wa Terary 
SAA ABA Mh: woMTEteaal ci 


Vasudeva formerly married the daughter of 
Devaka, the illustrious Devaki, a maiden of 
celestial beauty. After their nuptials, Karhsa, 
the increaser of the race of Bhoja, drove their 
car as their charioteer. As they were going 
along, a voice in the sky, sounding aloud and 
deep as thunder, addressed Karhsa and said, 
‘*Fool that you are, the eighth child of the 
damsel whom you are driving in the car shall 
take away your life*!’’ On hearing this, Karhsa 
drew his sword and was about to put Devaki to 
death; but Vasudeva interposed, saying, °‘Kill 
not Devaki, great warrior; spare her life and I 
will deliver to you every child that she may 
bring forth.’” Appeased by which promise and 
relying on the character of Vasudeva, Karhsa 
desisted from the attempt. 


WIN SarT 
Seravd Waa GE wal Aeraet: | 
taal FIANEN ayeasTaaeA 81 
qT EAeM Teraral! taal aa Tal 
ANGI THA THAT Go UI 
qaeae a ft dat aged fair 
T MTAATTS Bt at Saal WAT AAT Vail 
wife aret g aftarerenitfsan 
Sy cot At wast Fafeatararq ez 
Waa YT Vary whoreans Ae 
HAA AAT Gal HSN 23 1 


At that time, Earth, overburdened by her 
load, repaired to mount Meru to an assembly 


412 


of the gods and addressing the divinities, with 
Brahma at their head, related in piteous 
accents all her distress. 


ylacqara 
st: Yau Tetat Wl: W Tes 
TOMS TEARTAON S311 VI 
maraferaitsen Yaar Yast: | 
HEN-HUBT- AAT HITT TAAL B& I 
ae: VSG Wal a: YATAT: | 
SRN Wed: AAT VAT Atay-aARA= EM 
forty a a cart aprasfageym: | 
Wad TINT SE faa: 1 on 
aar-TeAa- Saar: frgeanc-aaT: | 
TRAE we faite: 1 ee 
WEVA eaa- TATA AOTC: | 
aes farnshaq aa fae srr 28 
TMAH TT BUTS 
TeTMTTHA Ut ABET SA APTN Vo 
aed arate der: array: | 
TRA AUTH SAS EST WAT 2 MH 
wremiten Usa fap wafer 
STATA: HA: DATA: TW ATT VU 
ater aya: fyi vera) Tare 
VAST STOTT ae: YAN VIM 
AI U Ueratal Fart wary A 
VATA GUAR A PANG ATE 2 
seiferasa agen fearafagat qa: 
Ta SAAT eer HATA BM 
aay Srat A MATT: | 
fardaramnaetata fageenta 4:11 261 
faa TREMIOT: AT ATAU) 
qa Tater are meadatata fase 200 
‘‘Agni,’’ said Earth, “‘is the progenitor of 
gold; Surya, of rays of light :° the parent and 
guide of me and of all spheres is the supreme 


Narayana, who is Brahma, the lord of the lord 
of patriarchs; the eldest of the eldest born; one 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


with minutes and hours; one with time; having 
form, though indiscrete. This assemblage of 
yourselves, O gods, is but a part of him. The 
sun, the winds the saints, the Rudras. the 
Vasus, the ASsvins, fire, the patriarch creators 
of the universe, of whom Atri is the first, all 
are but forms of thc mighty and inscrutable 
Visnu. The Yaksas, Raksasas, Daityas, spirits 
of evil, serpents and children of Danu, the 
singers and nympiis of heaven, are forms of 
the great spirit, Visnu. The heavens painted 
with planets, constellations and stars; fire, 
water, wind and myself and every perceptible 
thing; the whole universe itself—consists of Vis 
nu. The multifarious forms of that manifold 
being encounter and succeed one another, 
night and day, likc the waves of the sea. At 
this prescnt scason many demons, of whom 
K4lanemi is the chief, have over-run and 
continually harass, the region of mortals. The 
great Asura Kalancmi,’ that was killed by the 
powerful Visnu, has rcvived in Karhsa, the son 
of Ugrasena and many othcr mighty demons, 
more than I can enumerate, as Arista, 
Dhenuka, Kesin, Pralamba, Naraka, Sunda and 
the fierce Bana, the son of Bali,’ are born in 
the palaces of kings. Countless hosts of proud 
and powerful spirits, chiefs of the demon race, 
assuming celestial forms, now walk the earth; 
and, unable to support myself beneath the 
incumbent load, I come to you for succour. 
Illustrious deities, do you so act that I may be 
relieved from my burden, lest helpless I sink 
into the nethermost abyss.” 


WIR Sata 

sarang acrareanyd fragteda: | 

Wal wTaaes Tat wre wefan We 

Parasara said— When the gods had heard 
these complaints of Earth, Brahma at their 
request explained to them how her burden 
might be lightened. 


aeara 
UNS THM Va MITA ea: | 
BS Way MAA We ANAT HA 2 Vl 


BOOK V, CHAP. 1 


fare aaa AAAS TTA 

STATA ARATAT THAT TMA 3 0 

aaa Te: aTETeTATT 

dared Zt ae ad fans A 3 

wads ae Pale STATA: 

waeisrtradtat st ater set Fert 3 201 

‘*Celestials,’’ said Brahma, “‘all that Earth 

has said is undoubtedly true. I, Mahadeva and 
you all, are but Narayana; but the imper- 
sonations of his power are forever mutually 
fluctuating and excess or diminution 1s 
indicated by the predominance of the strong 
and the depression of the weak. Come 
therefore, let us repair to the northern coast of 
the milky sca and having glorified Hari, report 
to him what we have heard. He, who is the 
spirit of all and of whom the universe consists, 
constantly, for thc sake of Earth, descends in a 
small portion of his essence to establish 
righteousness below.”’ 


WIS Sara 
ayaa weal fam! ae ea: frame: 
warferattstd FETA WHSeASNLN 3 31 

Parasara said— Accordingly Brahma, 
attended by the gods, went to the milky sea 


and there, with minds intent upon him, praised 
him whose emblem 1s Garuda. 


gaara 
% fae aaarera wa dare aa 
oT Ue aa BU TATA WHT 3 
% Pan cauiashreanerq! wd wafad 
WRT TSA TT TORN Aq 34 
mdced ayde: aetacard wT 
fren aeut froma ot saree a3 6 
Sferera-FaUY IT TAT CATHAY: 
Wa Aras Ae TH TATU ATTA 3 19 1 
see OTaAg FATE AEA: | 
AACN SUt ATCT TTT 3 
aaa ae vaa AUT AVA 


SIUTUTTTSRUS Ys Pet TMITAN 3 8 
yoo: uae a 

TPA GFRTAT: | 
SAUEee Baal Tete 

a ada ad Aa Uda Nvol 
SONATA, A 

wai Wwadiswapahreran 
stra area fauft a 

BUVS-WUT UL: WAAL Y 2 
wa farrier Tet 

vation syeanft aarerafon 
aged TaN: 

qateaneh: Wht: UTETMAU Y 21 
Taal War gayi 

aat faut aerat carta 
a farasecn | 

Fer ue Urea faerag 3 
aaa ager afar 

fanned: 
aa Hay Wada 

BUTT ATTA & Yt 

aq Wate cat Yea AAGPaA 
wat ard fatsehea ratte 

Sel Yd TT MST WIN SGN 


area aaried Wlpofrerar| 


Gat: WasH TasifaMAacSarq ¥ EI 


sRePaTagesy tari afeary ait 


HATHA HIT HTS: tl BN 


fad: watat Fefreisarcea: | 


WANT: WANT ATA ATTA ATT SE 


PHcranita! PTE TATA | 
Tetteraeaa | AUST THAT Ye 


TMARUNT ANG Al ANUTAIITA Al 
Wau aia aqaronas F UTTUG of 


413 


414 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





3 


"O you,” said Brahma, “‘who are distinct 
from holy writ’; whose double nature is 
twofold wisdom’, superior and inferior and 
who are the essential end of both; who, alike 
devoid and possessed of form, are the twofold 
Brahma'’; smallest of the least and largest of 
the large; all and knowing all things; that spirit 
which is language; that spirit which is 
supreme; that which is Brahma and of which 
Brahma is composed! You are the Rk, the 
Yajus, the Saman and the Atharvan Vedas. 
You are accentuation, ritual, signification, 
metre and astronomy; history, tradition, 
grammar, theology, logic and law : you who 
are inscrutable. You are the doctrine that 
investigates the distinctions between soul and 
life and body and matter endowed with quali- 
ties'’; and that doctrine is nothing else but 
your nature inherent in and presiding over it’”. 
You are imperceptible, indescribable, incon- 
ceivable; without name or colour or hands or 
feet; pure, eternal and infinite. You hear 
without ears and see without eyes. You are one 
and multiform. You move without feet; you 
seize without hands. You know all, but are not 
by all to be known’®. He who beholds you as 
the most subtle of atoms, not substantially 
existent, puts an end to ignorance; and final 
emancipation is the reward of that wise man 
whose understanding cherishes nothing other 
than you in the form of supreme delight'*. You 
are the common centre of all'’, the protector of 
the world and all beings exist in you : all that 
has been or will be, you are. You are the atom 
of atoms; you are spirit; you only are distinct 
from primeval nature". You, as the lord of fire 
in four manifestations’ ’, give light and fertility 
to Earth. You are the eye of all and wearer of 
many shapes and unobstructedly traverses the 
three regions of the universe. As fire, though 
one, is variously kindled and, though 
unchangeable in its essence, is modified in 
many ways, so you, lord, who are, one 
omnipresent form, take upon you all 
modifications that exist. You are one supreme; 
you are that supreme and eternal state which 


the wise behold with the eye of knowledge. 
There is nothing else but you. O lord; nothing; 
else has been or will be. You are both discrete 
and indiscreet, universal and _ individual, 
omniscient, all seeing, omnipotent, possessed 
of all wisdom and strength and power. You are 
liable neither to diminution nor increase; you 
are independence and without beginning; you 
are the subjugator of all. You are unaffected 
by weariness, sloth, fear, anger or desire. You 
are free from soil, supreme, merciful,” 
uniform, undecaying, lord over all, the stay of 
all, the fountain of light, imperishable. To you, 
uninvested by material envelopes,'” unexposed 
to sensible imaginings, aggregate of elemental 
substance,”’ spirit supreme, be adoration. You 
assume a shape, O pervader of the universe, 
not as the consequence of virtue or vice, nor 
from any mixture of the two, but for the sole 
object of maintaining piety in the world.””” 


UU Bare 
saa deals Beat ATT WTA: | 
Garorare Wrarear fasrecet aft: 114 ei 
The unborn, universal Hari, having heard 


with his mental ear these eulogiums, was 
pleased and thus spoke to Brahma : 


sMMAyara 
WW Wt Te! wal WA: We sadfeeri 
AgeaATA TS J: FAAATSATAATTN & 2 It 


‘*Tell me, Brahman, what you and the gods 
desire : speak boldly, ccrtain of success.”’ 


TUT TAT 
adt Gen wiser faeunaer adi 
Gera wat Say Aaa TATA 3 


Parasara said— Brahma, beholding the 
divine, universal form of Hari, quickly 
prostrated himself and again renewed his 
praises. 


Taare 
TAY ATES TSA TT 
Ueaatel! agaeaurel 


BOOK V, CHAP. 1 


415 





wa TAA wa: Nata 
fare PRAHA & XII 
Fanfrgeniargearane | 
Tea TATA 
WAG Al VAT TIA- 
Ford Tuer! Tay! WATE GG MI 
‘““Glory to you, the thousand-formed, the 
thousand-armed, the many-visaged, many- 
footed; to you, the illimitable author of 
Creation, preservation and destruction; most 
subtle of the subtle, most vast of the great : to 
you, who are. nature, intellect and 
consciousness; and who are other spirit even 
than the spiritual root of those prineiples.” 


Ua wet ta! Wehr 

Wear: Uifsa-vreraeM 
WO wat stra a AA 

MIATAATTA ATLANTA & & I 
Ud ad qahegeaarat 

aaa aeut TAT 
Sy a Sel aaa: Waal: 

TAO ETITa & 9 II 

Ot: Wren: Fa! wr 

Afra aa Adit waA 
SATA Weare 

we FASTA MANATSAT IG SI 


Do you show favour upon us. Behold, lord, 
this earth, oppressed by mighty Asuras and 
shaken to her mountain bascments, comes to 
you, who is her invincible defender, to be 
relieved from her burden. Behold me, Indra, 
the ASvins, Varuna and Yama, the Rudras, the 
Vasus, the suns, the winds, fire and all other 
celestials, prepared to execute whatever you 
shall will that we shall do. Do you, in whom 
there is no imperfection, O sovereign of the 
deities, give your orders to your servants : lo, 
we are ready." 


WUT Sara 
Us CAAA Ta WAT: | 


Seer: Ahyit Faa-HeMt ATA 4 VI 
SAT A YUMA AG He TATA 
Bada Yar WT-aeryrelhsl HATTA: 1 § of 
Ques WHat: wigan wate 

gay Gagan: yatquattergt:i§ ki 
aa: areragrared Scar mconten 

Waar T Mel Magara: 1g VA 
AQAA BT Ueit Saat Saaroa 
PAINE TAT THT FTA BAT: 1G 3H 
atest Baars sa arafaar aha 


eT MRA HaATT ST VU 
sTevaa TaaS he whoa Weer 


Tags YT WyTaAeT ASTI & & UI 

When Brahma had ended, the supreme lord 
plucked off two hairs, one white and one blaek 
and said to the gods, “‘These my hairs shall 
deseend upon earth and shall relieve her of the 
burden of her distress.’ Let all the gods also, 
in their own portions, go down to earth and 
wage war with the haughty Asuras, who are 
there ineorporate and who shall every one of 
them be destroyed. Doubt not of this : they 
shall perish before the withering glanee of 
mine eyes. This my (black) hair shall be 
impersonated in the eighth conception of the 
wife of Vasudeva, Devaki, who is like a 
goddess; and shall slay Karmsa, who is the 
demon K4lanemi.’’ Thus having spoken, Hari 
disappeared; and the gods bowing to him, 
though invisible, returned to the summit of 
mount Meru, from whence they descended 
upon earth. 


HAT UGA WT Sarat aire: | 
afar wary Ay WAT Ng § I 
ashe Way Aa Para: | 

Cael AKA YS WHTAMTAAI & 

Wht Was Hare tales Bat TT 

ada aaearstt qaraftrary fat: c 
fecorafgrat: gar: wert sf fagqar:| 
fase ar Far Hate met TATA & 81 


416 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





arias wera aworat aifed gan 

sifaran WT a ANTS WTA ST 9 ol 

The Muni Narada informed Karhsa that the 
supporter of the earth. Visnu, would be the 
eighth child of Devaki; and his wrath being 
excited by this report, he placed both 
Vasudeva and Devalki in confinement. 
Agreeably to his promise. the former delivered 
to Kamsa each infant as soon as it was born. It 
is said that these, to the numbcr of six, were 
the children of the demon Hiranyakasipu, who 
were introduced into the womb of Devaki, at 
the command of Visnu, during the hours of 
Devaki’s repose, by the goddess Yoganidra,”” 
the great illusory energy of Visnu, by whom, 
as utter ignorance, the whole world is 
beguiled. © 


FAR! WaT TATA Wareter- Aaa 

Ueheeat TaN SaHAST FAN 0 BN 

aay ag Har Mores yeaa AA} 

seat Te: TAA: Wefaratan y 2 

Tepe ayeaer arate weet fra 

aa: B werd Ufa! Aaearareeq 03 1 

Baa VENT wae Tara: | 

eae: Uladt mt fa cla afecafan oxi 

THAIN Aisa wiles AUT at 

aamaTay ate: senshi: 1194 

adisé wefan caahtst we 

TH aM THe Werf 9 & i 

To her Visnu said, ‘‘Go, Nidra, to the 
nether rcgions and by my command conduct 
successively six of their princes to be 
conceived of Devaki. When these shall have 
been put to death by Kamsa, the seventh 
conception shali be formed of a portion of Ses 
a, who is a part of me; and this you shall 
transfer, before the time of birth, to Rohini, 
another wife of Vasudeva, who resides at 


Gokula. The report shali run, that Devaki 
miscarries, through the anxiety’ of 


imprisonment and dread the Raja of the 
Bhojas. From being extracted from his 
mother’s womb, the child shall be known by 
the name of Sarnkarsana and he shall be 
valiant and strong and like the peak of the 
white mountain in bulk and complexion. I will 
myself become incarnate in the eighth 
conception of Devaki; and you _ shall 
immediately take a similar character as the 
embryo offspring of Yasoda. 


Weare @ aara FereeaMeE Pty 
TURN TITS Walt eaMTATeAPA 99 1 
TMA AY caareanaraan 
Teafaaiiaatad gear apaeafai 9c 1 


In the night of the eighth lunation of the 
dark half of the month Nabhas, in the season 
of the rains, I shall be born. You shall receive 
birth on the ninth. Impelled and aided by my 
power, Vasudeva shall bear me to the bed of 
YasSoda and you to that of Devakt. 


hayes cargurera efa! vrerfyremact 
WARTS A a WI WAareeafan ee i 
aaa VMS WR: WOT AA WaT 
Wiorerarcaferat afies weteafa co 

aa: YSyarsea CIM ASAT: | 
waa: Yrarsrar wushreafan c VN 


Kamsa shall take you and hold you up to 
dash you against a stone; but you shall escape 
from his grasp into the sky, where the 
hundred-eyed Indra shall meet and do homage 
to you, through reverence for me and shall 
bow bcfore you and acknowledge you as his 
sister. Having slain Sumbha, Nigumbha and 
numerous other demons,” you shall sanctify 
the earth in many places.”° 


wa fa: wate: aft: enfant: ufeet gfe: 
oat: Of OT a a afer ate ae VI 
a rarardte etter aumis fara a 

waht UschTentd Vea AST BN 2 3 
WANS U MIATA: 

aut fe wis ad nerarcrenfaeafinc xi 


BOOK V, CHAP. 4 


417 





Taare weiss yf 

JUV WHAT BAST aH 64 

at aad Waar ay! Waraereeeray 

stare ufacateat mas efa! aafearucs i 

Sta stfawoyyerat waraist were: STATA: 

You are wealth, progeny, fame, patience, 
heaven and earth, fortitude, modesty, nutrition, 
dawn and every other female (form or 
property). They who address you morning and 
afternoon with reverence and praise and call 
you Arya, Durga, Vedagarbha, Ambika, 
Bhadré, Bhadrakali, Ksemi or Kse-mankari, 
shalf receive from my bounty whatever they 
desire. Propitiated with offerings of wine and 
flesh and various viands, you shall bestow 
upon mankind all their prayers. Through my 
favour all men shall ever have faith in you. 
Assured of this, go, goddess and execute my 
commands." 


NOTES 


1. The whole of this book is dedicated to the 
biography of Krsna. Many of the Puranas omit this 
subject altogether or only allude to 1t occasionally. 
In others it is equally prominent. The Brahma 
Purana gives the story exactly in the same words as 
our text: which has the best right to them may be 
questioned; but, as it is usually met with, the 
Brahma Purina is a_ very heterogeneous 
compilation. The Hari Varhsa has a narrative more 
detailed than that of the text, with additions and 
embellishments of its own. The Brahma Vaivartta 
throughout celebrates the acts of Krsna; and one 
portion of it. the Krsna Janma Khanda, especially 
describes his boyhood and youth. The incidents are 
the same in general as those in the text, but they are 
lost amidst interminable descriptions of Krsna’s 
sports with the Gopis and with his mistress Radha, 
a person not noticed elsewhere; the whole is in a 
style indicative of a modern ongin. The Agni 
Purana and Padma Purana (Uttara Khanda) have 
accounts of Krsna, but they are mere summaries, 
compiled evidently from other works. The principal 
authority for the adventures of Krsna 1s_ the 
Bhagavata, the tenth book of which is exclusively 
devoted to him. It is this work which has, no doubt, 


mainly extended the worship of Krsna, as its 
popularity is evinced by its having been translated 
into all the spoken languages of India professing to 
have a literature. The Prem-sagar. its Hindi 
version, 18 well known; but there are also 
translations in Mahratta, Telugu, Tamil. It does not 
seem likely, however, that the Visnu Purana has 
copied the Bhagavata; for although its greater 
conciseness may sometimes look like abridgement, 
yet the descriptions are generally of a more simple 
and antiquated character. Here, as usual, the 
Mahabharata is no doubt the earliest extant 
authority; but it is not the earliest, for whilst it 
omits to narrate most of his personal adventures 
unconnected with his alliance with the Pandavas, it 
often alludes to them and names repeatedly his 
capital, his wives and his progeny. It also devotes a 
section, the MauSala Parva, to the destruction of the 
Yadavas. The story of Krsna the prince and hero 
must have been complete when the Mahabharata 
was compiled. It is doubtful, however, if Krsna the 
boy and his adventures at Vrndavan, were not 
subsequent inventions. There are no allusions to 
them in the poem, of an unsuspicious nature. The 
only ones that I have met with are contained in a 
speech by Sigupala. Sabha Parva, vol. 1. p. 360, in 
which he reviles Krsna; but they may easily have 
been interpolated. There may be others scattered 
through the poem, but | have not observed them. 

2. The notices of Krsna’s origin and character in 
various passages of the Mahabharata are by no 
means consistent and indicate different dates at 
least. In an address to him by Arjuna, Vana Parva, 
vol. 1. p. 426, he is said to have passed thousands 
of years in various holy places, engaged in arduous 
penances. He is frequently identified with the Rsi 
Narayana or he and Arjuna are said to be Nara and 
Narayana : 7 Wa 4 areas Tana BA In the Dana- 
dharma he is represented as a worshipper of Siva 
and propitiating him and his wife Uma and 
receiving as boons from them wives and cluldren. 
As a warrior and prince he is always on the scene; 
but he is repeatedly called an Amsa or portion of 
Visnu; whilst in a great number of places he 1s 
identified with Visnu or Narayana and _ is 
consequently ‘all things.’ This latter is his character, 
of course, amongst the Vaisnavas, agreeably to the 
text of the Bhagavata : Feneq wary was: “Krsna is 
the lord (Visnu) himself" 


418 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





3. This is a still farther diminution of Krsna’s 
dignity; he is not even a part, but ‘a part of a part,’ 
Armsamsavatéra (3mgaqr:) but this, the 
commentator maintains, is to be understood only of 
his from or condition as man, not of his power, as it 
suffered no diminution, either in its primary or 
secondary state, as light by suffusion suffers no 
decrease; and a verse of the Veda is cited to this 
effect : ‘Though that which is full be taken from 
what is full, yet the remainder is undiminished ;’ 
wera rararend ‘Krsna is nevertheless the 
very supreme Brahma, though it be a mystery how 
the supreme should assume the form of a man, % 
Fel TS KS WK Ta Aes FIR arrears So the 
Bhagavata in one passage predicts that the Para- 
purusa, Purusottama or Visnu, will be born visibly 
in the dwelling of Vasudeva; aqeaye marerary Yea: 
Te: BPTETA 

4. The Bhagavata tells the circumstance as in 
the text. The Hari Varisa makes Narada apprise 
Karhsa of his danger. Narada’s interposition is not 
mentioned until afterwards by our authority. 
Devaki is the cousin of Karhsa : see Bk. iv. Ch. xv. 

5S. Agni or fire, refines gold, burns away the 
dross, according to the commentator. The sun is the 
lord of the rays of light; or, as the cause of rain and 
vegetation, the lord of cattle. The phrase is, "at 


wee: Wa WR: | 

6. According to the Vayu, Kalanemi or 
Kayabadha was a son of Virocana, the grandson of 
Hiranyakasipu : his death is described in the Hart 
V arhSa. 

7. Thesc appear subsequently in the narration 
and are destroyed by Krsna. 

8. Andmnaya (sr); not the immediate object 
of the Vedas, which is devotion, not abstraction; 
ritual or worship, not knowledge. 


9. The two kinds of knowledge (fa!) are termed 
Para (Wt) ‘supreme,’ and Apara (31a), ‘other’ or 
subordinate , the first is knowledge of. Para 


Brahma, of spirit abstractedly considered, perfect. 


knowledge derived from abstraction; the second is 
knowledge of Sabda Brahma, of spirit as described 
and taught in the Vedas or their supplementary 
branches. The identity of the supreme with both 
descriptions of holy knowledge pervades the whole 
of the address. 


10. Para Brahma and Sabda Brahma : see the 
preceding note. 

11. The doctrine alluded to may be either 
intended generally or in the several instances, the 
discussion of the spiritual soul and living soul, of 
body subtle and sensible and of matter endowed 
with qualities, reference may be purposed to the 
Vedanta, Yoga and Samkhya systems. 

12. That is, as the Sabda Brahma, the supreme is 
identical with philosophical doctrines, being the 
object, the instigator and the result. 

13. This is taken from the Vedas, the original of 
which is quoted and translated by Jones : see his 
Works. XIII. 368. The passage is thus cited by the 
commentator on our text : 3amftrd way Fea 
Waray: VT iy: @ ay aad aa ae AM THETs Yos 
Herd} ‘Without hand or foot he runs, he grasps; 
without eyes he sees; and without ears he hears : he 
know all that may be known and no one know him. 
Him they call the first great spirit.’ 

14. Varenya ripa, explained by Paramdnanda 
mirtti; he whose form or impersonation is Supreme 
felicity. 

15. Literally ‘navel of all ;?  faanft:: The 
passage is also read, wd fama: | ‘Though are all and 
the first ;’ the cause or creator. 


16. Or the passage is understood, “Though are 
one subsequently to Praxrti;? Te: wed: Ie 
that is, you are Brahma, the active will of the 
supreme, creating forms from rudimental matter. 

17. As the three fires enjoined by the Vedas and 
the fire: metaphorically of devotion; or lightnings, 
solar heat, fire generated artificially and the fire of 
digestion or animal fire; or Visnu in that character 
bestows beauty, vigour, power and wealth. 

18. Prita one copy has Santa, ‘calm,’ 
‘undisturbed.’ 

19. Beyond the separate layers or envelopes of 
elementary substances (see p. 18); or, according to 
the Vedanta notions, uninvested by those grosser 
sheaths or coverings, derived from food and the 
like, by which subtle body is enclosed. 

20. Mahavibhiti sarsthana (Herayfrden). 
Vibhiti is explained by Prapafica, sensible material 
or elementary substance, constituting body. 

21. The passage is somewhat obscurely 
expressed and is differently interpreted; it 1s, 
ASRS SroITaraara!| “Not from no cause, nor 


BOOK V, CHAP. 2 


419 





bd 


from cause, nor from’’ cause and no cause.’ The 
term ‘no cause’ may, the commentator says 
designate fixed prescribed duties, the Nityakarma; 
‘cause’ may signify occasional sacrifices, the 
Kamya-karma : neither of these can form any 
neccssity for Visnu’s descent, as they might of a 
mere mortal’s being born on the earth : or Karana 1s 
explained to mean ‘obtaining pleasure,’ from Ka 
(#) and Arana (am), ‘obtaining: ° obtaining 
happiness or the cause of it, piety, virtue (w7#:); and 
with the negative, Akdrana (aR), the reverse, 
pain, the consequence of wickedness (a4:). The 
purport is clear enough, is merely meant to state 
that Visnu is not subject to the necessity which is 
the cause of human birth. 

22. The term Pradhana, which is repeated in this 
passage, is explained in the second place to mean 
Puman, ‘soul! or ‘spirit 7° serqaiesrad WT TOTTI 

23. The same account of the origin of Krsna ts 
given in the Mahabharata, Adi Parva vol. I. p. 266. 
The white hair is impersonated as Balaréma; the 
black, as Krsna. The commentator on our text 
maintains that this is not to be literally understood : 
‘Visnu did not intend that the two hairs should 
become incarnate, but he meant to signify, that, 
should he send them, they would be more than 
sufficient to destroy Karhsa and his demons : or the 
birth of Rama and Krsna was a double illusion, 
typified by the two hairs.’ This scems to be a 
refinement upon an _ older and somewhat 
undignified account of the origin of Krsna and his 
brothcr. The commentator on the Mahabhara... 
argues that they are to be understood merely as the 
media by which Devaki and Rohini concetved. 


24. Yoganidra (ama) is the sleep of devotion or 
abstraction, the active principle of illusion, 
personified and also termed Maya and Mahamaya, 
ulso Avidya or ignorance. In the Durga Mahatmya 
of the Markandeya Purana she appears as Devi or 
Durga, the Sakti or bride of Siva; but in our text as 
Vaisnavi or the Sakti of Visnu. 

25. Allusion is here made to the exploits of 
Durga, as celebrated especially in the Durga 
Mahatmya : and it must be posterior to the date of 
that or same similar composition. The passage may 
be an interpolation, as the Markandeya Purana in 
general has the appearance of being a more recent 
compilation than the Visnu. 


26. This refers to the Pitha sthanas, ‘fifty-one 
places', where, according to the Tantras, the limbs 
of Sati fell, when scattered by her husband Siva, as 
he bore her dead body about and tore it to pieces, 
after she had put an end to her existence at Daksa’s 
sacrifice. This part of the legend scems to be an 
addition to the original fable made by the Tantras, 
as it is not in the Puranas (see the story of Daksa’s 
sacrifice). It bears some analogy to the Egyptian 
fable of Isis and Osiris. At the Pitha sthanas, 
however, of Jvalamukhi, Vindhyavasini, K4lighat 
and others, temples are erected to the different 
forms of Devi or Sati, not to the phallic emblem of 
Mahadeva, which, if present, is there as an 
accessory and embellishment, not as a principal and 
the chief object of worship 1s a figure of the 
goddess; a circumstance in which there is an 
essential difference between the temples of Durga 
and shrines of Osiris. 

kkk 


BOOK V, CHAP. 2 419 


CHAPTER 2 
fadtatsearr: 


(apemy Aaa Sas weTaAT WaT: | 
Sart Saat Ryle: 1) 
WHR Sard 
auth Ol Seat tacaa a Aen 
wend Waar Wh AAT STOTT I 
aay Ween we WT WT adl Bes 
Marae tara: wader au 
amg apiterredraraa aat fen 
ABT Hat Tse BAH UTA 3 
wa Wet: wears wera fafa fen 
fae Ya Ae MAASAI YT UK 
7 Oe taal 38 abyreaiaaran 
SRACTIMT at ewat AA array! 4 
est Tee: witeadal Sarat WOT: 
fasron ager fasuy qeqearelsTAN & I 
The nurse of the universe, Jagaddhatri, thus 
enjoined by the god of gods, conveyed the six 


420 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





several embryos into the womb of Devaki' and 
transfcrred the seventh after a season to that of 
Rohini; after which, Hari, for the benefit of the 
three regions, became incarnate as the 
conception of the former princess and 
Yoganidra as that of YaSoda, exactly as the 
supreme Visnu had commanded. When the 
portion of Visnu had become incorporate upon 
earth, the planetary bodies moved in brilliant 
order in the hcavens and the seasons wcre 
regular and genial. No person could bear to 
gaze upon Devaki, from the light that invested 
her; and those who contemplated her radiance 
felt thcir minds disturbed. The gods, invisible 
to mortals, celebrated her praises continually 
from the time that Visnu was contained in her 
person. 


ea Se: 
WHA WT Ta Tas: FIT 
aN alot wresaMfs SRA ON 
aaa Bisa AAA 
SNA J AAT VMAS <1 
Henmt wana aferat arate: | 
sifeficarmt wat cermat ae fatten 


‘“You,’’ said the divinities, "are that 
Prakrti, infinite and subtle, which formerly 
bore Brahma in its womb : then was you the 
goddess of speech, the energy of the creator of 
the universe and the parent of the Vedas. You, 
eternal being, comprising in your substance 
the essence of all created things, was identical 
with creation : you was the parent of the 
triform sacrificc, becoming thc germ of all 
things: you are sacrifice, whence all fruit 
proceeds: you are the wood, whose attrition 
engenders fire. As Aditi, you are the parent of 
the gods; as Diti, you are the mother of the 
Daityas, their foes. 


Wika aaa  araifa watt: 
Tana ur afaetar a WeratEeVt Voll 
ATTN Was a ae: Gatton 
ter a arermife eetratger git: ee 


Teaarrannal diceahtaciedat 

went fayeray tfa! aay MEAT LIN 
TATRA Wega! Word AST Tal 

AYR fe-AA-AG-aA WAATTT 23 11 
W-wde-Gergan are seat WN 
AAATARASTA WHAT AAT: 1 Ve 
Tena ATT MTZ 

SATA NTET SEAT: BIST 84 Il 
yay yacttar: <aciealsea Hest: | 
ACY Gece TaNvSahat BTN Ve 
deart ferent tat Set-TTa-ATTT: | 
FSA AAT WATT: MATRA: 11 V9 
Aq: Urasret Xa silat apitara 
ACT: WASH BAM: AAMT: 1 Vs 
BUHHCABUTUT FT Ufadarreare 
Tenants a Paap TATA 83 I 


You are light, whence day is begotten : you 
are humility, the mother of true wisdom : you 
are kingly policy, the parent of order : you are 
modesty, the progenitrix of affection: you are 
desire, of whom love is born : you are 
contentment, whence resignation is derived: 
you are intelligence, the mother of knowledge: 
you are patience, the parent of fortitude-: you 
are the heavens and your children are the stars: 
and from you does all that exists proceed. 
Such, goddess and thousands more, are your 
mighty faculties; and now innumerable are the 
contents of your womb, O mother of the 
universe. The whole earth, decoratcd with 
oceans, rivers, continents, cities, villages, 
hamlets and towns; all the fires, waters and 
winds; the stars, asterisms and planets; the 
sky, crowded with the variegated chariots of 
the gods and ether, that provides space for all 
Substance; the several spheres of earth, sky 
and heaven; of saints, sages, ascetics and of 
Brahma; the whole egg of Brahma, with all its 
population of gods, demons, spirits, snake- 
gods, fiends, ghosts and imps, men and 
animals and whatever creatures have life, 


BOOK V, CHAP. 3 421 





comprised in him who is their eternal lord and 
the object of all apprehension; whose real 
form, nature, name and dimensions are not 
within human apprehension—are now with that 
Visnu in you. 

wa Tale ea ae faen get a Rhfarcat 

a Mae eNarad Ot WeteeTH 2 oN 

wale tfa! wae ara: vt YA! He 

Wen a arated gd Warftact TT 2 a 

You are Svaha; you are Svadha; you are 
wisdom, ambrosia, light and heaven. You have 
descended upon earth for the preservation of 
the world. Have compassion upon us, O 
goddess and do good unto the world. Be proud 
to bear that deity by whom the universe is 
upheld.’ 
NOTES 

1. It is mentioned in the preceding chapter that 
they were all put to death, in which the Hart Varhsa 
concurs. The Bhagavata makes Karhsa spare them 
and restore them to their parents, as he had nothing 
to apprehend from their existence. 

KKK 


BOOK V, CHAP. 3 


CHAPTER 3 
TalatseNa: 
(rad atfauta:, ATTEN HA ASAT F) 
Ud WANT A sacaAATTAT 
TUT YOST Het SATA EATOTARTTOTT I 


aya waeteney aye MTA TAT 31 
Wt: Utena We aUSATEA: | 
Ware Freart arat ARTA SATE YI 
format Fraga are wRAatETA 
SPAT ATA: 1G I 
Way: yrauifor gar yore ler: | 
WIAGIAT: PTT ATTA SATE I 


421 





TANASE STATA TATes 
We TRiee: yeraferar fest it 


Thus eulogiscd by the gods, Devaki bore in 
her womb the lotus-eyed deity, the protector of 
the world. The sun of Acyuta rose in the dawn 
of Devaki to cause the lotus petal of the 
universe to expand. On the day of his birth the 
quarters of the horizon were irradiate with joy, 
as it moonlight was diffused over the whole 
earth. The virtuous experienced new delight, 
the strong winds were hushed and the rivers 
gilded tranquilly, when Janarddana was about 
to be born. The seas with their own melodious 
murmurings made the music, while the spirits 
and the nymphs of heaven danced and sang : 
the gods, walking the sky, showered down 
flowers upon the earth and the holy fires 
glowed with a mild and gentle flame. At 
midnight, when the supporter of all was about 
to be born, the clouds-emitted low pleasing 
sounds and poured down rain of flowers. 


Gerda agaigqces a1 

MARAT Gt FETA SA: II ¢ A 

aia a i ara: weareseraia: 

faaraarara wer Saray FEAT 

As soon as Anakadundubhi beheld the 

child, of the complexion of the lotus leaves, 
having four arms and the mystic mark Srivatsa 
on his breast, he addressed him in terms of 


love and reverence and represented the fears 
he entertained of Karhsa. 


aged sara 
Waste taeayi! yrews-aH- META 
feormufie Fa Waa ETH oll 
sla 2a! alsa Hed Wa aA 
adel Sit Wear eaaery wy AFSL Vail 


‘““You are borm,’’ said Vasudeva, ‘“‘O 
sovereign god of gods, bearer of the shell, the 
discus and the mace; but now in mercy 
withhold this your celestial form, for Karhsa 
will assuredly put me to death when he knows 
that you have descended in my dwelling.”’ 


422 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





eaayara 


“2 


Uisteas acta 
Ty BAM aye fave 
Walaa a caea: 
TANT aPATATETAT : 11 2 
sTdet Waly! waaay 
Wad Waant & ahatse fefesrert: 1 g3 1 
Devaki also exelaimed, ‘‘God of gods. who 
are all things, who comprise all the regions of 
the world in your person and who by your 
illusion have assumed the condition of an 
infant, have compassion upon us and forego 


this your four-armed shape, nor let Karnsa, the 
impious son of Diti, know of your descent.” 


sTTarara 


ease Gq waar yet Garferea Aer aT 
tet efa! wand Watsé Aq Aaa Vv 


To these applications Bhagavan answered 
and said, ‘‘Princess, in former timcs I was 
prayed to by you and adored in the hope of 
progeny : your prayers have been granted, for I 
am born your son.”’ 


TIN sara 
SYR MTaTeT ays APTA 
agearste t Ugrarert weal af gu 
Aifenardeaa vero arg 
HATERS THIAG Sat 1 VE 
audi aa aaryeaut Fig 
Hoa Va: BUA HS SATU V9 
Saat aie Ara 
aged seq foul aaaet wat ec 
HUT SUM TAVITA | 
TAT MAGS ATA SAP AVI 
ey aaret AMETY AtfeaT AA RAMN 
ama Hat Aaa! weer ares TA Qo 
ageaiste fae arenes afrary 
aay Colas: i 2 gi 


See UM AGSI A AMET ATA 
Aeierereeryart maisrad Ys AAT eM 


So saying, he was silent : and Vasudeva, 
taking the baby went out that same night; for 
the guards were all charmed by Yoganidra, as 
were the warders at the gates of Mathura and 
they obstructed not the passage of 
Anakadundubhi. To protect the infant from the 
heavy rain that fell from the clouds of night, 
Sesa, the many-headed serpent, tollowed 
Vasudeva and spread his hoods above thcir 
heads; and when the prince, with the child in 
his arms, crossed the Yamuna river, deep as it 
was and dangerous with numerous whirlpools 
the waters were stilled and rose not above his 
knce. On the bank he saw Nanda and the rest, 
who had come thither to bring tribute due to 
Karhsa; but they beheld him not.’ At the same 
time YaSoda was also under the influence of 
Yoganidra, whom she had brought forth as her 
daughter and whom the prudent Vasudeva 
took up, placing his son in her place by the 
side of the mother : he then quickly returncd 
home. When YaSoda awoke, she found that 
she had been dclivered of a boy, as black as 
the dark leaves of the lotus and she was 
greatly rejoiced. 


area agearsty aftat Pomtecy 
CAAT AT TMT ATTA 231 

Tal area ear Vero: WATT: | 
SATAMAATATTeAATAS FET YI 
HATA UAT Tal Was aTfeTAT AL 

aa asia tae aaaven Para: ui 
faaia a ferengs a fam feats fat 
VAT BUS Ae AAMSAENTTTN 2 Il 
Wield Wald: has owas 

fea war ferret we! ardt aeat afercafern 2911 
Tea CaM: WT A a 

aed AMY Hreat TATA Vet 
SURAT Weal Sat feral WeIT-IOT 
Uva dsresrer eat fraderah ure 


BOOK V, CHAP. 4 423 


sta siifermygerat wsraist gata: seaT: 1 

Vasudeva, bearing off the female infant of 
Yasoda , reached his mansion unobserved and 
entered and placed the child in the bed of 
Devaki : he then remained as usual. The 
guards were awakened by the cry of the new- 
born baby and, starting up, they sent word to 
Karmsa that Devaki had borne a child. Karhsa 
immediately repaired to the residence of 
Vasudeva, where he seized upon the infant. In 
vain Devaki convulsively entreated him to 
relinquish the child : he threw it ruthlessly 
against a stone; but it rose into the sky and 
expanded into a gigantic figure, having eight 
arms, each wielding some formidable weapon. 
This terrific being laughed aloud and said to 
Karhsa, ‘‘What avails it you, Karmsa, to have 
hurled me to the ground? He is born who shall 
kill you, the mighty one amongst the gods, 
who was formerly your destroyer. Now 
quickly secure him and provide for your own 
welfare.’’ Thus having spoken, the goddess, 
decorated with heavenly perfumes and 
garlands and hymned by the spirits of the air, 
vanished from before the eyes of Bhoja raja.” 


NOTES 


1. The Bhagavata more consistently makes 
Vasudeva find Nanda and the rest fast asleep in 
their houses and subsequently describes their 
bringing tribute or tax (kara) to Kamsa. 

2. Chief of the tribe of Bhoja. a branch of the 
Yadavas : see Bk. IV. Ch. XIII. 


KKK 





BOOK V, CHAP. 4 


423 





CHAPTER 4 


ATA: 


(HRMS TYTa- SAF HATH 1) 


TUG SaATT 
HAMA: We Ball Aergas! 
WeraH Iganga sarq! vil 

Ha saraq 


@ wera! weraret! cafgrq! agen! yar 


STAM UPA: AAT TIT AA VI 


Karmsa, much troubled in mind, summoned 
all his principal Asuras, Pralamba, Kesin and 
the rest and said to them, ‘‘O valiant chiefs, 
Pralamba, Kesin, Dhenuka, Pitand, Arista and 
all the rest of you, hear my words. 


at eqaatde: a: fart goat: 

agraanfadahy A ar WOTATTS AN 3 1 

fafrsunevdin fe eturarafom 

efor ante fer wet feerqrenfran v1 

farnfant: fa aghreada: fantart: 

faarat: weaeargacttatea: 1&1 

fae + Geismar Vy A: | 

GOAT ASL AUTAUTTETA STATIN & I 

Tae arftar afeedar weno fee en 

ABTA TAS HHT AATTAT: 1119 1 

PRAAAST TET WATT ATA: | 

T Ud Wald Wat WUT FET CI 

SY UT Asa Aa STAT: | 

ered Farad ahr ae et 

waife wey geri aaravafers Aan 

STUATTA SAR AA SUAATAN 2o ll 

de a apiear: chfaq yea & a aaa: 

rat CATTANTT AAT Waeaay SeT:11 221 

serge yey yaad: a at fat 

Sela Aferat we caarmiararn 22 

TANS AY WAT Get: HAT Tear 

Ga Tet Met T FAST: WATT L3H 

The vile and contemptible denizens of 

heaven are assiduously plotting against my 
life, for they dread my prowess : but, heroes, I 
hold them of no account. What can the 
impotent Indra or the ascetic Hara, perform? 
or what can Hari accomplish, except the 
murder of his foes by fraud? What have we to 
fear from the Adityas, the Vasus, the Agnis or 
any others of the immortals, who have all been 


vanquished by my resistless arms? Have I not 
seen the king of the gods, when he had 


424 


ventured into the conflict, quickly retreat from 
the field, receiving my shafts upon his back, 
not bravely upon his breast ? When in 
resentment he withheld the fertilising showers 
from my kingdom, did not my arrows compel 
the clouds to part with their waters, as much as 
were required? Are not all the monarchs of the 
earth in terror of my prowess and subject to 
my orders, save only Jarasandha my sire?’ 
Now, chiefs of the Daitya race, it is my 
determination to inflict still deeper 
degradation upon these evil-ininded and 
unprincipled gods. Let therefore every man 
who is notorious for liberality (in gifts to gods 
and Brahmanas), every man who is remarkable 
for his celebration of sacrifices, be put to 
death, that thus the gods shall be deprived of 
the means by which they subsist. Thc goddess 
who has been born as the infant child of 
Devaki has announced to me that he is again 
alive who in a former being was my death. Let 
therefore active search be made for whatever 
young children there may be upon earth and 
let every boy in whom there are signs of 
unusual vigour be slain without remorse.” 


UU Jara 
SOMATA HA: WAIMIAYS Ad: 
Wate ageas cans fartaa: evn 


Having issued these commands, Karhsa 
retired into his palace and liberated Vasudeva 
and Devaki from their captivity. 


Ha Sara 

gaara wat qlee weer 

STI WH AST STA WT ARITA 11 24 Ht 

vest Ufa at aarfeat fF a 

anlar qaaretarargay afgarfarat: 11 6 

saree faqern ow dared ufteise: 

save fare wade TA: TSAI V1 

She sttferayy erat WET age: SEAT: At 
‘“Tt is in vain,’’ said he to them, ‘‘that I 

have slain all your children, since after all he 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


who is destined to kill me has escaped. It is of 
no use to regret the past. The children you may 
hereafter have may enjoy life unto its natural 
close; no one shall cut it short." Having thus 
conciliated them, Karnsa, alarmed for himself, 
withdrew into the interior apartments of his 
palace. 


NOTES 
1. Jarasandha, prince of Magadha, was the 


father-in-law of Karnsa. 
KREK 


424 THE VISNU-PURANAM 


CHAPTER 5 
Uaniseaya: 
(QaATae: ) 


GUT Satay 


faq Tyealsea FART eRe Wa: 

Wes swary Te yar oral wAfs An gi 
ageastt t we fase feeata aracy 
STAs VYAAAAASA TAFATI 2 It 
oat fe aaa: al wafead: HT 
AeA ATA ABTEAT: 11 3 I 
aedara: are afaers feaarcaat 
vatetaa Te! wast Fore XI 
ante atenera Ufevitraar fe a: 

SB WU waa Bars aaa TG 


When Vasudeva was set at liberty, he went 
to the wagon of Nanda and found Nanda there 
rejoicing that a son was born to him.' Vasu- 
deva spoke to him kindly and congratulated 
him on having a son in his old age. “‘The 
yearly tribute,’ he added, “has been paid to 
the king and men of property should not tarry 
near the court, when the business that brought 
them there has been transacted. Why do you 
delay, now that your affairs are settled? Up, 
Nanda, quickly and set off to your own 
pastures; and let this boy, the son whom 
Rohini has borne me, accompany you and be 
brought up by you as this your own son.”’ 


BOOK V, CHAP. 5 


425 





UUW Satay 


Seer: WaT TGA: 
wenenifadaes: Ht Teal ASAT GI 


Accordingly Nanda and _ the _ other 
cowherds, their goods being placed in their 
wagons and their taxes having been paid to the 
king, returned to their village. 


aaa Mpa dat Yaar aera 

Ge HOTT Wat Tat eat ATI 
Ta Ta eet Yat aaa 

TST TA TOTS TAHA SAAT ¢ 
PUTER: Tt Me HTNVATagt say 
Fares Worsted Wa ArTaArag 8 
ar faqarentiar fatesreargaern 
Uae UAT STAY fereraToTfarstreaTt Ro 
TAA TATA, NASTY TTA: 
SY: WAS Hoot ater Frovfetar Vain 
STaa HOt Waren aera fT: 
MES WT SAAT GARTH 22 
TW: eattaqurera Tasty WaT 
HOTT Weal eat HesAGaTAT 831 


Some time after they were settled at 
Gokula, the female fiend Pitand, the child- 
killer, came thither by night and finding the 
little Krsna asleep, took him up and gave him 
her breast to suck.2 Now whatever child is 
suckled in the night by Pitan4 instantly dies; 
but Krsna, laying hold of the breast with both 
hands, sucked it with such violence, that he 
drained it of the life; and the hideous Pttana, 
roaring aloud and giving way in every joint, 
fell on the ground expiring. The inhabitants of 
Vraja awoke in alarm at the cries of the fiend, 
ran to the spot and beheld Pitana lying on the 
earth and Krsna in her arms. Yasoda snatching 
up Krsna, waved over him a cow-tail brush to 
guard him from harm, whilst Nanda placed 
dried cow-dung powdered upon his head; he 
gave him also an amulet,’ saying at the same 
time, 


TENT Tara 


Wy aaa ya wat Ve: 

TAT ATA SNA SH ATTAM TT VY I 

a cpa anaaadt F717 

AUSSUN] SF: A aT WAT HAT VGH 

Tasaifafhia-aftae: went fay: 

qfawadt waa a wai erg Byars VE 1 

AMAT WY Val Waat A: NUTT! 

fafaoed: HAHRT-ACNaT: WATETAT= 1 VAI 

‘“May Hari, the lord of all beings without 
reserve, protect you; he from the lotus of 
whose navel the world was developed and on 
the tip of whose tusks the globe was upraised 
from the waters. May that Kesava, who 
assumed the form of a boar, protect you. May 
that Kesava, who, as the man-lion, rent with 
his sharp nails the bosom of his foe, ever 
protect you. May that Kesava, who, appearing 
first as the dwarf, suddenly traversed in all his 
might, with three paces, the three regions of 
the universe, constantly defend you. 


fore wg Mare: Host we Sya:! 
TOPS AST fawpstyt- Urey WATT: Ve 
UG ag Wag TWA: Vesa a 
WANE ALANIS STT: | 22 1 
WSG-TH-Ml-USN Vga: aay 
TIY WA-HANVS-TAAT AY TATSAT | Vol 
rat ug fey ager fafey Hgyer: 
CHHMSTAL A WIG aT ABIIT=11 2 VI 
Ud FRAY TMNT GT: | 
BURA: MHS AAT ATTA 3 NN 
af BW Wes SHAT UAT: HEATH 
FAA: TT ATS Fa UT AA V3 
sia sifearayy ery wSrATSt USA: SEAT: II 


May Govinda guard your head; Kesava 
your neck; Visnu your belly; Janarddana your 
legs and feet; the eternal and irresistible 
Narayana your face, your arms, your mind and 
faculties of sense. May all ghosts, goblins and 


426 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





spirits malignant and unfriendly, ever fly you, 
appalled by the bow, the discus, mace and 
sword of Visnu and the echo of his shell. May 
Vaikuntha guard you in the cardinal points; 
and in the intermediate ones, Madhusidana. 
May RsikeSa defend you in the sky and 
Mahidhara upon earth.’? Having pronounced 
this prayer to avert all evil, Nanda put the 
child to sleep in his bed underneath the 
waggon. Beholding the vase carcass of Pitand, 
the cowherds were filled with astonishment 
and terror. 


NOTES 


1. It is literally ‘went to the cart’ or ‘waggon ;’ 
FoI Wee Na: as if Nanda and his family dwelt in 
such a vehicle, as the Scythians are said to have 
done. The commentator explains Sakata (x2) the 
place of loosmg or unharnessing the waggon; 
weeranraAesH | In the Bhagavata, Vasudeva does not 
quit Mathura, but goes to the halting ground of 
Nanda, who has come to that city to pay his taxes : 
aa acaarad! explained by the comment, a aren | 

2. In the Hari Varhsa this female fiend is 
described as coming in the shape of a bird. 

3. The Raksa, the preserver or preservative 
against charms, is a piece of thread or silk or some 
more costly material, bound round the wrist or arm, 
with an appropriate prayer such as that in the text. 
Besides its application to children, to avert the 
effects of evil eyes or to protect them against Dains 
or witches, there is one day in the year, the Rakhi 
Pirnima or full moon in the month of Sravana 
(July-August), when it is bound upon the wrists of 
adults by friendly or kindred Brahmanas, with a 
short prayer or benediction. The Rakhi is also sent 
sometimes by persons of distinction and especially 
by females, to members of a different family or 
even race and nation, to intimate a sort of brotherly 
or sisterly adoption. Tod’s Rajasthan, I. 312. 

kkk 


426 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





CHAPTER 6 
Weare: 
(WHEAT, Aeaea-POTaAaH Ts) 


WUT FATT 
HATHA ATA: | 
faara aUoTagd erat wet! BN Vi 
TA UEMETUT Pree UAT 
fared & fart wart TN zn 
aal Beta Wal Arad fen 


SVT SEN MASAMI aT 3 1 

TW: sad had Pend ufvakiaq 

aad Taga WATT YN 

eam qerenie: wefaauatsry 

yreeé Uftad a Facer afer G i 

aa: Waray Tar farerererre: 

TEMS wae aTeTaAaarerg: ng 

AMS MHTESAMAATTS HUTT: | 

Were URaTaTa Sfa-Yer- THETA: 1119 

On one occasion, whilst Madhusidana was 
asleep underneath the waggon, he cried for the 
breast and kicking up his feet he overturned 
the vehicle and all the pots and pans were 
upset and broken. The cowherds and their 
wives, hearing the noise, came exclaiming, 
‘‘Ah ! ah !”’ and there they found the child 
sleeping on his back. ‘‘Who could have upset 
the waggon ?’’ said the cowherds. ‘‘This 
child,” replied some boys, who witnessed the 
circumstance; “‘we saw him,’’ said they, 
‘‘erying and kicking the waggon with his feet 
and so it was overturned: no one else had any 
thing to do with it.”’ The cowherds were 
exceedingly astonished at this account; and 
Nanda, not knowing what to think, took up the 
boy; whilst YaSoda offered worship to the 
broken pieces of pots and to the waggon, with 
curds, flowers, fruit and unbruised grain. 


BOOK V, CHAP. 6 


427 





Mel Werner a aqeamonfad: | 

WHA US WOM CAH TATA SI 
RES TAS HUSA TATTT! 

Tt Ufa NST Ar Hay WEMaAA 1 8 
Taera fe ares fefguit at wat aah 
yeaa at fe ayagenrafan go 
HUTTE SY MTU eTT | 

a Prantag sae ayer a a Ufeitn gen 
Maren HSA aaerdt FA: 
ASSAM THOTT TT 82 


The initiatory rites requisite for the two 
boys were performed by Garga, who was sent 
to Gokula by Vasudeva for that purpose : he 
celebrated them without the knowledge of the 
cowherds;' and the wise sage, eminent 
amongst the wise, named the elder of them 
Rama and the other Krsna. In a short time they 
began to crawl about the ground, supporting 
themselves on their hands and knees and 
creeping everywhere, often amidst ashes and 
filth. Neither Rohini not Yasoda was able to 
prevent them from getting into the cowpens or 
amongst the calves, where they amused 
themselves by pulling their tails. 


UeT UMay at aera aaa 
Vos At arhag wrSaratererseitn 3 
UMA BAe HUTA A ATI 
HOT BAATTAAT AMARTH BAT TMT Ww 
aT Taga Tay wea Praear Sq_we 
POH THATATS AAMATAT BG 


As they disregarded the prohibitions of 
YaSod4 and rambled about together constantly, 
She became angry and taking up a stick, 
followed them and threatened the dark- 
complexioned Krsna with a _ whipping. 
Fastening a cord round his waist, she tied him 
to the wooden mortar,’ and being in a great 
passion, she said to him, 


ate sen wes aftrasereea 
SAAT UT Pt HT A Tene Herat Ve I 


ATA AT A HVAT SaaS! 
SAAT WATT HAT: 1 V9 
ada garam freriraygaery! 
UANGUS RG FA at BATMAN Ve 11 


“‘Now, you naughty boy, get away from 
hence if you can,’’ She then went about her 
domestic affairs. As soon as she had departed, 
the lotus-eycd Krsna, endeavouring to 
extricate himself, pulled the mortar after him 
to the space between two Arjuna trees that 
grew near together : having dragged the 
mortar between these trees, it became wedged 
aviary there and as Krsna pulled it through, it 
pulled down the trunks of the trees. 


Wa: HEH WAH UT BAT! 
ARTI TATA TET DW ASAT 28 
Wea Fafa wera wean 
FATA - FATT ATTA 2 0 1 
Ta TE STEM WS Tatayh 

TAT SANSA W Mal STARA 2 2 
Magee: Be TATA: | 
TAMA ASAT Maver asa: 1 2 2H 


Hearing the crackling noise, the people of 
Vraja came to see what was the matter and 
there they beheld the two large trees, with 
shattered stems and broken branches, prostrate 
on the ground, with the child fixed between 
them, with a rope round his belly, laughing 
and showing his white little teeth, just budded. 
It is hence that Krsna is called Damodara, 
from the binding of the rope (dima) round his 
belly (udara).’ The elders of the cowherds, 
with Nanda at their head, looked upon these 
circumstances with alarm, considering them as 
of evil omen. 


IMA 7A: Hl Wes szATeTAaAA 
SUT AEA GA FRAT AGATA 1 23M 
Uren ferries wreneer fareta: | 

fart aranfg-areot gaat: Ua AAT VII 
PaaAT: WAT TATE Tey AT Feary 


428 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





ARIAS SST AAAS FAT 24 I 


‘*‘We cannot remain in this place," said 
they; “‘let us go to some other part of the 
forest; for here many evil signs threaten us 
with destruction; the death of Pitana, the up- 
setting of the waggon and the fall of the trees 
without their being blown down by the wind. 
Let us depart hence without delay and go to 
Vrindavan, where terrestrial prodigies may no 
more disturb us." 


ofa aren afa ad way a ase: 

wy: GW @ Ft We Tat ow 
faeTeTATN 2 & Il 

aa: AO WAY: Peete 

FIM AAT BTA THAT VU 


seared AOA AL AAMT 
S-H- AA SATA FEA 2 eH 
Peat Maa HoOrafpyaayon 

AT Ara ear Tat sfegAeiteran 28 
acrerariaearste ercfanet facia 
Wqeaiel Saad Aa Wel WARATI 3 oN 
a water: dat Get Feat ad: 
PRAT Se aT ATS HTC: 113 UI 


Having thus resolved, the inhabitants of 
Vraja communicated their intention to their 
families and desired them to move without 
delay. Accordingly they set off with their 
waggons and their cattle, driving before them 
their bulls and cows and calves; the fragments 
of their household stores they threw away and 
in an instant Vraja was over-spread with 
flights of crows. Vrindavan was chosen by Krs 
na, whom acts do not affect, for the sake of 
providing for the nourishment of the kine; for 
there in the hottest season the new grass 
springs up as verdantly as in the rains. Having 
repaired, then, from Vraja to Vrindavan, the 
inhabitants of the former drew up their wagons 
in the form of a crescent.“ 


aca a Madt Wa-amed aa: 
Theat MB-Aegalereheat! 3 VI 


aferagaiist aageadeaal 

MTA HATA ET- TAA 3 3 I 
THUAN Ae HATTA rere 

eat a Tat wT Age Teac 3 v1 
asad BSAA TAT: | 
TIGA: WH aeaAMaRN freee: 34! 
Ie WIA Tt J AAAs ASAT 

WAT WT: Ure AaTaTe AIAG: 113 & 1 


As the two boys, Rama and Damodara, 
grew up, they were ever together in the same 
place and engaged in the same boyish sports. 
They made themselves crests of the peacocks’ 
plumes and garlands of forest flowers and 
musical instruments of leaves and reeds or 
played upon the pipes used by the cowherds; 
their hair was trimmed like the wings of the 
crow,”’ and they resembled two young princes, 
portions of the deity of war : they were robust 
and they roamed about, always laughing and 
playing, sometimes with each other, 
sometimes with other boys; driving along with 
the young cowherds the calves to pasture. 
Thus the two guardians of the world were 
keepers of cattle, until they had attained seven 
years of age, in the cow-pens of Vrindavana. 


MICHA RASA HLA TATA: | 
aya athanittad Haq feetran 3 911 
VESTA AME PTAA WET 

TAT AHA AA TAT ATTATI 3 oI 
wea HM aA: . 
waite efettami wer sent aarfivan 3 ¢11 
7 Rswitersd frotet afer: 
UsleMaret Wate wrenfataritafir: 1x o 1 
Prone ats yeReT TT TAT 
sarelnfadaey yea afer x vl 
Ray qeramt wast farer aft: 

SqGe FWUS Heiaaayiewa4n ¥ 2 

q aan Bef fageraragen 

tala wat ofe gata watftat v3 


BOOK V, CHAP. 6 


AM AYA AAMT: | 
SURAT: WAST: IY UI 


Then came on the season of the rains, when 
the atmosphere laboured with accumulated 
clouds and the quarters of the horizon were 
blended into one by the driving showers. The 
waters of the rivers rose and overflowed their 
banks and spread beyond all bounds, like the 
minds of the weak and wicked transported 
beyond restraint by sudden prosperity. The 
pure radiance of the moon was obscured by 
heavy vapouts, as the lessons of holy writ are 
darkened by the arrogant scoffs of fools (and 
unbelievers). The bow of Indra held its place 
in the heavens all unstrung, like a worthless 
man elevated by an injudicious prince to 
honour. The white line of storks appeared 
upon the back of the cloud, in such contrast as 
the bright conduct of a man of respectability 
opposes to the behaviour of a scoundrel. The 
ever-fitful lightning, in its new alliance with 
the sky, was like the friendship of a profligate 
for a man of worth. Overgrown by the 
spreading grain, the paths were indistinctly 
traced, like the speech of the ignorant, that 
conveys no positive meaning. 


Sriinfeans afeay aret Wea 
PO-W- Yet Feat MATA: AU I 
aafag wht: at cet TegeaaTgs 

wy: Fafaae vitrgartenseat Ye I 
qafaq nemaa-faat ware Fahad 
fafast aafaeraat fafaatifergh: i voi 
qisary Waal cafatagatfauin 
qarag Teifa Vitgd srerenreTareRt ¥ <I 
WRAAATNGT weraTaTa safer 
WERT TAa MAO TAT TAH ¥ 8 I 


At this time Krsna and Rama, accompanied 
by the cow-boys, traversed the forests, that 
echoed with the hum of bees and the pea- 
cock’s cry. Sometimes they sang in chorus or 
danced together; sometimes they sought 
shelter from the cold beneath the trees; 


429 


sometimes they decorated themselves with 
flowery garlands, sometimes with peacocks’ 
feathers; sometimes they stained themselves of 
various hues with the minerals of the 
mountain; sometimes weary they reposed on 
beds of leaves and sometimes they excited 
their juvenile associates to sing and sometimes 
they mimicked the cry of the peacock with 
their pipes. 

sta arifaduladeanthrdaal 

MSTA ST Ae AT: MT ATTATI & 0 I 

fare yaa Meringanradh 

SAAT: POTS MTTAMATT A & Il 

facet FAINT TAIT AeTareHt 

THY: Wart: leat famterswafaan & 2 


In this manner participating in various 
feelings and emotions and _ affectionately 
attached to each other, they wandered, 
sporting and happy, through the wood. At 
evening tide came Krsna and Balarama, like 
two cow-boys, along with the cows and the 
cowhcrds. At evening tide the two immortals, 
having come to the cow-pens, joined heartily 
in Whatever sports amused the sons of the 
herdsmen. 


NOTES 


1. The Bhagavata describes Garga’s interview 
with Nanda and the inducements of the latter to 
keep the former’s celebration of the Sanskaras or 
initiatory rites of the two boys, secret from the 
Gopas. Garga there describes himself as the 
Purohita or family priest, of the Yadavas. 

2. The Ulikhala or mortar is a large wooden 
bow! on a solid stand of timber, both cut out of one 
piece; the pestle is also of wood; and they are used 
chiefly for bruising or threshing unwinnowed corn 
and separating the chaff from the grain. As 
important agents in household economy, they are 
regarded as sacred, and cven hymncd in the Vedas. 

3. Our text. and that of the Hari Varhsa, take no 
notice of the legend of Nalakubera and Manigriva, 
sons of Kubera, who, according to the Bhagavata, 
had been metamorphosed, through a curse of 
Narada, into these two trees and for whose 
liberation this feat of Krsna was intended. 


430 


4. The Hari Varhsa, not satisfied with the 
prodigies which had alarmed the cowherds, adds 
another, not found, it is believed, anywhere else. 
The emigration, according to that work, originates, 
not with the Gopas, but the two boys, who wish to 
go to Vrindavan and in order to compel the 
removal, Krsna converts the hairs of his body into 
hundreds of wolves, who so harass and alarm the 
inhabitants of Vraja. that they determine to 
abandon their homes. 

5. The Kaka-paksa. or crow’s wing, implies the 
hair left on each side of the head, the top being 
shaved. 

eek 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


430 
CHAPTER 7 
TAAISeaTA: 
(aalferaa aay) 
WT SATA 
Ueber g far wd GoM Feat aah 


faerant gat MU URATTaT: 11 8 

a ag aferedt aletamternferiy 
Srederttearhta Wa: 118 

Tea afarenia fantasartorg 

ae wiferaanrer cevisdta weer 31 
feat feratat Sear 
ATTRA A PAA T- AUST AA ¥ I 
aaa HEN Beyaparraraey 

facia Farararea STE ATG I 
ateay oats eerear arferatsat faerser: | 
at war Ftaweraa eet ae: ware § 1 
aa afaar Wat aya Ure Ten 

aq ihttertatte qemdtergTaa ot 

AR ATT GN et wa 
Parag o@ aa ata ci 
Uded Fons raaant Wat Ha: 
AAU HEAT IPAS TIAN 8 tt 
aest afagral aerayeehaTy 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


sfeearataenta Bes tera: 1 Yo 


One day Krsna, unaccompanied by Rama, 
went to Vrndavan : he was attended by a troop 
of cowherds and gaily decorated with wild 
flowers. On his way he came to the Yamuna, 
which was flowing in sportive undulations and 
sparkling with foam, as if with smiles, as the 
waves dashed against the borders. Within its 
bed, however, was the fearful pool of the 
serpent Kaliya, boiling with the fires of 
poison;' from the fumes of which, large trees 
upon the bank were blighted and by whose 
waters, when raised by a gale into the air, 
birds were scorched. Beholding tills dreadful 
lake, which was like another mouth of death, 
Madhusidana reflected that the wicked and 
poisonous K4aliya, who had been vanquished 
by himself (in the person of Garuda) and had 
been obliged to fly from the ocean (where he 
had inhabited the island Ramanaka), must be 
lurking at its bottom and defiling the Yamuna, 
the consort of the sea, so that neither men nor 
cattle could slake their thirst by her waters. 
Such being the case, he determined to dislodge 
the Naga and enable the dwellcrs of Vraja to 
frequent the vicinage without fear; for it was 
the especial purpose he considered of his 
descent upon earth to reduce to subjection all 
such violators of law. ‘‘Here’’ thought he, ‘‘is 
a Kadamba tree, which is sufficiently near; I 
can climb up it and thence leap into thc 
serpcnt’s pool.’’ 


TUT Savy 
3a fafara Taga a MS UH Aa: 
fraud ee da Autres Aha Ve 
aaa Waar ax ara: @ wersa: 
Bead Tia TAPAS SST VU 
a fe epfansarenaargueter: | 
HVAT: WET: WAN TATA TAT 83 1 
STORET Tel HOT AMTSS AAA 


TILTON AAS TIA TAA 8S 
AMTGAaA SB- fava : | 


BOOK V, CHAP. 7 


431 





Bar Hea AST ACTS 24 
ATA MARY ASTANA: | 


WATT ITA TAA HUSHDITT: 11 25 I 

ad: yatua: ad: a ot ANT: | 

aeyent at Hoot farsarenfachyp|S:11 Vou 

a aa Ultd Guat aaMaaifSa 

THAT SATUNTT THY: MATA LCI 

Wa We Wa: HOT wt af arferagel 

WEAN MUTA Aer WAT 22 I 

Having thus resolved, he bound his clothes 
tightly about him and jumped boldly into the 
lake of the serpent-king. The waters, agitated 
by his plunge amidst them, were scattered to a 
considerable distance from the bank and the 
spray falling upon the trees, they were 
immediately set on fire by the heat of the 
poisonous vapour combined with the water; 
and the whole horizon was in a blaze. Krsna, 
having dived into the pool, struck his arms in 
defiance’ and the snake-king, hearing the 
sound, quickly came forth: his eyes were 
coppery red and his hoods were flaming with 
deadly venom : he was attended by many other 
powerful and poisonous snakes, feeders upon 
air and by hundreds of serpent-nymphs, de- 
corated with rich jewels, whose earrings 
glittered with trembling radiance as the 
wearers’ moved along. Coiling themselves 
around Krsna, they all bit him with teeth from 
which fiery poison was emitted. Krsna’s 
companions, beholding him in the lake, 
encompassed by the snakes, twining around 
him, ran off to Vraja, lamenting and bewailing 
aloud his fate. “‘Krsna,’’ they called out, “‘has 
foolishly plunged into the’serpent’s pool and 1s 
there bitten to death by the snake-king! Come 
and see.”’ 


TAHA TF AST MTT AAUTATTA eT: | 
THER ALA APAPNAATT FEA oll 
a at earafate sat aratarafa ager: 
AMA HMMA Ft Westerns Tar 2 gi 
TeTUy May TAT gaa: | 


aed ATA AY: FONTS: 11 2 ZI 

The cowherds and their wives and Yasoda, 
hearing this news, which was like a 
thunderbolt, ran immediately to the pool, 
frightened out of their senses and crying, 
**Alas ! alas ! where is he ?’? The Gopis were 
retarded by Yasoda, who in her agitation 
stumbled and slipped at every step; but Nanda 
and the cowherds and the invincible Rama 
hastened to the banks of the Yamuna, eager to 
assist Krsna. 


Seas I aa BUTT AAT 
frommind aor wr afer 231 
Tana Fayer =e yaya evil 
AMAT I AEMANT GI ATA 2 Vil 


here they beheld him apparently in the 
power of the serpent-king, encompassed by 
twining snakes and making no effort to escape. 
Nanda, as soon as he set his eyes upon his son, 
became senseless; and Yasoda also, when she 
beheld him, lost all consciousness. 


TARA GEXA SEY: VHA: | 

Wreaey thera Wier waenrrelreeT Bu I 
Wal apiean arg fagratsa verse 
ARTIST AT UAT BTS TSA PEI 
feaa: at fart wed faa aur at rem 
faat gauur ar mat faa Ho al GAs VOI 
faataal 7 aa: POAT Wa 
aos aT Bey at Bat AT: Ve 
aa Adlerian Bit: 

carte aigatas terete fer: 28H 
SUHH-Wga-TAAB- alae 
aTayaa eft Sat: set MS wfaeae 3 ot 
APTA TAT: 

4 fat yustiarel Area PATHETTN 3 VI 
MATa aT MII APTA 
feaasnit Gia rer: Fuorearanfeciaa 3 VI 


The Gopis, overcome with sorrow, wep: 
and called affectionately and with convulsive 


432 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





sobs, upon KeSava. ‘“‘Let us all,’’ said they, 
“plunge with Yasod4 into the fearful pool of 
the serpent-king. We cannot return to Vraja; 
for what is day, without the sun? What nigat, 
without the moon? What is a herd of heifers, 
without its lord? What is Vraja, without Krs 
na? Deprived of him, we will go no more to 
Gokula. The forest will lose its delights; it will 
be like a lake without water. When this dark 
lotus leaf complexioned Hari is not present, 
there is no joy in the maternal dwelling. How 
strange is this ! And as for you, you cowherds, 
how, poor beings, will you live amidst the 
pastures, when you no longer behold the 
brilliant lotus eyes of Hari? Our hearts have 
been wield away by the music of his voice. 
We will not go without Pundarikaksa to the 
folds of Nanda. Even now, though held in the 
coils of the serpent-king, see, friends, how his 
face brightens with smiles as we gaze upon 
him.” 
QUIS Sara 

sfa wrdtera: syear tifzuray weract: 

maa aTafagary facies Teattrcerat: 113 31 

wes ered =raefs gare 

THA AMC HOTTA TAT 3 Xt 

fafad tacae! waisd aren 

aaserdaen fared a atest T3401 

AT ATA ATT TATOTTAAT AT: | 

Hated Wat a Acted aS TATE EI 

As- Bal- fora-aghraferntiecr ahr: 

fare wanferner! areata afr: 1300 

wea Saar! aT aaa 

ARTS UAT TATPATSAAT: 3 cit 

AAaetea WTA! ASAT WAT Ts 

fase Wa Wa AAA 3 81 

AAA Va Ved THeSA AUST: | 

AIST: WATS USHA PTA: | ¥ OM 

saradiet F Hort! oT wa fe araar: 1 


Wey Gad: HA SA AP] WAV ¥ 2 


afgtar arqar wrat aight areraraerz 

AST STAM FOOT! FUCA SATA VU 

When the mighty son of Rohini, Balarama 
heard these exclamations of the Gopis and 
with disdainful glance beheld the cowherds 
overcome with terror, Nanda gazing fixedly 
upon the countenance of his son and Yasoda 
unconscious, he spoke to Krsna in his own 
character: ‘‘What is this, O god of gods ! the 
quality of mortal is sufficiently assumed; do 
you not know yourself eternal? You are the 
centre of creation, as the nave is of the spokes 
of a wheel. A portion of you have I also been 
born, as your senior. The gods, to partake of 
your pastimes as man, have all descended 
under a like disguise; and the goddesses have 
come down to Gokula to join in your spores. 
You, eternal, have last of all appeared below. 
Wherefore, Krsna, do you disregard these 
divinities, who, as cowherds, are your friends 
and kin? These sorrowing females, who also 
are your relations? You have put on the 
character of man; you have exhibited the tricks 
of childhood: now let this fierce snake, though 
armed with venomed tangs, be subdued, (by 
your celestial vigour).” 


WUT Sava 
ofa dana: gen: feaahraeage: 
STARS AAT Taes APTERPATN Y 3 
STH UT FRANANNAT AAMT HUTA 
STINT: WTA ea: YY 
TM: WUSHAET HoTeMarpst: | 
AAAS Hed TATA at: ATAU I 
Teaiqaral wra ant: Hort Tad: 
RUSUAAaAT Aa SAL ABs & 
afahiaferetanrena: Beefy 
farted YU STRATA AST Vol 


Thus reminded of his real character by 
Rama, Krsna smiled gently and speedily 
extricated himself froin the coils of the snakes. 
Laying hold of the middle hood of their chief 


BOOK V, CHAP. 7 


with both his hands, he bent it down and set 
his foot upon the hitherto undended head and 
danced upon it in trrumph. Wherever the snake 
attempted to raise his head, it was again 
trodden down and many bruises were inflicted 
on the hood by the pressure of the toes of Krs 
na. Trampled upon by the feet of Krsna, as 
they changed position in the dance, the snake 
fainted and vomited forth much _ blood’. 
Beholding the head and neck of their lord thus 
injured and the blood flowing from his mouth, 
the females of the snake-king implored the 
clemency of Madhusidana. 


ATTRA He: 


aratsfa cada! aay 

Ut Safaaferat Verse: TTY CH 

qT Waa: WAI: We WT WA 

aera cea Her aha Afar we it 

TeMaer wel-aag-aents- waaay 

TRISHA G- TNT F FATTY 0 I 

aaa 7 faghtet acaet fe atta: 

UUTATONET ICM CT AAT: TT TTY VM 

4 US SAM aa Ua ARTA Ua: 

feafaerat + araishet wer wet TT: AUNTY VM 

alg: tacuiste & afta fafaarerta a1 

BUT AULA SAA TARTAN 3H 

feratsyaaa: UAT Wet AAT Sata: 

AAAS GAT AAA MAA ATU VI 

‘“You are recognised, O god of gods !”’ 

they exclaimed; “‘you are the sovereign of all; 
you are light supreme, inscrutabic; you arc the 
mighty lord, the portion of that supreme light. 
The gods themselves are unable worthily to 
praise you, the lord self-existence; how then 
shall females proclaim your nature ? How 
shall we fully declare him of whom the egg of 
Brahma, made up of earth, sky, water, fire and 
air, is -but a small portion of a part? Holy sages 
have in vain sought to know your eternal 


essence. We bow to that form which is the 
most subtle of atoms, the largest of the large; 


433 


to him whose birth is without a creator, whose 
end knows no destroyer and who alone is the 
cause of duration. There is no wrath in you; 
for your is the protection of the world; and 
hence this chastisement of Kaliya. Yet hear us. 
Women are to be regarded with pity by the 
virtuous: animals are humanely treated even 
by fools. Let therefore the author of wisdom 
have compassion upon this poor creature. 


AA-MIENT Tae: TUT 

rae Y Use VME MAT STAT G & I 
aq TaTseusealsa Fa Tar TAA: | 
Wifa-Bet GracHe-Aret HW AAISSTT WG & UI 
ad: He Wea! wareraatad: | 
WOT ATTISS WPA AAT WELT G9 


Yourself, as an oviparous, hooded snake, 
are the upholder of the world. Oppressed by 
you, he will speedily perish. What 1s this 
feeble serpent, compared to you in whom the 
universe reposes ? Friendship and enmity are 
felt towards equals and superiors, not for those 
infinitely bencath us. Then, sovereign of the 
world, have mercy upon us. This unfortunate 
snake is about to expire : give us, as a gift of 
charity, our husband.” 


WUT SaTT 

Seah aa HrAaersiT TAT: | 

Wate eaeahes we aad : PANG 

alerts Sarg 

aad ae! cannfadh Ter 

Preentarrd ae wee Bente Paras 4 8H 

wa Ue UATE: UT a: WIA: | 

WE WaT URS aa: TAT fas ARAN oN 

TENS Tal U tas TEAS HAN 

quay Ueledera wreate fae eqs 2H 
iat wetaefiast ara 

SOOATATEAG F KAN set STNG Vl 

TSAR ART TANTS 

Toned a aaa ae areata fea cae G 31! 


434 


cares fester years: | 
Tenfeayagd: sweastat at set WaT & vil 
ARTAATTRUTGT SATA: Wavelet 

a aft ocd Ba aise aT ae WAM GI 
fara: wore valent a atin: 
Sadat AKA Aisa At Bet WAN g Gl 
Ble AEA AT eaArelfet ATA: | 
Magee At! Aswad at wet WAT Gott 


When they had thus spoken, the Naga 
himself, almost examinate, repeated feebly 
their solicitations for mercy. ‘‘Forgive me,” he 
murmured. “‘O god of gods! How shall 1 
address you, who are possesscd, through your 
own strength and essence, of the eight great 
facultics, in energy unequalled? You are the 
supreme, the progenitor of the supreme 
(Brahma) : you are the supreme spirit and 
from you the supreme procecds : you are 
beyond all finite objects; how can I speak your 
praise? How can J] declare his greatness, from 
whom come Brahma, Rudra, Candra, Indra, 
the Maruts, the Asvins, the Vasus and Adityas; 
of whom the whole world is an infinitely small 
portion, a portion destined to represent his 
cssence; and whose nature, primitive or 
derived, Brahma and the immortals do not 
comprehend? How can I approach him, to 
whom the gods offer incense and flowers 
culled from the groves of Nandana; whose 
incarnatc forms the king of the deities ever 
adores unconscious of his real person; whom 
the sages, that have withdrawn their senses 
from all external objects, worship in thought 
and enshrining his image in the purposes of 
their hearts, present to it the flowers of 
sanctity?” 


Ass F Fade! ARArai eqat 7 a 
area HUTa-walafa: wate Aug cil 
aaah ser wea rdisher Aya 
AAAS TAT ATTEN ETAT & At 
Bd Waa Us aa UEAt TNL 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


Sfa-SU- AMT FRA STAT AAT 9 of 
AME AAA BRI sea BIT Vac 

MAA U MAMAS UPA WAN 9 ei 
Tea Wadd eaca! wat vfs 

area eusfrart a dda Get a9 V1 
aae aaa cus uiddary Arai 

UW Weiss At Gusta! AA WAT 9 3 
eadteat gafaat aftatsé craregan 

Wifad damage auf faq xn 


I am quite unable, O god of gods, to 
worship or to hymn you. Your own clemency 
must alone influence your mind to show me 
compassion. It is the nature of snakes to be 
savage and I am born of their kind : hence this 
is my nature, not minc offence. The world is 
created, as it is dcstroyed, by you; and the 
species, form and nature of all things in the 
world are your work. Evcn such as you have 
crcated me in kind, in form and in nature, such 
I am. and such are my actions : should I act 
differently, then indeed should I deserve your 
punishment, for so you have declared’. Yet 
that I have been punished by you is indeed a 
blessing; for punishment from you alone is a 
favour. Behold I am now without strength, 
without poison; deprived of both by you. 
Spare me my life; J] ask no more. Command 
me what I shall do.” 


STAT IATA 

aa We wat ad! Harfre aT 

PIRI AYA SAI & 

aaa aa ad! apart waht art 

TEs: WaT Kay T werweafan OG 

Being thus addressed by Kaliya, Krsna 
replied, ‘“You must not tarry here, nor any 
where in the stream of the Yamund; depart 
immediately, with your family and followers, 
to the sea; where Garuda, the foe of the 


serpent race, will not harm you, when he sees 
the impressions of my feet upon your brow.’’ 


BOOK V, CHAP. g | 435 





CHAPTER 8 


STPAISeaTA: 
(CYRIGTAT:) 
TUT Sara 
TM: Weta @ ya: feat aea-Ayah 
TAA ar ae Tet ATT TAT I 
ay Mead feet eet AA ara: | 
WNATAAASR: AeA TT I 
ad Mead Wear Tara 
Spat Weraay, Way EAST FL Fa 3 
Ua! F HON! Var aaa Wad 
quae Aaa] Vaan aiat J xi 
HET VT ATTA TATA ae T ST 
SIAN: UT ale TTA I 
sft MIMO sear ASUON ae: 
FOBT UTaTATe fea aTeTHeTET a1 & II 


Again, tending upon the herds, KeSava and 
Rama wandered through the woods and on one 
occasion came to a pleasing grove of palms, 
where dwelt the fierce demon Dhenuka, 
feeding upon the flesh of deer. Beholding the 
trees covered with fruit and desirous of 
gathering it, the cowherds called out to the 
brothers and said, ‘‘See, Rama; see, Krsna; in 


436 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





this grove, belonging to the great Dhenuka, the 
trees are loaded with ripe fruit, the smell of 
which perfumes the air : we should like to eat 
some, will you throw some down?’’ As soon 
as the boys had spoken, Sarhkarsana and Krs 
na shook the trees and brought down the fruit 
on the ground. 


WMA Ta WearTHUs T GTA: | 
STAM ASST ANTE SATE: 9! 
USAAUVA A tel VTAVAt act Ary 


Waa WAST Fa aaa eit 
Teka waa Uiseat Taste 
dreaava a fade ate gorsttr en 
Wat: BARA Aenea ST 
Urea WAATATA WeTaMASTaASIAT 1 Qo M1 
sare t MAPA, CeTTEArT 
OTSA ATTY AAAS TNCTATH BAA 
STOTATeeaAe Wea War eter ETM 
drarersear Via! ys rar Vz 
aa Tat Frrararafereterat fet 
Fayre WE Vea HOLL FT eat 
Sta sifaroyy erat waraigy Stea: SteATT At 


Hearing the noise of the falling fruit, the 
fierce and malignant demon Dhenuka, in the 
form of an ass, hastened to the spot in a great 
passion and began to kick Rama on the breast 
with his hinder heels. Rama, however, seized 
him by both hind legs and whirling him round 
until he expired, tossed his carcass to the top 
of a palm tree, from the branches of which it 
struck down abundance of fruit, like rain drops 
poured upon earth by the wind. The animals 
that were of kin to Dhenuka came running to 
his aid; but Krsna and Rama treated them in 
the same manner, until the trees were laden 
with dead asses and the ground was strewed 
with ripe fruit. Henceforward the cattle grazed 
unobstructed in the palm grove and cropped 
the new pasturage, where they had never 
before ventured’. 


NOTES 


1. This exploit is related in the Bhagavata, Hari 
Vaméa and other Vaisnava Puradnas, much in the 
same strain, but not always in the same place : it 
more commonly precedes the legend of the 
discomfiture of Kaliya. 


KEK 


436 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





CHAPTER 9 
TaUISEAMA: 
(WeTaTATaT: ) 

Uy Saray 
afeay Tread ary fafrarfaa 
Vat WANG TMA Tat Areva TST aH 
are Saad y ayeTgagah 
Se ApHas MVS-ASATTAT 2A 
eqeart wired fafa a wear 
ACTA TAT EU ATT TT AT ATTRA 11 3 
Fratrargreaent at ararenfautedt 
Wy Herat aerystfaatatn ¥ 
Fania at rar Vlearawh 
aeayedget sagenfaaraed 4 
wigan: stsatataTy 
ATTA ATTA eat TAT G A 
TST A AEA 
aaTeO TT: RSA TTaATI 9 1 
ad: Calera Frags weracth 
ara wats gover: ci 


When the demon in the form of an ass and 
all his tribe, had been destroyed, the grove of 
palms became the favourite resort of the 
Gopas and their wives and the sons of 
Vasudeva, greatly pleased, repaired to the 
Bhandira fig tree. They continued to wander 
about, shouting and singing and gathering 
fruits and flowers from the trees; now driving 
the cows afar to pasture; now calling them by 
their names; now carrying the foot-ropes of 
the kine upon their shoulder; now ornamenting 


BOOK V, CHAP. 9 


437 





themselves with garlands of forest flowers, 
they looked like two young bulls when the 
horns first appear. Attired the one in yellow 
and the other in sable garments, they looked 
like two clouds, one white and one black, 
surmounted by the bow of Indra. Sporting 
mutually with frolics beneficial to the world, 
they roamed about like two monarchs over all 
the collected sovereigns of the earth. 
Assuming human duties and maintaining the 
human character, they strayed through the 
thickets amusing themselves with sports suited 
to their mortal species and condition, in 
swinging on the boughs of trees or in boxing 
and wrestling and hurling stones. 


TTA EMA TAATUTAT: | 

STAT Mera Trae erie aset: 8 tt 

aisamred Frye WeATATAR: | 

AGT AUT Wea SARA: Il Qo tl 

wavegreat seafarers 

qe dat Uferrs aq aH AAAI ail 

afwormied ame arernteteh AT: | 

wpe fe a wa st st Prageraq eit 

Having observed the two lads thus playing 
about, the Asura Pralamba, seeking to devour 
them, came amongst the cowherd boys in the 
shape of one of themsclves and mixed, without 
being suspected, in their pastimes; for he 
thought, that, thus disguised, it would not be 
difficult to find an opportunity to kill, first Krs 
na and afterwards the son of Rohini. The boys 
commenced playing at the game of leaping 
like deer, two and two together.’ 

sera ae Ward: Weal Aa et: 

TOTALITY MOTT: YATRA: 23 i 

sera ad: HOT: Tera Wieaitga: | 

fader qouraatanitesy wafsrar: 1 wit 

T Aaa MUS HAA SI 

Watagg: Tel Ye Aer Wasa Vu tt 


Govinda was matched with Sridaman and 
Balarama with Pralamba : the other boys were 


coupled with one another and went leaping 
away. Govinda beat his companion and 
Balarama his; and the boys who were on Krs 
na’s side were also victorious. Carrying one 
another, they reached the Bhandira fig; and 
from thence those who were victors were 
conveyed back to the starling-ground by those 
who were vanquished. 


agturg wer yilogferer era: 

T Wet Uae wes sa afta eg tt 

saey Uta YA ear: | 

aga YUH: Weta AHEH: tl Volt 

agaung t EMT qesteieargpheryl 

SATAN FHT THAT VC 

Oe Wace werara-aeraferery 

fara: HI TIAMTATTI 28 tl 

aor! pur! frarae wadrerghrm 

ae Upe SalI WTSI 2 ot 

aeat Ud are War ware 

Ae HATA WAIT STAT SAAT: A VU 

It being Pralamba’s duty to carry Sarhkars 
ana, the latter mounted upon his shoulders, 
like the moon riding above a dark cloud; and 
the demon ran off with him, but did not stop : 
finding himself, however, unable to bear the 
weight of Balarama, he enlarged his bulk and 
looked like a black cloud in the rainy season, 
Balarama beholding him like a_ scorched 
mountain, his head crowned with a diadem 
and his neck hung round with garlands, having 
eyes as large as cart wheels, a fearful form and 
shaking the earth with his tread, called out, as 
he was carried away, to his brother, ‘“Krsna, 
Krsna, I am carried off by some demon, 
disguised as a cowherd and huge as a 


mountain! What shall I do? Tell me, 
Madhusidana : the villain runs away with 
speed!”’ 

WU Savesy 


wae We Mad Paahrrahraye: | 
TET UisrrTer TeaaMATOTAMU 2 Vl 


438 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





fared aqal wal arntaracter 
Paleaq! VATS Tee AAT 2311 


Krsna opened his mouth, smiling, for he 
well knew the might of the son of Rohini and 
replied, ‘‘Why this subtle pretext of merely 
mortal nature? You who are the soul of all the 
most subtle of subtle things. 

CRIA TAA HOTA 
STAN Tee THO AT Aq Vv 

Remember yourself, the radical cause of 
the whole world; born before all cause and all 
that is alone when the world is destroyed. 


fea aia aes wah art ya: 
ATATAAT OTA AANA TTTAT 2 & I 


Do you not know that you and I are alike 
the origin of the world, who have come down 
to lighten its load? 


77: frrastgquat a aft: 
Udl fafideraraate: | 
at ware afat wat 
feprereatsere: !aTeeret 2 & UI 
The heavens are your head; the waters are 
your body; earth is your feet; your mouth is 
eternal fire; the moon is your mind; the wind 


your breath; your arms and hands are the four 
regions cf space. 


ACAAHA WTA TEA 
AERTS MATA: | 
AeAUAN RAAT: 
USANA FAA YOR Vo 


You have, O mighty lord, a thousand 
heads, a thousand hands and feet and bodies; a 
thousand Brahmas spring from you, who are 
before all and whom the sages praise in 
myriads of forms. 

feat fe wu aa aft aret 
SAT VATATAT SATA 
aardaa Aiea a fe aet 


ae fat oreraegare 2 <I 


No one but I know your divine person. 
Your incarnate person is glorified by all the 
gods. Know you not, that, at the end of ail, the 
universe disappears in you? 


wat gaa axon fants arent farang 
Hilfevera! arerawt Foal areraiern 281 


That, upheld by you, this earth sustains 
living and inanimate things? and that, in the 
character of uncreated time, with its divisions 
of ages, developed from an instant, you devour 
the world? 

ord am atedataarg fenced ofa aren 
FEaTAS UGAANSYASAHAMAA YATRA 3 0 
Ua a MeTsTT WET YATeTAyaT 
AAT ANT AYA TTA AAT HOTA 3 2 

As the waters of the sea, when swallowed 
up by submarine name, are recovered by the 
winds and thrown, in the form of snow, upon 
the Himdcala, where coming into contact with 
the rays of the sun, they reassume their watery 
nature’; so the world, being devoured by you 
at the period of dissolution, becomes of 
necessity, at the end of every Kalpa, the world 
again, through your creative efforts. 


wanes fauraaana fe aru 
BAST WIT Yearat aafsrdt 3 2 


a Bera! waren ws eAaA 
ayEMaraeras at feaat ferq 3 31 


You and I, soul of the universe, are but one 
and the same cause of the creation of the earth, 
although, for its protection, we exist in distinct 
individuals. Calling to memory who though 
are, O being of illimitable might, destroy of 
yourself the demon. Suspending awhile your 
mortal character, do what is right.” 


WU SaTT 
sft wentta faa! quart queen 
Faget Werarara wera Acar FT: 11 3 II 
isa areryetet arrdenerer: | 
WT UR wertar afeata facie 3 41 


BOOK V, CHAP. 19 


439 





a Prenfaanteran qaresifornygAt 

faqura Wergs seraal WATT TN a EI 

wera fred qear aeargratom 

WEerequgira: wey Mleahe A_aTN 3 9 It 

aegaart ateg wat set Provera 

Wea Ae HOT Yates 3 cl 

Sta sttgrergurat waraigt wat: STATA: It 

Thus reminded by the magnanimous Krsna, 
the powerful Baladeva laughed and squeezed 
Pralamba with his knees, striking him at the 
same time on the head and face with his fists, 
so as to beat out both his eyes. The demon, 
vomiting blood from his mouth and having his 
brain forced through the skull, fell upon the 
ground and expired. The Gopas, beholding 
Pralamba slain, were astonished and rejoiced 
and cried out, 
Balarama: and thus commended by his play- 
fellows and accompanied by Krsna, Bala, after 
the death of the daitya Pralamba, returned to 
Gokula.’ 


NOTES 


1. Jumping with both feet at once, as deer bound, 
two boys together, the one that holds out longest or 
comes to a given point first, is the victor and the 
vanquished is then bound to carry him to the goal, 
if not already attained and back again to the starting 
post, on his shoulders. The Bhagavata does not 
specify the game, but mentions that the vanquished 
carry the victors on their backs. 

2. This passage is read and explained differently 
in different copies. In some it is, 34 aa 
ASA AA ETET uty ceed fears ayaa 
Waswacaqys yrdai And this is explained, 
astra aearet ofa aa afad singe ferred 
Sead asada qa asa wy Wels 
waaay ad Ty fears vada wa: 11 ‘The water 
of the ocean, devoured by the fire called Vadava, 
becoming condensed or in the form of dew or 
snow, is seized by the wind called Kastaka, from 
which the Vadava fire has departed, consisting of a 
pipe of the solar rays and being placed in the air, 
lies or is on the Himacala’ etc. This is rather an 
awkward and confused representation of the notion 
and the other reading is somewhat preferable : it 


‘‘Well done,’’ and praised . 


consists simply in substituting @Rd for Tazz that is, 
according to the commentary, 34 alsa wre 
ae oa aaa asatrracterrema sed fara 
fad feed otya fer Aq ‘The water devoured by 
the fire is thrown by the wind Ka, made of a solar 
ray etc.; on the Himacala, where it assumes the 
form of snow;’ and so on. However disfigured by 
inaccurate views of some of the instruments in 
operation, the physiology is in the main very 
correct and indicates accurate observation of 
natural phenomena. The waters of the ocean, 
converted into vapour by solar heat, are raised by 
the same influcnce into the air and thence borne by 
the winds to the summits of lofty mountain ranges, 
where they are arrested by a diminished 
temperature, descend in the form of snow and again 
supply the streams that perpetually restore to the 
sea the treasures of which it is as perpetually 
plundered, 

3. According to the Hari VarhsSa the gods 
themselves praised this proof of Rama’s strength 
(bala) and hence he derived the name of Balarama. 

week 


BOOK V, CHAP. 19 439 


CHAPTER 10 


SUIATSeaTa: 
(Sean Masaya wt) 


WW Sara 

aataetarera WA-Heaaaat 

wige sadtat fawadq- Aa UNTIL Vi 

sapere wel: weaeyesl 

Qaeda Wat Tea Tet VII 

TET WirrenRy: UATE SAI 

STAT Ufa Waele ATTA 3 

Par4Sara said— Whilst Kesava and Rama 
were sporting thus in Vraja, the rainy season 
ended and was succeeded by the season of 
autumn, when the lotus is full blown. The 
small Saphari fish, in their watery burrows, 
were oppressed by the heat, like a man by 
selfish desires, who is devoted to his family. 


The peacocks, no longer animated by passion, 
were silent amidst the woods, like holy saints, 


440 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





who have come to know the unreality of the 
world. 


sya Weraadet Fen: Fara: | 
aera ter we fasay ae xii 
Pe Tages ay: vrs Wars al 
aera waa Feat SAT 4 II 
HAA: WSS Braa4eaywit wy: 
SAAHIUAT A ATA TAAT & II 
ater favet aater wratavenuset: | 


asTeeean AAT wyHet FAM 


The clouds, of shining whiteness, 
exhausted of their watery wealth, deserted the 
atmosphere, like those who have acquired 
wisdom and depart from their homes. 
Evaporated by the rays of the autumnal sun, 
the lakes were dried up, like the hearts of men 
when withered by the contact of selfishness 
The pellucid waters of the season were 
suitably embellished by white water-lilies, as 
are the minds of the pure by the apprehension 
of truth. Brightly in the starry sky shone the 
moon with undiminished orb, like the saintly 
being, who has reached the last stage of bodily 
existence in the company of the pious. 


VA: Waa AIT ATTA: | 

ane sagafecqeden Fasc 
yar: BMUswSA Bet WIT: | 

SN: HAAS HATAT ASA SAN SU 
Aydsyacead wag: Patras: 
PATATA- ATA FETT FAT APTI Ro I 
aaatraaet Bens Tanta 

Ma wana fat ware Wear veil 


The rivers and lakes slowly retired from 
their banks, as the wise by degrees shrink from 
the selfish attachment that connects them with 
wife and child. First abandoned by the waters 
of the lake, the swans again began to 
congregate, like false ascetics, whose 
devotions are interrupted and they are again 
assailed by innumerable afflictions. The ocean 
was still and calm and_ exhibited no 
undulations, like the perfect sage, who has 


completed his course of restraint and has 
acquired undisturbed tranquillity of spirit. 
Everywhere the waters were as clear and pure 
as the minds of the wise, who behold Visnu in 
all things. 

aye Fret sat Meet rE TaA 

areas Afra AAT 82 

qaiguird ad fat anrafa: yay 

see Sa fade: greta 93 

TASU Ya: US AE ATT: VAT 

SPRATT: WATE SATETATN VII 

WTA SATNNT: ATAt FaqTa: 

BAAS aaa TTT 1 VG I 

The autumnal sky was wholly free from 
clouds, like the heart of the ascetic, whose 
cares have been consumed by the fire of 
devotion. The moon allayed the fervours of the 
sun, aS discrimination alleviates the pain to 
which egotism gives birth. The clouds of the 
atmosphere, the muddiness of the earth, the 
discoloration or the waters, were all removed 
by autumn, as abstraction detaches the senses 
from the objects of perception. The exercise of 
inspiring, suppressing and expiring the vital 
air, was as if performed daily by the waters of 


the lakes (as they were full and stationary and 
then again declined)’. 


fanaa aret MPAA FTL 

SEM SRST OTA AAT RA TAHA VE Ut 

FORMA GA MIATA 

ATEMaS Ae WS FSM TTA: ON 

alsa PeAtel AMT Aa at Be SMTA: | 

At this season, when the skies were bright 
with stars, Krsna, repairing to Vraja, found all 
the cowherds busily engaged in preparing for a 
sacrifice to be offered to Indra’; and going to 
the elders, he asked them, as it out of curiosity, 
what festival of Indra it was in which they 
took so much pleasure. 


we dt TPenhey aranfraraq wI 
Tai warai ae Saws: Wer: | 
at Walaa ter aera THT Vet 


BOOK V, CHAP. 10 


aadieatid wre aay a ates 
AVATAR ATA SAAT: | 2 oI 
eae Sat Mar arqarasy fran: 

a dated: wed: yoreger wafer a2 2 
area Ago at qyenfedt AT: | 

aad Gt aval SPA Tenses: 1 VW 
ava uray seat mia: weer arte: 
Way: Taeas wars ala Ta 2 3H 
Tea Wate wear: Wa we Yel Ya: 
We: Oey TIA ST AAT VXI 


Nanda replied to his question and said, 
‘‘Satakratu or Indra is the sovereign of the 
clouds and of the waters : sent by him, the 
former bestow moisture upon the earth, 
whence springs the grain, by which we and all 
embodied beings subsist; with which also and 
with water, we please the gods : hence too 
these cows bear calves and yicld milk and are 
happy and well nourished. So when the clouds 
are scen distended with rain, the earth is 
neither barren of corn, nor bare of verdure, nor 
is man distressed by hunger. Indra, the giver of 
water, having drunk the milk of earth by the 
solar ray, sheds it again upon the earth for the 
sustenance of all the world. On this account all 
sovereign princes offer with pleasure 
sacrifices to Indra at the end of rains and so 
also do we and so do other people.” 


WU Sara 
TANT Te Weare THIS 
RTT ENR We STATA V4 II 
4 aa afaaaht arforesittaat 4 a 
Mats Mead at! as TTT BAIN PEM 
salar Fat anal cvSdifarearazn 
famraqea aq arates yopeT A Ve 
piacform aay Fete WYATT 
fae det wert! art sfrraera i 2c 
aan aad: wa faufortifaar 
Te TH: we shrarawetta FA Veit 


44] 


Parasara said— When Krsna heard this 
speech from Nanda in regard to the worship of 
Indra, he determined to put the king of the 
celestials into a passion and replied, ‘‘We, 
father, are neither cultivators of the soil, nor 
dealers in merchandise; we are sojourners in 
forests and cows are our divinities. There are 
four branches of knowledge, logical. 


scriptural, practical and political’. Hear me 


describe what practical science is Agriculture, 
commerce and tending of cattle; the 
knowledge of these three professions 
constitutes practical science. Agriculture is the 
subsistence of farmers; buying and selling, of 
traders. Kine are our support. Thus the 
knowledge of means of support is threefold. 


fae at wat BMRA A tad TENT 

aa wanhia @ da weave 3 ol 
RSA Ge St WIR AT: 

Se U Neredaral ara! area PITTS aN 
ern wire dtr saris yay 

aad fire: aa Fare we AT 3 UH 
Tt grcarecon + yeerreran 

Ofer: weet oes war a amenflor: 3 30 
sera frraginit aashary warerafanr: | 
age WANT Tet TAT UAT 3 vil 

Aat AASUUTAT AAT A BAAN: | 

aar faeteeteary Urata WENT: 1 34 


The object that is cultivated by any one 
should be to him as his chief divinity; that 
should be venerated and worshipped, as it is 
his benefactor. He who worships the deity of 
another and diverts from him the reward that is 
his due, obtains not a prosperous station either 
in this world or in the next. Where the land 
ceases to be cultivated there are bounds 
assigned, beyond which commences the forest; 
the forests are bounded by the hills and so far 
do our limits extend. We are not shut in with 
doors, nor confined within walls; we have 
neither fields nor houses; we wander about 
happily wherever we list, travelling in our 


442 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





waggons.” The spirits of these mountains, it is 
said, walk the woods in whatever forms they 
will or in their proper persons sport upon their 
own precipices. If they should be displeased 
with those who inhabit the forests, then, 
transformed to lions and beasts of prey, they 
will kill the offenders. 


fiftaarad Teng Wage waRtary 
fenrentes WeUT Wa: Vee Fatt 3G 
aaraTgT feat: Wray BAT: | 
faht-nragrgionay aaMigaaEAT: 11 319 1) 

aA Wag: Vet waratafaearett: | 
area Wea Het oy erat fara 1136 
Reel wetet Tela wr feraretarq 
Aiea at a fanart J aryarswTa4: 113 eH 


We then are bound to worship the 
mountains; to offer sacrifices to cattle. What 
have we to do with Indra? Cattle and 
mountains are our gods. Brahmanas offer 
worship with prayer; cultivators of the earth 
adore their landmarks; but we who tend our 
herds in the forests and mountains should 
worship them and our kine. Let prayer and 
offerings then be addressed to the mountains 
Govardhana and kill a victim in due form. Let 
the whole station collect their milk without 
delay and feed with it the Brahmans and all 
who may desire to partake of it. 


and set ert atisrdy fasrfery 
wpa: UT Y ATT: Xo ll 
THAT Ud Wot: Waray Az 
Wa: Heat Wa Mifentaragan AAI y eH 


When the oblations have been presented 
and the Brahmanas have been fed, let the 
Gopas circumambulate the cows, decorated 
with garlands of autumnal flowers. If the 
cowherds will attend to these suggestions, they 
will secure the favour of the mountain, of the 
cattle and also mine. 


Sit ARI Ae: Peal ATA Teil: | 
Wreeparpar fa! ag wleacrargadii y 21 


VN Fad aca! aeaewadtfeaq 

aq aheme ad fattaq: sartarqis 3 

When Nanda and the other Gopas heard 
these words of Krsna, their faces expanded 
with delight and they said that he had spoken 
well. “‘You have judged rightly, child,”’ 
exclaimed they; “‘we will do exactly as you 
have proposed and offer adoration to the 
mountain. ”’ 


UUM Saray 

qa ot Adare faftagt asia: 

afa-urra-aiaraeg: perafet AA evil 

fais ASAT: PARISA WAT: | 

SAAN FTA AIT FTI SG MI 

Ta: Yet Aasmaan: weferory 

MUMEMT AeaT: MAA Weal SAN XE II 

Accordingly the inhabitants of Vraja 
worshipped the mountain, presenting to it 
curds and milk and flesh; and they fed 
hundreds and thousands of Brahmanas and 
many other guests, who came to the ceremony, 
even aS Krsna had enjoined : and when they 
had made their offerings, they 


circumambulated the cows and the bulls, that 
bellowed as loud as roaring clouds. 


fate gens vretsetate gray 

qyasa ag der Neaalled fem vel 

set Het waar MI: as fart: fore: 

otfereeierarayra PAN ATRTT AI ¥ 6 UI 

srg Te afer Arar creat at aH 

fen fifties We Fomerag: FAX ei 

Sfa sitfaogerey agaist aera: sree 

Upon the summit of Govardhana, Krsna 
presented himself, saying, ‘“‘I am_ the 
mountain’’ and partook of much _ food 
presented by the Gopas; whilst in his own 
form as Krsna he ascended the hill along with 
cowherds and worshipped his other self’. 


Having promised them many blessings, the 
mountain-person of Krsna vanished; and the 


BOOK V, CHAP. 1] 


443 





ceremony being completed, the cowherds 
returned to their station. 


NOTES 


1. A set of very poor quibbles upon the terms of 
the Pranayama : or, Purana, drawing in the breath 
through one nostril; literally, ‘filling :’ Kumbhaka, 
closing the nostrils and suppressing the breath; 
keeping it stationary or confined, as it were in a 
Kumbha or water-pot : and Recaka, opening the 
othcr nostril and emitting the breath; literally, 
‘purging’ or ‘depletion.’ The waters of the 
reservoirs replenished in the beginning of the 
autumnal season by the previous rains, remain for a 
while full, until they are drawn off for irrigation or 
reduced by evaporation : thus representing the three 
operations of Purana, Kumbhaka and Recaka. 

2. No public worship is offered to Indra at 
present; and the only festival in the Hindu calendar, 
the Sakradhvajotthana, the erection of a flag in 
honour of Sakra or Indra, should be held on the 
twelfth or thirteenth of Bhadra, which is in the very 
middle of the rainy season; according to the Jithi 
Tatva, following the authority of the Kalika and 
Bhavisyottara Puranas. The Sakradhvajotthana is 
also a rite to be performed by kings and princes. It 
may be doubted, therefore, if the text intends any 
particular or appointed celebration. 

3. Or, Anviksiki (artférat), the science of 
inquiring by reasoning, Tarka (a) or logic : Trayi 
(cH), the three Vedas collectively or the doctrines 
they teach : Vartta (aral), rendered ‘practical,’ is the 
knowledge of the means of acquiring subsistence 
(aft:) : the fourth is Dandaniti (eve*fa:), the 
science of government, both domestic and foreign. 

4. These nomadic habits are entirely lost sight of 
in the parallel passages of those Puranas in which 
the juvenile life of Krsna is narrated. The text of the 
Hari VarhSa is in most of the other verses preciscly 
thc same as that of the Visnu Purana, putting 
however into the mouth of Krsna a long additional 
eulogium on the season of autumn. 

5. The Hari Vamsa says, ‘an illusory Krsna, 
having become the mountain, ate the flesh that was 
offered;’ WeaATaPon) MRefrat WAMd! Of course the 
‘personified’ mountain is intended, as appears from 
several of the ensuing passages; as for instance, he 
says presently. ‘I am satisfied; and then in his 


divine form he smiled,’ dqadeifattera Bay wWteTa 


a1 The Hari Varnga affords here, as in so many 
other places, proofs of its Dakhini origin. It is very 
copious upon the homage paid to the cattle and 
their decoration with garlands and plumes of 
peacocks’ feathers, of which our text takes no 
notices. But in the south of India there is a very 
popular festival, that of the Punjab, scarcely known 
in the north, when cattle are decorated and 
worshipped; a celebration which has no doubt 
suggested to the compiler of the Hari Vamsa the 
details which he describes. 
eve 


BOOK V, CHAP. 1] 443 





CHAPTER 11 


Wee Seare: 
(SHAT WA: , SleHareT Weagryeaenwsy) 


WUT Sara 
We Niet vot Aaafreatad: 


Gans AM Tut aaerAraTTarI eI 

a at tear! frertag ae seat wa 

CRIP RPG IN ME DOILICOIULCE ES] 

Tang: Yedtanttwt: warrant 

FONATATEATA TSS AMATI 3 UI 

SAA FT: UTA BET Ma ATTOTT 

a Mat seat Wise eA vit 

seq Pasa arony 

aera a: aftenta arhaeentatrargn & tt 

Indra, being thus disappointed of his 
offerings, was exceedingly angry and thus 
addresscd a cohort of his attendant clouds, 
called Samvarttaka: ‘‘Ho, clouds’’ he said, 
‘‘hear my words and without delay execute 
what I command. The insensate cowherd 
Nanda, assisted by his fellows, has withheld 
the usual offerings to us, relying upon the 
protection of Krsna. Now, therefore, afflict the 
cattle, that are their sustenance and whence 
their occupation is derived, with rain and 
wind. Mounted upon my elephant, as vast as a 
mountain peak, I will give you aid in 
strengthening the tempest.’’ 


444 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





WUT Sata 


SATA: TEU TTA TAT: | 

ardad wenitraarat wat fear & it 

ad: Urs qo masta a 

CH MTA SATA 9 1 

fagqarmagmadadtia ater 
PICO CE ICE OGI PA] 

srrantigd Me atathret at: 

ede fete a wreratanraq ei 

Tag Vt Uae adaray Ah 

qa: MU He: Watt aepfatertent: i! ot 

MIST AAA AYCM FETA 

Treat fray Heat ATAU ATI: 11 Val 

ary sae: Waren: | 

wife aaacugret: FoNpaantar: 1 VV 

aaeg Mee He TTT 

arian efqyar Axafaaraq qa! 23 

Vad Het Tea Aretafacttert 

aedahaet MWS ATSTATA WAT VI 

suntan deaternearerrenraay 

arefrenta mee yspesattrarahtn V4 1 

When Indra ceased, the clouds, obedient to 

his commands, came down, in a tearful storm 
of rain and wind, to destroy the cattle. In an 
instant the earth, the points of the horizon and 
the sky, were all blended into one by the heavy 
and incessant shower. The clouds roared 
aloud, as if in terror of the lightning’s scourge, 
poured down uninterrupted torrents. The 
whole earth was enveloped in impenetrable 
darkness by the thick and volumed clouds; and 
above, below and on every side, the world was 
water. The cattle, pelted by the storm, shrunk 
cowering into the smallest size or gave up 
their breath : some covered their calves with 
their flanks and some beheld their young ones 
carried away by the flood. The calves, 
trembling in the wind, looked piteously at their 
mothers or implored in low moans, as it were, 


the succour of Krsna. Hari, beholding all 
Gokula agitated with alarm, cowherds, 
cowherdesses and cattle all in a state of 
consternation, thus reflected :"This is the work 
of Mahendra, in resentment of the prevention 
of his sacrifice and it is incumbent on me to 
defend this station of herdsmen. I will lift up 
this spacious mountain from its stony base and 
hold it up, as a large umbrella, over the cow- 


- pens.’’ 


WT Sarat 


sft sear aft Hot WMagarasteqi 

TUCTHH UA ACA THTAT VE It 

TaieNe Sra: WAU SATAT: | 

fayrana catia: aa adfrarcongi 11 

grratay oerq aenairefrererary 

Mragaa a daer fritarrer Pts: ecu 

Seyret dat war fafagaiet: wel 

waeifernivsnewranisa: ee 

ROTsh t wate viereararerery) 

TAHA aS ahora aaa: 1 oN 

Me-Mases: Wifafeaaniet: | 

eqaarrat: HoT: VTAINATI 2 2 

Tate Teme aaa 

Sour alfear far! aot AryrenrhOT: 1 2 VI 

aay Set Vester UtaTd aT AERC 

frente sete ARTs APL FATT 231 

aay wife tay fara 

Frag Wepet Wa RI TTT 2 v1 

TAT FONSHT Tey MAT ARTA 

Tun fafageieetg sled: 241 

gia frmygeret usAigt Waray: SATAN 
Having thus determined, Krsna 

immediately plucked up the mountain 
Govardhana and held it aloft with one hand in 
sport, saying to the herdsmen, ‘‘Lo the 
mountain is on high; enter beneath it quickly 


and it will shelter you from the storm; here 
you will be secure and at your case in places 


BOOK V, CHAP. 12 


defended from the wind : enter without delay 
and fear not that the mountain will fall.” Upon 
this, all the people, with their herds and their 
wagons and goods and the Gopis, distressed 
by the rain, repaired to the shelter of the 
mountain, which Krsna held steadily over their 
heads; and Krsna, as he supported the 
mountain, was contemplated by the dwellers 
of Vraja with joy and wonder; and, as their 
eyes opened wide with astonishment and 
pleasure, the Gopas and Gopis sang his praise. 
For seven days and nights did the vast clouds 
sent by Indra rain upon the Gokula of Nanda 
to destroy its inhabitants, but they were 
protected by the elevation of the mountain; 
and the slayer of Bala, Indra, being foiled in 
his purpose, commanded the clouds to cease. 
The threats of Indra having been fruitless and 
the heavens clear, all Gokula came forth from 
its shelter and returned to its own abode. Then 
Krsna, in the sight of the surprised inhabitants 
of the forests, restored the great mountain 
Govardhana to its original site. ' 


NOTES 


‘1. It seems not unlikely that this legend has some 
reference to the caves or cavern temples in various 
parts of India. A remarkable representation of it 
occurs upon the sculptured rocks of Mahabalipura. 
It is related much to the same purport in the 
Bhagavata. Sisupala, ridiculing the exploit, asserts 
that Govardhana was nothing more than an ant hill. 

kek 


445 


BOOK V, CHAP. 12 


CHAPTER 12 
Blasiseara: 
(See, SU stgorer siftawy) 


TUT Sata 


qa Waar Ser uftaad a We 
VATA HOTT SHA WAHT: 1 BN 
aistted vemrmtaaatrahr 
Maga Hor east Iss: VI 
ane Herated Mat WATT 


445 


POST STAY WG ATTA WATTS: 11 3 I 
Tess Tevilacagrand fa 

PIS yet TNA VATA vt 
ae UT AMAeaa APPS! 

Wa: Greraaed Wifafarrfeaarar: 14 I 
OT! FONT! syoyers TaTASANTA: | 
Tae WENT! Aafered Pa 6 
mMTaaotaa Tren: ysataery 
Va US HaMIANAAG UAT II 
WeNg rear WaT Wee ATeCAT: | 
ames Teese Het HAAN CI 


AAT! TIT Mag: MYCUTSA ASAT 

ae afaat a! arog Ae 

After Gokula had been saved by the 
elevation of the mountain, Indra became 
desirous of beholding Krsna. The conqueror of 
his foes accordingly mounted his vast elephant 
Airavata, and came to Govarddhana, where the 
king of the gods beheld the mighty Damodara 
tending cattle, and assuming the person of a 
cow-boy, and, although the preserver of the 
whole world, surrounded by the sons of the 
herdsmen: above his head he saw Garuda, the 
king to birds, invisible to mortals, spreading 
out his wings to shade the head of Hari. 
Alighting from his elephant, and addressing 
him apart, Sakra, his eyes expanding with 
pleasure, thus spoke to Madhusidana: “Hear, 
Krsna, the reason why 1 have come hither; 
why I have approached you; for you could not 
otherwise conceive it. You, who are the 
supporter of all, have descended upon earth, to 
relieve her of her burden, in resentment of my 
obstructed rites I sent the clouds to deluge 
Gokula, and they have done this evil deed. 
You, by raising up the mountain, have 
preserved the cattle; and of a verity J am much 
pleased, O hero, with thy wondrous deed. 


aed Her arms WA WaT 
TAMAS MAL: HOLA AAAI You 
Titer aifed: sear! Taeenrtterra: | 


446 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





CAA ATARAT JOT AITO 821 
rat POIs vat areawreatfed: | 
sara Tate Maced vfaeafan ez 


ANG AMET TST SATS TAA! 
Swe Ta TH UfaATTTTAT 1 83H 
FRIAS F Wa: HITT ATA 


WAAATA MN VATHAT MTT 2% I 

The object of the gods is now, methinks, 
accomplished, since with thy single hand you 
hast raised aloft this chief of mountains. I have 
now come by desire of the cattle’, grateful for 
their prcservation, in order to install you as 
Upendra; and, as the Indra of the cows, you 
shall be called Govinda.” Having thus said, 
Mahendra took a ewer from his elephant 
Airavata, and with the holy water it contained 
performed the regal ceremony of aspersion. 
The cattle, as the rite was celebrating, deluged 
the earth with their milk. 


afifies Tat areae cas S SATE 
We UIT HOT YAS Wea: 1 Vail 
Ta Het Stat Tarsefa F syu71 

Be Waly WaT! ATTATTOTSTATI VE I 
Taig: area yarat yferaract 
sTatorsgar AMT A WAY TaAT AMT VV 
MTaAU Ue sa a! areas 


SWAT MAA TATA WATTS RSI 

When Indra had, by direction of the kine, 
inaugurated Krsna, the husband of Saci said to 
him affectionately, “I have thus performed 
what the cows enjoined me. Now, illustrious 
being, hear what farther I propose, with a view 
to facilitate your task. A portion of me has 
bcen born as Arjuna, the son of Prtha: let him 
ever be defended by you, and he will assist 
you in bearing thy burden. He is to be 
cherished by you, Madhustidana, like another 
sclf.” 


TPP rMara 


arta wna aot ard wet Ta 
ae wefaents araeter welt 2311 


Tae Yo! WTTATATTA 

qT maedd aire 2aq! gfe Seafai 2 ol 
A ATA TeTaTgSaS TRAIT: 

Re HAIATSY ATHTAITEAATAT 2 vil 
qareray tag! ufaraia wetea: | 

aa fate Asal MTAAOT HAT 2 2 

a we es A Uae aad eal 

ares fq: afsraray serfacafan 2 3 1 
aya we Waly galeryerrary 

fad ana Fa GM STAMTAaaTATT 1 2 


To this Krsna replied, “I know thy son, 
who has been born in the race of Bharata, and 
I will befriend him as long as I continue upon 
earth, As long as 1 am present, invincible 
Sakra, no one shall be able to subdue Arjuna 
in fight. When the great demon Kansa has 
been slain, and Arista, Kesin, Kuvalayapida, 
Naraka, and other fierce Daityas, shall have 
been put to death, there will take place a great 
war, in which the burden of the earth will be 
removed. Now therefore depart, and be not 
anxious on account of thy son : for no foe shall 
triumph over Arjuna whilst I am present. For 
his sake I will restore to Kunti all her son, with 
Yudhisthira at their head, unharmed, when he 
Bharata war is at an end.” 


sum: Taey caUe STEAL 
sreantad ant wate fed wat 24H 
peste afedt Whites Gas 
SRT Mat efeyra Aaa 2 EN 
Sta sitfaaygeah waraTyt BIST: STATA: I 


Upon Krsna's ceasing to speak, he and 
Indra mutually embraced; and the latter, 
mounting his elephant Airavata, returned to 
heaven. Krsna, with the cattle and _ the 
herdsmen, went his way to Vraja, where the 
wives of the Gopas watched for his approach. 
NOTES 

1. Gobhiacha chodita (7s “ifeq:); that is, 


‘delegated,’ says the commentator, ‘by the cow of 
plenty. Kamadhenu, and other celestial kine, 


BOOK V, CHAP. 13 


447 





inhabitants of Goloka, the heaven of cows:’ but this Govinda: aéfecrs tari wa Talftscal wa: tifa gia 
is evidently unauthorized by the text, as celestial «fara <ireata ya madi All this is very different 
cattle could not be grateful for preservation upon from the sober account of our text, and is 
earth; and the notion of Goloka, a heaven of cows undoubtedly of comparatively recent origin. 


and Krsna, 1s a modern piece of mysticism, drawn 
from such sectarial works as the Brahma Vaivartta 
Purana and Hari Vamsa. ; 

2. The purport of Indra's speech is to explain the 
meaning of two of Krsna's names, Upendra and 
Govinda. The commentators on the Amara Kosa 
agree in explaining the first, the younger brother of 
Indra, Farragys:| conformably to the synonym 
that immediately follows in the text of Amara, 
Indravaraja (3<Tat4: ); a name that occurs also in the 
Mahabharata: Krsna, as the son of Devaki, who is 
an incarnation of Aditi, being born of the latter 
subsequently to Indra, Govinda is he who knows, 
finds, or tends cattle; Gam vindati (7 fafa). The 
Pauranik etymology makes the latter the Indra ($< 
quasi $5) of cows; and in this capacity he may well 
be considered as a minor or inferior Indra, such 
being the proper sense of the term Upapurana ‘a 
minor Purana,’ &c. The proper import of the word 
Upendra has, however, been anxiously distorted by 
the sectarian followers of Krsna. Thus the 
commentator on our text asserts that Upa is here 
synonymous with Upari (39), and __ that 
Upendratwa, “the station of Upendra,’ means ‘rule 
in the heaven of heavens, Goloka,' a new creation 
of this sect, above Satya-loka, which, in the 
uncorrupt Pauranik system, is the highest of the 
seven Lokas: see Bk. II. Ch. VII. So the Hari 
Vaméa makes Indra say, Fara aaged Tenttat MPRA: 
sre eff Hen cai meara fefa eaat:1 As you, Krsna, are 
appointed, by the cows, Indra superior to me, 
therefore the deities in heaven shall call you 
Upendra.' The Bhagavata does not introduce the 
name though it no doubt alludes to it in making the 
divine cow Surabhi, who is said to have come from 
Goloka with India, address Krsna, and say, 3% 
aeafwena sen afeerad! We, intructed by Brahma, 
will crown you as our Indra’ Accordingly Krsna has 
the water of the Ganges thrown over him by the 
elephant of Indra, and India, the gods and sages 
praise him, and salute him by the appellation of 
Govinda. The Hari VamSa assigns thus to Indra 
alone, who says, 'I am only the Indra of the gods; 
you have attained the rank of Indra of the kine, and 
they shall for ever celebrate you on earth as 


KK: 


BOOK V, CHAP. 13 447 





CHAPTER 13 


FAEMISEATT: 


(TOM stqurmraactay, mia: we Tea 
Wewtst A) 


QTY Saray 


Ta VR F Waren: Fumigzarforgi 
HY: MAT It FAT AA MASAI I VI 
SIAC URTaTEl! WaT Hea TAT 

Tras waat arat faftercorastori 2 i 
TARSTAG MUTT PTA 
fray at waa: feta art! Her 3 I 
wiferat afraeatrer werray farrorfed: 

TA Mags Pisa AAT A: USI 
Ged Mes Bt: ral oral frafeeaa 

UU aga A cat WITS ATA GI 
Tift: welgunes sre aa Ayal 

Hat Wena Aq Aad AT GI 
Tetra aida FAT UAT 
faery! Vgt HOT waste vit 
al at Aral aT wa Bal Wa We aM 

fe arene faanor arratsfa aatseg ac il 


After Sakra had departed, the cowherds 
said to Krsna, whom they had seen holding up 
Govarddhana, “We have been preserved, 
together with our cattle, from a great peril, by 
your supporting the mountain above us; but 
this is very astonishing child's play, unsuitable 
to the condition of a herdsman, and all thy 
actions are those of a god. Tell us what is the 
meaning of all this, Kaliya has been conquered 
in the lake; Pralamba has been killed; 
Govarddhana has been lifted up: our minds are 
filled with amazement. Assuredly we repose at 
the feet of Hari, O you of unbounded might! 


448 


for, having witnessed thy power, we cannot 
believe you to be a man. Thy affection, 
Kesava, for our women and children, and for 
Vraja; the deeds that you hast wrought, which 
all the gods would have attempted in vain; 


they boyhood, and thy prowess; thy 
humiliating birth amongst us; are 
contradictions that fill us with doubt, 


whenever we think of them. Yet reverence be 
to you whether you be a god, or a demon, or a 
Gandharva, or whatever we may deem you; 
for you are our friend.” 


WIM Sava 


eqot weal waa quit feafsae, woreeatvary 
SMA ANG: FONSANS ATA 8 


When they had cndcd, Krsna remained 
silent for some time, as if hurt and offended, 
and then replied to them, 


ANTTATTAPA 
WM Bt Mat! afe aat A Arad 
vee até aa: fe at ferarter wasrTAN oll 
afe aster afa wife: soreatsé want afe 


aernaagen giegt: Fraat afan ee 
we tat + Weal 4 wait Tw ara: 
até Al areal Aa afer Ferra 82 UI 
Krsna replied— “Herdsmen, if you are not 
ashamed of my relationship; if 1] have merited 
your praise; what occasion is there for you to 
engage in any discussion concerning me? If 
yon have any regard for me; if I have deserved 
your praise; then be satisfied to know that 1 
am your kinsman. I am neither god, nor Yaksa, 
nor Gandharva, nor Danava; | have been born 
your relative, and you must not think 
differently of me.’ 
WIN Sara 
sit gen Rares TMT RTA SAH 
ae Herat! are wore 83 
Upon receiving this answer, the Gopas held 


their peace, and went into the woods, Icaving 
Krsna apparently displeased. 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


ong fans ara wearer Uisary 

aa Hafedt waranty 1 eS 

SAU TA HAS YAM WATATA| 

facies we TNs cia wer eG 

ae Tan aqua arate 

Sat Hered Vilearaaat-sFetaATAN LE HI 

Teal Tea Brat Pees aaTaTNd 

SAAT WN SATA APTS 1 W911 

But Krsna, observing the clear sky bright 

with the autumnal moon, and the air perfumed 
with the fragrance of the wild water-lily, in 
whose buds the clustering bees were 
murmuring their songs, felt inclined to join 
with the Gopis in sport. Accordingly he and 
Rama commenced singing sweet low strains in 
various measures, such as the women loved; 
and they, as soon as they heard the melody, 


quitted their homes, and hastened to meet the 
foe of Madhu. 


Wa: wae A afar ae TAT TT 

SMa atfery AA WATS 2 Il 

alfa Aras Forfa Wrecat AMINA 

wat a cafe sare aeardafecthaaw 28 1 

alfacaarart: Raat sear afer 

aaa Ward seat AiferactaATH 201 

akMAMfagenere-aorgeraran Aa 

ASMA- WSIS AACA TATATAATI 2 UI 

forced waa wareraahqory 

Freageracan gith Tara Waa aHTI 2 2 

One damsel gently sang an accompaniment 

to his song; another attentively listened to his 
melody: one calling out upon his name, then 
shrunk abashed; whilst another, more bold, 
and instigated by affection, pressed close to 
his side: one, as she sallied forth, beheld some 
of the seniors of the family, and dared not 
venture, contenting herself with meditating on 
Krsna with closed eyes, and entire devotion, 


by which immediately all acts of merit were 
effaced by rapture, and all sin was expiated by 


BOOK V, CHAP. 43 


449 





regret at not beholding him: and others, again, 
reflecting upon the cause of the world, in the 
form of the supreme Brahma, obtained by their 
sighing final emancipation. 


marge Ula prea 
AUTATATS MAT TATAT ANTS: 11 23 
MAY FIN: HOA AA: | 
TASH MA FO ASPSTAAATTAN 2 Vil 
wor freggeat seq: wT 
FUSE Tareneteaat we: | 
SPM Tales Heart wy MATA Bu 
gparfera! fasta qonsetatt are 
STATS HOTT CCT AA CATATTS I 2 GI! 
arnt satfa wt ara! fA:ws: wireatael 
set SOMATA Ta Measat AAT Vol 
aqyaise war feat fracg wera 

WE Tathet F UTAH; 2 1 


Thus surrounded by the Gopis, Krsna 
thought lovely moonlight night of autumn 
propitious to the Rasa dance.’ Many of the 
Gopis imitated the different actions of Krsna, 
and in his absence wandered through 
Vrindavan, representing his person. “I am Krs 
na,” cries one; "behold the elegance of my 
movements. “I am Krsna,” exclaims another; 
“listen to my song.” “Vile K4liya, stay! for I 
am Krsna,” is repeated by a third, slapping her 
arms in defiance. A fourth calls 
"Herdsmen, fear nothing; the danger of the 
storm is Over, for, lo 1 lift up Govarddhana for 
your shelter.” And a fifth proclaims, “Now let 
the heads graze where they will, for I have 
destroyed Dhenuka.” 


Ue AAATTY FOTIGTY ATETET 

THAN CIM: UA US Wa SATAARITAN 28 
facet ya wre wet Maa 
qorarrraatet ferent AAAI 3 0 11 
BATA SMONg-aacMe THAT! 
Tere HOTA CTSA TAT: 113 
cafe rat Vt A FAM Aareran 


wala Tense ee FT 3 2 

Thus in various actions of Krsna the Gopis 
imitated him, whilst away, and beguiled their 
sorrow by mimicking his sports. Looking 
down upon the ground, one damsel call to her 
friend, as the light down upon her body stands 
erect with joy, and the lotuses of her eyes 
expand,” See here are the marks of Krsna's 
feet, as he has gone alone sprotively, and left 
the impressions of the banner, the thuodebolt, 
and the goad.” What lovely maiden has been 
his companion, inebriate with passion, as her 
irregular footmarks testify? 


qa aed gar 
SATAAATAOT TERI Wee: 13 3 
sarafaga A at aie ysl 
array Tale faweafeay FAM 3 ¥ 
GUPTA AAAI ATA 
TAVITA AA APO WPT BG 
STAIMISTAA FT 

at maar gat ats Frerorenrafeafa: 113 & 1 
Sarasa At Aft aa AeA 
SAAT HVAT WaT la: 11 319 
eran etter fanfare 
AT Pat Mead WAN 3 CI 


Here Damodara has gathered flowers from 
on high, for we see alone the impressions of 


out, the tips of his feet. Here a nymph has sat down 


with him, ornamented with flowers, fortunate 
in having propitiated Visnu in a prior 
existence. Having left her in an arrogant 
mood, because he had offered her flowers, the 
son of Nanda has gone by this road; for see, 
unable to follow him with equal steps, his 
associate has here tripped along upon her toes 
and holding his hand the damsel has passed, as 
is evident from the uneven and intermingled 
footsteps. But the rogue has merely taken her 
hand, and left her neglected, for here the paces 
indicate the path of a person in despair. 


aA ais Garten Us Fra 
aa He rar raftar wars: 3 V1 


450 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





wfapt Tet Ho: WenT 7 eA 

Prarie promiger Acetferfertrerti x o 
fagarenena arent frre: qeoresh 
APTA TAIT TY TT TAT lt 

aa aqua faairyargay 
HAA FOTAHTASAT ¥ 2 
alfacrian Mfa-cardafatefaam 

FO FOr ENA weE AAAeTATI ¥ 3 I 
aihrg YUEN Hear Sees ET 
faclas AAY_VAt wit GAySISITAII ¥ ¥ 
aifaertea Weare Fritfera-faciert | 
cae SE aad Brass USAT Sk I 


Undoubtedly he promised that he would 
quickly come again, for here are his own 
footsteps returning with speed. Here he has 
entered the thick forest, impervious to the rays 
of the moon, and his steps can be traccd no 
farther.” Hopeless then of beholding Krsna, 
the Gopis rcturned, and repaired to the banks 
of the Yamuna, where they sang his songs; and 
presently they behcld the preserver of the three 
worlds, with a smiling aspect, hastening 
towards them: on which, one exclaimed, “Krs 
na! Krsna!” unable to articulate any thing else: 
another affected to contract her forehead with 
frowns, as drinking with the bees of her eyes 
the lotus of the face of Hari: another, closing 
her cyelids, contemplated internally his form, 
as if engaged in an act of devotion. 


aa: afer frac: arfére. yurgettarct | 
FrASTHAAAS HTS TTT YE I 
ait: wearer we Bet 
THT WHS EAA A SATII V9 I 
TAOS AAUS A POTITT ASST 
TER TaNEH AAI WY CI 
SM WIS ceheant Aira wens 
GANT AH CeTg- Fa eraga ST SSM 
Aa: WH Age Werereeraht aA: | 
TPMT ATATSR TMAH UG OM 


GOT: MRTG STS PYTHT 

Wit Wr Ra FONATT YA: FAI 4 I 
Uftadamtulanr wegersenieany 

Sat argetat Tat Tet AEE 1G UI 


Then Madhava, coming amongst them, 
conciliated some with soft speeches, some 
with gentle looks, and some he took by the 
hand; and the illustrious deity sported with 
them in the stations of the dance. As each of 
the Gopis, however, attempted to keep in one 
place, close to the side of Krsna, the circle of 
the dance could not be constructed, and he 
therefore took each by the hand, and when 
their eyelids were shut by the effects of such 
touch, the circle was formed’ Then proceeded 
the dance to the music of their clashing 
bracelets, and songs that celebrated in suitable 
strain the charms of the autumnal season. Krs 
na sang the moon of autumn, a mine of gentle 
radiance! but the nymphs repeated the praises 
of Krsna alone. 


aha wiacraaag: UR Wyra AAI 

THT whereqfreaat- Fragen WEES & 3 I 
Taare TeraAAT STA 
YARRA TSTGAAAT WAT yw U 
Tas SY FON Ara ATTA: | 

My Holla Hears aad at Ryo ATG aM 


At times, one of them, wearied by the 
revolving dance, threw her arms, ornamented 
with tinkling bracelets, round the neck of the 
destroyer of Madhu: another, skilled in the are 
of singing his praises, embraced him. The 
drops of perspiration from the arms of Hari 
were like fertilizing rain, which produced a 
crop of down upon the temples of the Gopis, 
Krsna sang the strain that was appropriate to 
the dance. The Gopis repeatedly exclaimed, 
“Bravo, Krsna!” to his song. 


Te gH apde TYE ay: 
STATA SEPTATE SFT & GU 
OM aa Ve MT TT Aya: | 
VOTAEN AT: AOTAT AANA 4 91 


BOOK V, CHAP. 13 


451 





a areata: ufaty: fighter 
HOt Marea WAY Tah Tawa Uk St 
aise dyltnaat WAAL ATTEA:. 

Te aera ararg aftranfeas 4 eat 


TAGT TM AY WayAy UWyT: | 
SIAARURTISH SNA TAAAVAT: 1 & 0 U1 


SM BAEMTY AMISH: "feat WET 
ae aaa saver Taare: 1g Vt 
ofa sitfamygerat warnigt waregr: Sera: it 

When leading, they followed him, when 
returning, they encountered him; and, whether 
he went forwards or backwards, they ever 
attended on his steps. Whilst frolicking thus 
with the Gopis, they considered every instant 
without him a myriad of years; and, prohibited 
in vain by husbands, fathers, brothers, they 
went forth at night to sport with Krsna, the 
object of their affection. Thus the illimitable 
being, the benevolent remover of all 
imperfections, assumed the character of youth 
amongst the females of the herdsmen of Vraja; 
pervading their natures, and that of their lords, 
by his own essence, all diffusive like the wind 
: for even as in all creatures the elements of 
ether, fire, earth, water, and air, are 
comprehended, so also is he every where 
present, and in all. 


NOTES 


1. The Rasa dance is danced by men and women, 
holding each other's hands, and going round in a 
circle, singing the airs to which they dance. 
According to Bharata, the airs are various both in 
melody and time, and the number of persons should 


not exceed sixty-four : evardatareh framecrnf ard 
Sad: WEP AAS AA 

2. The soles of the feet of a deity are usually 
marked by a variety of emblematical figures: this is 
carried to the greatest extravagance by the 
Buddhists, the mark on the feet of Gautama being 
130: see Trans. R. As. Sac. IH. 70.' It is a decoration 
very moderately employed by the Hindus. 

3. This is a rather inexplicit statement, but the 
comment makes it clear, Krsna, it is said, in order 
to form the circle, takes each damsel by the hand, 


and leads her to her place: there he quits her : but 
the effect of the contact is such, that it deprives her 
of the power of perception, and she contentedly 
takes the hand of her female neighbour, thinking it 
to be Krsna's, The Bhagavata is bolder, and asserts 
that Krsna multiplied himself, and actually stood 
between each two damsels: ‘waraa: age 
Mess: | May For ara wat gaa webs fai 
“The Rasa dance, formed of a circle graced by the 
Gopis, was then led off by the Lord of magic, Krs 
na having placed himself in the midst of every two 
of the nymphs.’ The Hari Vamsa intimates the 
same, though not very fully: aeqvaiem wal taka 
FARA WE: Horas sew Wows: 1) ‘Then all the 
nymphs of the cowherds, placing themselves in 
couples in a row, engaged in pleasant diversion, 
singing the deeds of Krsna,’ The Pankti, or row, is 
said by the commentator to mean here, the 
Mandala, or ring; and the 'couples' to imply that 
Krsna was between every two, He quotes a verse to 
this effect from some other Vaisnava work: 
SAT Wea Aa: Fed BR wae Sart apr 
eaarte7: i! ‘Between each two damsels was 
Madhava, and between each two Madhavas was a 
nymph : and the son of Devaki played on the flute:’ 
for, in fact, Krsna is not only dancing with each, 
but also by himself in the centre: for this the 
commentator on the Hari Vamsa cites a passage 
from the Vedas: a yea ayia Heal ae safe Bern: 1 
Literally, The many formed being) assumes 
(various) bodies. One form stood apart, occupying 
triple observance’. Now if the verse be genuine, it 
probably refers to something that has little to do 
with Krsna; but it is explained to apply to the Rasa; 
the form of Krsna being supposed to be meant as 
wholly distinct from the Gopis, and yet being 
bebeld by everyone of them, on each side and in 
front of her. In the meditation upon Krsna, which is 
enjoined in the Brahma Vaivartta, he is to be 
contemplated in the centre of the Rasa Mandala, in 
association with his favourite Radha; but the 
Mandala described in that work is not a ring of 
dancers, but a circle of definite space at Vrndavana, 
within which Krsna, Radha, and the Gopis divert 
themselves, not very decorously. This work has 
probably given the tone to the style in which the 
annual festival, the Rasa Yatra, is celebrated in 
various parts of India, in the month of Kartika, 
upon the sun's entrance into Libra,’ by nocturnal 


452 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





dances, and representations of the sports of Krsna. 
A circular dance of men and women, however, 
does not form any prominent feature at these 
entertainmt and it may be doubted if it is ever 
performed. Some of the earliest labourers in the 
field of Hindu mythology have thought this circular 
dance to typify the dance of the planets round the 
sun (Maurice, Ancient History of the Hindus 1.108. 
IT. 356); but there is no particular number assigned 
to the performers by any of the Hindu authorities, 
beyond its limitation to sixty-four. At the Rasa 
Mandala of the Brahma Vaivartta, Radha is 
accompained by thirty-six of her most particular 
friends amongst the Gopis, but they are each 
attended by thousands of inferior personages, and 
none of the crowd are left without male multiples 
of Krsna. The only mysticism hinted at in that 
Purana, is, that these are all one with Krsna: the 
varied vital conditions of one spirit being 
represented by the Gopis and the illusory 
manifestations of Krsna; he himself being supreme 
unmodified soul. 
woe 


452 


CHAPTER 14 
ATS IISEATA: 


(SUT ATA: 


UUM Sara 


Wales Helferg Wars Ares 
MAA Wal Moats: WTA: | Vil 
AAA AAS TTA RUT RIS HOTA: 
AUT SAT AMAT 2A! 
cere: arrears frgarst ya: FA: 
aeonlergeget: SAH TATA: 131 
SEMGAHENIT: WATTS eT: | 
AOA TSTS WANS TANTS: 11S 
Weragusrs ry a eeanasars: | 
Weel W Tat Wi sea FayATysi 
Geena sare 4: Wang i 
MARAT TATA AVATATATT: | 

Ter Maferaer Gert BT SA: 11 G 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


forgaré deers cers Bere: 

THAT Merahrpa sation 

SHTRAATOTT: Frere lal-FaaTTT: | 

SMATAT GSAT POT FIT: i Ci 

art Saga Sat Fat Welaet: | 

TNT At: WUTC AM ATTA FI 

sNaa Gat We WETAT TST: | 

Wa SAT Heit faarorrsorerenq go 11 

weal tae wgKaT Yelrer faarora: | 

sitgaefiee aud feafrarar eeu 

TUE YET TaMNSaq AA: | 

TUT H Wee FUTstlorrg Raq 22 

qweahted afery tet aor arery! 

WY BA Aeaa YU SATO TTI Vz! 

ofa siifaenreret csraigy age: SEIT: 

One evening, whilst Krsna and the Gopis 
ware amusing themselves in the dance, the 
demon Arista, disguished as a savage bull, 
came to the spot, after having spread alarm 
through the station. His colour was that of a 
cloud charged with rain; he had vase horns, 
and his eyes were like two fiery suns : as he 
moved, he ploughed up the ground with his 
hoofs: his tongue was repeatedly licking his 
lips ; his tail was erect; the sinews of his 
shoulders were firm, and between them rose a 
hump of enormous dimensions, his haunches 
were soiled with ordure, and he was a terror to 
the herds; his dewlap hung low, and his face 
was marked with scars from butting against 
the trees, Terrifying all the kine, the demon 
who perpetually haunts the forests in the shape 
of a bull, destroying hermits and ascetics, 
advanced. Beholding an animal of such a 
formidable aspect, the herdsmen and _ their 
women were exceedingly frightened, and 
called aloud on Krsna, who came to their 
succour, shouting and slapping his arm in 
defiance. When the Daitya "heard the noise, be 
turned upon his challenger, and fixing his eyes 
and pointing his horns at the belly of Kesava, 
he ran furiously upon the youth, Krsna stirred 





BOOK V, CHAP. 15 453 





not from his post, but, smiling in sport and. 
derision, awaited the near approach of the bull, 
when he seized him as an alligator would have 
done, and held him firmly by the horns, whilst 
he pressed his sides with his knees. Having 
thus humbled his pride, and held him captive 
by his horns, he wrung his throat, as if it bad 
been a piece of wet cloth; and then tearing off 
one of the horns, he beat the fierce demon with 
it until he died, vomiting blood from his 
mouth. Seeing him slain, the herdsmen 
glorified Krsna, as the companies of the 
celestials of old praised Indra, when he 
triumphed over the Asura Jambha.' 
NOTES 

1 This exploit is related a little more in detail in 
the Bhagavata and Hari Vamsa. 

KKK 


BOOK V, CHAP. 15 


453 





CHAPTER 15 


UHSMISeATa: 
(ROMY SAAT TUT) 
TUT Jara 

cantata sashes aga fafrarfad 
wera fafad aR ad arasaraet en 
afae anfera Ant wry Ysaregal 
Bara Yaarars wrene utara U0 
HAA ATE: Wes AMNIAAPHATA! 
OC CAME BICC IGNLCAT ET 


After these things had come to pass, Arista 
the bull-demon and Dhenuka and Pralamba 
had been slain, Govarddhana had been lifted 
up, the serpent Kaliya had been subdued, the 
two trees had been broken, the female fiend 
Pitand had been killed, and the waggon had 
been overturned, Narada went to Kansa, and 
related to him the whole, beginning with the 
transference of the child from Devaki to 
Yasoda. 


FM AT Meet KA ALAS TACIT 
aged wit war ad aa Beatle vi 


Tishrariguena weaeadatel 
WE Weaisa areaghreferaaq 4 i 
SST GHATS WH- FON Yao 
aaea Her seared weetat & it 
Buss Werateat Ales wea: | 
Vana Tees wrafenhy Brahh wl 
TTT at TALI 

TAT TAT ANA Arete AT TMT cit 
MHrHTa UseARt WYFAT! 
aaa waferenfy WET eh 
gaara amreeana a ary 
aaa aaaaera ge aTafacaten go i 
TH: Haeranhksy Weare 
arafacata at ardt aycagarantn gen 


Hearing this from Narada, Kafsa was 
highly incensed with Vasudeva, and bitterly 
reproached him, and all the Yddavas, in an 
assembly of the tribe. Then reflecting what 
was to be done, he determined to destroy both 
Krsna and Rama whilst they were yet young, 
and before they had attained to manly vigour: 
for which purpose he resolved to invite them 
from Vraja, under pretext of the solemn rite of 
the lustration of arms, when he would engage 
them in a trial of strength with his chief 
boxers, Canta and Mustika, by whom they 
would assuredly be killed. “I will send,” he 
said, "the noble Yadu, Akrira the son of 
Swaphalka, to Gokula, to bring them hither: I 
will order the fierce Kesin, who haunts the 
woods of Vrndaban, to attack them, and he is 
of unequalled might, and will surely kill them; 
or if they arrive here, my _ elephant 
Kuvalayapida shall trample to death these two 
cow-boy Sons of Vasudeva.” 


UUM Jar 
SUA MT SRT HAY Wa-sTeh 
Sg HiaitairHte aaaTa TI V2 


Having thus laid his plans to destroy Rama 
and Janardana, the impious Kansa sent for the 


heroic Akrira, and said to him, 


454 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





HA SAT 
A a aaa! aed Raat wea am 
SA: SAMS TAA ANTHEA TN 23 I 
ayeagal aa faunrteraqayat 
Aree fener MAA WA Zot MARA: Vx 
get AN Uyevat wfaeata 
SMA AAA AAT HATS ATA 24 
aU-yfoat vet Fraagyret wa 
AA WEA WARHISA THAI VE I 
aM: Harada WeraraTat fad: | 
a at freeaa ure agearensit ferern eon 
at een ayeas Teese gHifeT 
fret fart Saas Yertferq ee tt 
Wt: TAMA Weare 
fad unit eftenfi eprat waaafrorq ei 
TA aeaTAA, Ser araaa! Aa 
CASS SNE WAREMTAHATTI 2 0 II 
aay Freaved ad weataeareay 
Wonfaed erat TeAaeaT SIT! MTA 2 2H 
aan a wife afddias areyrert a1 
TOT: PAPA AT ATTA ATH 2 VII 


“Lord of liberal gifts,’ attend to my words, 
and, out to friendship for me, perform my 
orders. Ascend your chariot and go hence to 
the station of the herdsman Nanda. Two vile 
boys, portions of Visnu, have been born there, 
for the express object of effecting my 
destruction. On the fourteenth Junation I have 
to celebrate the festival of arms,’ and I wish 
them to be brought here by you, to take part in 
the games, and that the people may see them 
engage in a boxing match with my two 
dexterous athlete:, Chanira and Mustika; or 
haply my elephant Kuvalaydpida, driven 
against them by his rider, shall kill these two 
iniquitous youngsters, sons of Vasudeva. 
When they are out of the way, I will put to 
death Vasudeva himself, the cowherd Nanda, 
and my foolish father, Ugrasena, and I will 


seize upon the herds and flocks, and all the 
possessions, of the rebellious Gopas, who have 
ever been my foes. Except you, lord of 
liberality, all the Yadavaa are hostile to me; 
but I will devise schemes for their extirpation, 
and J shall then reign over my kingdom, in 
concert with you, without any annoyance. 
Through regard for me, therefore, do you go as 
I direct you; and you shall command thc 
cowherds to bring in with spced their supplies 
of milk and butter and curds.” 


TUM Sara 


SeNaeera Terra fest 

Wa FMT By FRAT AAT: 11 23 

MATA UT UA WTS PITTI 

Peart aa: Year WyTat AaHa: Ht Vi 

Sta sitferopgerey warnist waregt: SEAT: I 

Being thus instructed, the illustrious 

Akrtra readily undertook to visit Krsna, and, 
ascending his stately chariot, he went forth 
from the city of Mathura. 


kk* 


NOTES 


1. Danapati- The epithet refers to Akrira's 
possession of the Syamantaka gem (see Bk. IV. Ch. 
XIII); although, as here used by Katisa, it is an 
anachronism, the gem not becoming his until after 
Krsna's maturity. 

2, Dhanurmaha (wqe:): the same phrase occurs 
in the different authorities. In its ordinary 
acceptation it would imply any military festival. 
There is one of great celebrity, which, in the south 
of India, closes the Dasahard. or festival of Durgi, 
when military exercises are performed and a field is 
ravaged, as typical of the opening of a campain. 
Worship is paid to military implements. The proper 
day for this is the Vijaya dasami or tenth of the 
light half of Aswin, falling about the end to 
September or beginning of October. Trans. Bombay 
Sac. Ill, 73; also Amara Kosa. under the word 
@erizar: (Lohabhisara). Both our text and that of 
the Bhagavata however, intimate the celebration of 
the feast in question, on the fourteenth day of the 
fortnight (in what month is not specified), and an 


BOOK V, CHAP. 16 455 





occasional 'passage of arms,’ therefore is all that is 
intended. The fourteenth day of the light lunation 
of any month is commonly held appropriate for a 
holiday, or religious rite. It will be seen in the 
sequel, that the leading feature of the ceremonial 
was intended to have been a trial of archery, 
spoiled by Krsna's breaking the bow that was to 
have been used on the occasion. 
aK 


BOOK V, CHAP. 16 


CHAPTER 16 
WSMSeaTT: 
(aafgraer:) 

QUIT Sard 

wet Ute aelax: Haga-wonfad:. 

PORT Feast FaaTyIPTAT I Vi 

HW GAATTYS: TENT AT | 

Etlerarrergreaaet MWATTATRATN 2 

ae Shares Troe sera: | 

Trey vadfaen MS POT AZNB 

afte aréife mifera: sear Aat der ser: 

TARA TS rear ¥ Il 

Kesin, confiding in his prowess, having 

received the commands of Kansa, set off to the 
woods of Vrnddvana, with the intention to 
destroying Krsna. He came in the shape of a 
steed, spurning the earth with his hoofs, 
scattering the clouds with his mane, and 
springing in his paces beyond the orbits of the 
sun and moon. The cowherds and _ their 
females, hearing his neighings, were struck 
with terror, and fled to Govinda for protection, 
calling upon him to save them. In a voice deep 


as the roaring of the thundercloud, Krsna 
replied to them, 


SFM TAT 
aet waa More: Aer: fH wargt:t 
Tana aa CAAT FATATT I & A 
fearrarerarer afacetrantton 
SAAT ACTA SHASTA G 


455 


"Away with these fears of KeSin; is the 
valour of a hero annihilated by your alarms? 
What is there to apprehend from one of such 
little might, whose neighings are his only 
terrors; a galloping and vicious steed, who is 
ridden by the strength of the Daityas? 


wa fe 33 HUNSe Yonieaa frags 
UMA SA ACTA ATION 
syararened Were: Sia: waa aah 
faqrreng asad saregquaaqi it 
SPUN Hear Ya TT TATA: | 
wayrarara wear siya sears: 11 8 
a set aa fargrat Hearagan 

wife ST: Ue: FaaaaTa Fal Rot 
FONT age ag: Heater fe 
FeATETT eT Safer cree UAT: 11 VAM 
fanfentay aget waa afrt aq 

Tisfeon fage was Frege Gaerne 
TE aul we: ways Wy 
ASTANA: STAT FAT: ASMA AAT 23 
SIME HET: BSAC: FOAM 
froare feargay aegaa: FAY Tar evi 
farreqeyasre svattenferntac 

caferred fee vrenet & fates eu it 
Beary afert Geo araetsfatse | 
SARI: TAN SARA AAT 2E I 
eat Meer Ter gat cafes faterat: 
FSI: Westar 11 Vt 


Come on, wretch— I am Krsna and 1 will 
knock all thy teeth down thy throat, as the 
wielder of the trident did to Pushan.’” Thus 
defying him to combat, Govinda went to 
encounter Kegin. The demon ran upon him, 
with his mouth opened wide; but Krsna 
enlarging the bulk of his arm, thrust it into his 
mouth, and wrenched out the teeth, which fell 
from his jaws like fragments of white clouds. 
Still the arm of Krsna, in the throat of the 
demon, continued to enlarge, like a malady 


456 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





increasing from its commencement till it ends 
in dissolution. From his torn lips the demon 
vomited foam and blood; his eyes rolled in 
agony; his joints gave way; he beat the earth 
with his feet; his body was covered with 
perspiration; he became incapable of any 
effort. The formidable demon, having his 
mouth rent open by the arm of Krsna, fell 
down, torn asunder like a tree struck by 
lightning: he lay separated into two portions, 
each having two legs, half a back, half a tail, 
one ear, one, eye, and one nostril. Krsna stood, 
unharmed and smiling, after the destruction of 
the demon, surrounded by the cow-herds, who, 
together with their women, were filled with 
astonishment at the death of Kesin, and 
glorified the amiable god with the lotus eyes. 


Sera fawt aret were Fer: 

aio fred eran gees: ec i 

MY Ay sat oterta Teega 

fredise carat aeit aerpreftafadtararqn 29 

qarqaisencad azarfa-rereay 

STATA TT FF TANTEI: 2 oN 

aMvTaTaaM FT Halt APTSAI 

ants afateact Seeders B TAN 2 gH 

Tyas seashe For! sar frat 

TAR MAMAAT STANSMAM TN 2 2 

TEM AIA SHAM Ba: Heit TATE 

TET Hoare wa ols Tar vfaeafan 231 

Narada the Brahman, invisible, seated in a 

cloud, beheld the fall of Kesin, and delightedly 
exclaimed, "Well done, lord of the universe, 
who in thy spores hast destroyed Kesin, the 
oppressor of the denizens of heaven! Curious 
to behold this great combat between a man and 
a horse—such a one as was never before heard 
of-I have come from heaven. Wonderful are 
the works that you hast done, in thy descent 
upon the earth ! they have excited my 


astonishment; but this, above all, has given me 
pleasure. Indra and the gods lived in dread of 


this horse, who tossed his mane, and neighed, 
and looked down upon the clouds. For this, 
that you hast slain the impious Kesin, you 
shalt be known in the world by the name of, 
Kegava,” 


wary & uftenti Haqesga y:. 

UMass BAS cars HPS Vv 
sarge aa arn fafa 
MCA ca Osea: Gheraac 24 1 
carrAMearetor Sarit yfereterars 

SRST WaT Peron AAA 2 GI 
Ase Bente wad! Taare ve FTA 
aa ania water Ase TATATETN 290 


Farewell: I will now depart. I shall meet 
you again, conqueror of Kesin, in two days 
more, in conflict with Kansa. When the son of 
Ugrasena, with his followers, shall have been 
slain, then, upholder of the earth, will earth's 
burdens have been lightened by you. Many are 
the battles of the kings that I have to see, in 
which you shall be renowned. I will now 
depart, Govinda. A great deed, and acceptable 
to the gods, has been done by you. I have been 
much delighted with you, and now take my 
leave.” 


WUT Sava 
ANS J TA HN: WE Mefater: | 


fader Wepet Wea SMTTATAN 2 ¢ II 
gfe sttfaeayyeray weraigy alse: Beara: I 
When Narada had gone, Krsna, not in any 
way surprised, returned with the Gopas to 
Gokula; the sole object of the eyes or the 


wornen of Vraja.° 
xk 


NOTES 

1 As Virabhadra did to PisI or Pisan, a form of 
Surya, at the sacrifice of Daksa: see Bk. 1] Ch. VIII. 
n. 6. 

2. Or Kesi and va. ‘who kills,’ from vadh or 
badh, ‘to kill:’ but this is a Pauranik etymology, and 


BOOK V, CHAP. 17 457 





less satisfactory than the usual grammatical one of 
Kesa, ‘hair’ and ‘va’ possessive affix: Krsna 
corresponding in this respect to the Apollo Crinitus. 
It is also derived from the legend of his origin from 
‘a hair'(see Bk. V. Ch. X. a. 23): and again, KeSa is 
said to purport ‘radiance’ or ‘rays.’ whether of the 
sun or moon or fire : all which are the light of Krs 
na: whence he is called KeSava, ‘the rayed’ or 
‘radiant.’ Mahabharata, Moksa Dharma. 

3 The legend is told. by all the other narrators of 
Krsna's Juvenile exploits. 

eve 


BOOK V, CHAP. 17 


CHAPTER 17 
AACS: 
(SETA WHAT) 


QU Sata 


sThusty fatter erent 
POTTS: Wal TAATHEMTN VU 
farrarare Uratt at Tera wat 
Userpraturer WE Feather VASAT: 1 Vt 


Akrira, having set off in his quick 
travelling car, proceeded to visit Krsna at the 
pastures of Nanda; and, as he went along, he 
congratulated himself on his superior good 
fottune, in having an opportunity of beholding 
a descended portion of the deity. 


Be Y Wael WT YAMA wz A Frem 
aghagrentaaal faengearTrs TSAI 3 
ata Y Wael AX sta A aot fit: 

at UTERrenay evar fat afereafern xi 
Ue aftr aq Yar Tat ACTA 

aq Wistert frongerag FET yi 
Farqer aa der aergrahaents a 
TN A UE aT are TTA FTN 
BAY TAGHT: YOR: ETT: | 

Sead Wsfascreanced yeahs seat 
Sear lrg AAMT MAATATTUTATT! 

BATT AAAS FAM HVAT SN 


457 


“Now,” thought he, “has my life borne 
fruit; my night is followed by the dawn of day; 
since ] shall see the countenance of Visnu, 
whose eyes are like the expanded leaf of the 
lotus. I shall behold that lotus eyed aspect of 
Visnu, which, when seen only in imagination, 
takes away the sins of men. I shall to-day 
behold that glory of glories, the mouth of Vis 
nu, whence proceeded the Vedas, and all their 
dependant sciences. I shall see the sovereign 
of the world, by whom the world is sustained; 
who is worshipped as the best of males, as the 
male of sacrifice in sacrificial rites. I shall see 
Kesava, who it without beginning or end; by 
worshipping whom with a hundred sacrifices, 
Indra obtained the sovereignty over the gods. 


T TEN AH-TeT-fiy-aea-fa-ASRUT: 

Tl Wat AAR Meas TF Vs 

Water Wafaq wa: Taya: 

Ty faacrera cart @ aeaht WaT Well Pout 

aRa-au-atel-a-faeemteht: Feat 

AAT ATA ASH: BST AMATeeeate Ven 

Toes want ariunegsfe Far 

HY TFTA WTA: TATA TSTT: LIN 

sta: ysl at srarhatrdferary 

Asadtort are arth aaa 23 tt 

fag-ya-Gee-wg-AIg- TeTAthrary 

TAA ATA SL AS AGN AA Aw 

aeafaant fadat gfe afer _ frafern 

SV WaT at PENT A OG 

That Hari, whose nature is unknown to 
Brahma, Indra, Rudra, the Asvins, the Vasus. 
Adityas, and Maruts, will this day touch my 
body. The soul of all, the knower of all, he 
who is all, and is present in all, he who is 
permanent, undecaying, all-pervading, will 
converse with me. He, the unborn, who has 
preserved the world in the various forms of a 
fish, a tortoise, a bore, a horse,’ a lion, will 
this day speak to me. Now the lord of the 


earth, who assumes shapes at will, has taken 
upon him the condition of humanity, to 


458 


accomplish some object cherished in his heart. 
That Ananta, who holds the earth upon his 
crest, and who has descended upon earth for 
its protection, will this day call me by my 
name. Glory to that being, whose deceptive 
adoption of father, son, brother, friend, 
mother, and relative, the world is unable to 
penetrate. Glory to him, who is one with true 
knowledge, who is inscrutable, and through 
whom, seated in his heart, the Yogi crosses the 
wide expanse of worldly ignorance and 
illusion. 


dhaftriggedt ages aad: 

Aarafetafaay: sreat at vatsfer aN 2g i 

aan at seratier acela viata 

Wea WT VA Vera Ag AAT Von 

FIT ARAGON AT A ATA 

Teast Fret gah great ste et 

I bow to him, who, by the performers of 
holy rites, is called the male of sacrifice 
(Yajna-purusa): by pious worshippers is 
termed Vasudeva; and by the cultivators of 
philosophy, Visnu. May he in whom cause and 
effect, and the world itself, is comprehended, 
be propitious to me, through his truth; for 
always do I put my trust in that unborn, eternal 


Hari; by meditation on whom, man becomes 
the repository of all good things.” 


WU Sata 
set fey fawy aiarorerrsa: | 
ShR Meet we: fafa get faunas nee 
B aay Ael aAT FUMMTAS TAT! 
TUTE Telesyn 2 01 
SITUATAA stter eT gTaAT AT 
WATT UTA FAAT: ATTA 2 
Bfacrateraent fayrot yas 
GFoEtTa WA aoa Yutatsarq 2 211 
fara areal att aargeafasyfeery) 
Agattetereet Parestarat aT 23 11 
eagegaae Aerawt fim 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


TAY TAS Sat AQTSATN VII 
miggadaad frentrpargsy 
Rrermrearufige Srerenhetirarere 24 1 


His mind thus animated by devout faith, 
and meditating in this manner, Akrira 
proceeded on his road, and arrived at Gokula a 
little before sunset, at the time of the milking 
of the cows; and there he saw Krsna amongst 
the cattle, dark as the leaf of the full blown 
lotus; his eyes of the same colour, and his 
breast decorated with the, Srivatsa mark; long 
armed, and broad chested; having a high nose, 
and a lovely countenance, brightened with 
mirthful smiles; treading firmly on the ground, 
with feet whose nails were tinted red; clad in 
yellow garments, and adorned with a garland 
of forest flowers; having a fresh-gathered 
creeper in his hand, and a chaplet of white 
lotus flowers on his head, Akrira also beheld 
there Balabhadra, white as a jasmine, a swan, 
or the moon, and dressed in blue raiment; 
having large and powerful arms, and a 
countenance as radiant as a lotus in bloom; 
like another Kailasa mountain, crested with a 
wreath of clouds. 


ct epan fanagereT: w aerate: 
Yoran fea Tas MATH US AAA! 2 G I 
UA AL UT I Aaa WT WAAL 
wMagrgqearen fear atsamatere: 1 291 


ae Wregrate areal: | 
Has Wa WATS 
AASTAS WIA RMN VEN 
STAG YE AN ETT 
peat pai (a 
eat faltecsrepraern 3 
Satafagqefactyrarent 
RUTAGITNA THT 
we Era aerate 
CRAM TEAST 3 01 





BOOK V, CHAP. 18 459 

wang fasra aferdarg- “Alas! _ le despise me, ed a 
connexion with Kansa, an associate with evi 

TAT WNT AGATA ART | ose: Pete 

though not contaminated by it. How vain 1s his 

Tarte Breyten birth, who is shunned by the virtuous? and yet 


Wea YORI TT: 11 3 vil 
When Akrira sow these two youths, his 
countenance expanded with delight, and the 
down of his body stood erect with pleasure: 
for this he thought to be supreme happiness 
and glory; this, the double manifestation of the 
divine -Vasudeva; this was the twofold 
gratification of his sight, to behold the creator 
of the universe: now he hoped that his bodily 
form would yield fruit, as it would bring him 
in contact with the person of Krsna; and that 
the wearer of infinite forms would place his 
hand on his back; the touch of whose finger 
alone is sufficient to dispel sin, and to secure 
imperishable felicity: that hand which 
launches the fierce irresistible discus, blazing 
with all the flames of fire, lightning, and the 
sun, and slaughtering the demon host washes 
the collyrium from the eyes of their brides: 
that hand into which Bali poured water, and 
thence obtained ineffable enjoyments below 
the earth, and immortality and dominion over 
the gods for a whole Manvantara, without peril 
from a foe. 
Sq wi darafie’ 
STATETAHITACTTGET! 
aalaaraed ferreg 
TAMA: Meyatesd Aq 3 
WATT TAA 
TWAT Wel WERT 
fe at AIT AAATAT- 
AMATeMted Se Tea 3 311 
Tees wieaferwraa 
Sent were TTT 
, res 
STATA TT FACT: 113 SI 
Ste sttfearnygerot aEMigt WAS: SATA: It 


what is there in this world unknown to him 
who resides in the hearts of all men, who is 
ever existent, exempt from imperfection, the 
aggregate of the quality of purity, and identical 
with true knowledge? With a heart wholly 
devoted to him, then, I will approach the lord 
of all lords, the descended portion of Purus 
oatama, of Visnu, who is without beginning, 
middle, or end.” 
NOTES 

1. The commentator explains this to mean 
Hayagriva, or Visnu with the neck and head of a 
horse; who, it is sald in the second book of the 
Bhagavata, appeared at the end of a great sacrifice 
performed by Brahma, and breathed from his 
nostrils the texts of the Vedas. The fourth Avatara 
is always elsewhere said to be the Vamana. or 
dwarf. 

kak 


BOOK V, CHAP. 18 | | 459 





CHAPTER 18 
SBTENSEATA: 


(Anat: so aT, wet farzauiay, 
STATA Tee) 

TUM Sars 
facrafata Magara a area: | 
HUSA ATO sary Ferear FL: VN 
Wsaag eapraares-Hafaer worm 
daa a wheat Gas Ute 21 
Bada At warag aer-Ayraht 
aa: wast eet arrerareraPeny 3 


Thus meditating, the Yadava approached 
Govinda, and addressed him, and said, “I am 
Akrira,” and bowed his head down to the feet 
of Hari; bile Krsna laid upon him his hand, 
which was marked with the flag, the 
thunderbolt, and the lotus, and drew him 


460 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





towards him, and affectionately embraced 
him. 

We Mat Ac: Hardaetas: | 

THM AMMA TATA NY I 

ae Fruirela aa hearragsie: | 

SM BT eaaht at SAAT ETAT 

STAY TM HA: YSTEN WT Aa 

a dard agfera ao aer farafae i 

aq Wa faerregrat wary afer: 

TARA SeIeyIt BATT! WAT t 

ahet a vani! qeatafra aa 

fates aradag a fats at at Fanci 

Then KeSava and Rama entered into 

conversation with him, and, having heard from 
him all that had occurrred, were much pleased, 
and led him to their habitation: there they 
resumed their discourse, and gave him food to 
eat, and treated him with proper hospitality, 
Akrira told them how their father 
Anakadundubhi, the princess Devaki and even 
his own father, Ugrasena, had been insulted by 
the iniquitcus, demon Kansa: he also related to 
them the purpose for which he had been 
dispatched. When he had told them all these 
things, the destroyer of Kesin said to him, “I 


ad: ward faner qeor-aat werach 

SHUT Ve Tyger Ay wf ez 

qRaT WU: Ba: Pras Es: | 

fase onfeg aN: We Wet TATA V3 

Having given orders qccordingly to the 
cowherds, Akrira, with Kesava and R4ma, 
retired to rest, and slept soundly in the 
dwelling of Nanda. The next morning was 
bright, and the youths prepared to depart for 
Mathura with Akrira. The Gopis, seeing them 
about to set forth, were much afflicted; they 
wept bitterly, their bracelets were loose upon 
their arms, and they thus communed together: 


agi wer Mere: set TpeTACTh 
AT-BAT AAT UTCAFTN VV It 
facnfaareaary arretort FaTATNA 
fares Set A arenTay ATeaheT BG Ul 
ait waarmee fafert scart Bey 
Wed TMoateeg Papert geet gett 
Maia aaa faaraaferar aft: 
anTeoraiay Heer A V9 
meat eft erat facrafrsaa: | 
Maat Gt: Ut wat ara AACA Ve 
“If Govinda depart for Mathura, how will 


was aware of all that you have told me, lord of he return to Gokula ? His ears will there be 


liberal gifts: 
Tg Way WAT at arena: WA waar 
MISSI arate srerararet FEN et 
fasra fant die! 3 faeat aghréfar 
fanaa aa efrentint ger gon 


Rama and I will go tomorrow to Mathura 
along with you. The elders of the cowherds 
shall accompany us, bearing ample offerings. 
Rest here to-night, and dismiss all anxiety. 
Within three nights ] will slay Kansa and his 
adherents.” 


UWI SATA 
aufava sal MTHS wea: | 
GANT FONG TAMTTS FAT Ve 


regaled with the melodious and polished 
conversation of the women of the city. 
Accustomed to the language of the graceful 
females of Mathura, he will never again 
endure the rustic expressions of the Goplis. 
Hari, the pride of the station, is carried off, and 
a fatal blow is inflicted upon us by inexorable 
destiny. Expressive smiles, soft language, 
graceful airs, elegant gait, and significant 
glances, belong to the women of the city, Hari 
is of rustic breeding, and, captivated by their 
fascinations, what likelihood is there of his 
returning to the society of any one amongst 
us? 


UR WSS BAe Ale aya: | 
PUTCO FST WATTS 88 


BOOK V, CHAP. 18 


fa a aft yeraisa srt FTL 

WANS AAIAAT AY SATU Rot 

Wa Wa Ufed: Waraeate: | 

WATS Mie AAET ATU 2 vit 

TRONaIa ah fH gafa + az: aa 

Ta: fee afteatat cera facerher 2 2 

FEMGHGT Mat TAAd AGMA: | 

Tad Hed aye Trefarradan 231 

Gare Wet aeTenfearierary 

UTAH AA TATTSA: 1 Vit 

Kesava, who has mounted the car to go to 
Mathura, has been deceived by the cruel, vile, 
and desperate Akrira. Does not the unfeeling 
traitor know the affection that we all here feel 
for our Hari, the joy of our eyes, that he is 
taking him away ? Unkind that he is, Govinda 
is departing from us, along with Rama: haste! 
let us stop him ! Why talk of telling our 
seniors that we cannot bear his loss? What can 
they do for us, when we are consumed by the 
fires of separation? The Gopas, with Nanda at 
their head, are themselves preparing to depart; 
no one makes any attempt to detain Govinda, 
Bright is the morning that succeeds to this 
night for the women of Mathura, for the bees 
of their eyes will ce upon the lotus face of 
Acyuta. 

qared ue y Feat areata: | 

Safer Usa: Tats Gora 24 II 

TTT RAT Wea: | 

MATATAET AAT ATCA 2 & I 

a FWA; Qurentrepentraay 

faenitenerreaan at geaArranteArq 29 11 

Stel WTI avifaeat Teartaferqi 

Sgaraa safer faaarensonrarn 2c 11 

aM Vifserrergy FAA Bt: 

Ver TEA RE AcAAAA AI 

SR: PEAT: VT wad Tar 

Wanrary atfieg YO HAT A HAA ot 


461 


Sl Bl PUA eH eaar| 
aitgil after aiste Tops eT 3 aI 


Happy are they who may go hence without 
impediment, and behold, enraptured, Krsna on 
his Journey. A great festival will give pleasure 
to-day to the eyes of the inhabitants of 
Mathur4, when they see the person of 
Govinda. What a blissful vision will be seen 
by the happy women of the city, whose 
brilliant eyes shall regard, unchecked, the 
countenance of Krsna! Alas! the eyes of the 
Gopis have been deprived of sight by the 
relentless Brahma, after he had shown them 
this great treasure. In proportion as_ the 
affection of Hari for us decays, so do our 
limbs wither, and the bracelets slip from our 
arms : and now the cruel Akrira urges on the 
horses: all conspire to treat unhappy females 
with unkindness. Alas ! alas! we see now only 
the dust of his chariot wheels! and now he is 
far away, for even that dust is no longer to be 


" 


seen! 
smlanftaret mMasrPraferd: | 
TAT FATT HT TWHOT HAT 3 VI 
Tapa Bfaaeayy Wa APATISNA 
WAT HEATAQAAY WAT TATEAT: 1 3 3 1 
AME FOMAPU WAKA TATA! 
aad aft arferenatgarcorrstan 3 xi 
WA At: WI: TAT: WT ASMAa: | 
cet el Ut fan? wfave aATeT 3 4 I 
WUNAAN Sd NS See A: 
HAMMETT IPA ATTA ONTO 3 & I 

qa arghatetreeter: warty: | 

aaa wareaaarenfayhearq 3 9 it 
earned TA UST ATH 
TEHustert WTA TRATTI 3 6 I 
TAS: CAPA ATT TAAL 
FASTA AHAFATTAOTTI 3 8 
ae aan aay fesmes-fayaory 
Waadisaten-fafeaatra wae ¥ o It 


462 


aq WaTaM Ea pessareyy! 

Sat HOMMHS-Gustaradc Aa ¥ Vt 
wren: fatgariacrs: 
fat TARA ATTA TA: IS BM 


Thus lamented by the women, KeSava and 
Rama quitted the district of Vraja.' Travelling 
in a car drawn by fleet horses, they arrived at 
noon at the banks of the Yamuna, when 
Akrira requested them to halt a little, whilst 
he performed the usual daily ceremonial in the 
river.’ Accordingly the intelligent Akrara 
bathed, and rinsed his mouth, and _ then 
entering the stream, he stood meditating upon 
the supreme being; but he beheld mentally’ 
Balabhadra, having thousand hooded heads, a 
garland of Jasmine flowers, and large red eyes, 
attended by Vasuki. Rambha and other mighty 
serpents, praised by the Gandharvas decorated 
with wild flowers, wearing dark coloured 
garments, crowned with a chaplet of lotuses, 
ornamented with brilliant earrings, Inebriate, 
and standing at the bottom of the river in the 
water.’ On his lap he also beheld, at his ease, 
Krsna. of the complexion of a cloud,” with full 
and coppery eyes, having an elegant form, and 
four hands, armed with the discus and other 
weapons, wearing yellow clothes, decorated 
with many coloured flowers, and appearing 
like a cloud embellished with streams of 
lightning and the bow of Indra; his breast was 
marked with the celestial sign, his arms were 
radiant with bracelets, a diadem shone on his 
brow, and he wore a white lotus for his crest: 
he was attended by Sanandana and other holy 
sages, who, fixing then eyes upon the tips of 


their noses, were absorbed in profound 
meditation. 
Ta-FOM TITER: wears fate: 


asfadtag wrested Berrarranfare ¥ 3 ht 
faaatt: TATATS are TAT SATE: | 

cat Frener Ofer TANT: TAYE 
aast aa dani wreanedfatedh 

TH-wt wang wTETAGePadtit vy 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


Farag ade a east ata ah 

SRAM Ter - yf Fare TeTTA: 1 YG I 

amt fagaata: @ g arate 

{Bla WafagaeRAaTAAT TN 9 I 

When Akrira beheld Balarama and Krsna 
in this situation, he was much amazed, and 
wondered how they could so quickly have got 
there from the chariot. He wished to ask them 
this, but Jandrddana deprived him of the 
faculty of speech at the moment. Ascending 
then from the water, he repaired to the car, and 
there he found them both quietly seated in the 
same human persons as before. Plunging again 
into the water, there he again beheld them, 
hymned as before by the Gandharvas, saints, 
sages, and serpents. Apprehending, therefore, 
their real character, he thus eulogized the 
eternal deity, who consists of true knowledge : 


warrettarsfaaratert WaT 
Say AHSAN AU ATC 
rao asta! efasfara a aa: 
AUIS faa UT WH: WATS 
TAT UPA WATAT FAT WaT? 
STAT BT UTA wate cSt Fara: 114 ot 
rete Te MA ATTA TT 
Tel~ Farey- FATE: BHETAUATSSAATT 1 Bn 
SATERRAST!) SARS 
SARA wat AaSPST UTATT G21 
7 aa ara! faerd anrenfenewt:: 
ae Fan WG Preaek TAA: 14 3 
TF HeUAgaSAT WaeMeTay AT: | 
Ta: POTQAA Aaa A ATS Ml & Yl 
qatieana! frarrnitite 

tad wife~et wate faa 
faucteatt faa: 

Raheny 7 fe waatsher fare & 41 
et gan wyehretar feerat 

erat wt fragrafa: aalonst: | 


BOOK V, CHAP. 18 


463 





aan arated 
fraretstrate unfar pitied: iG § 11 
fet vary gata qehmfereat 
faust a yorasana! woe 
BU Wt Uichtarranat Ay 
WTA MEAT MUTANS ST TSH GO Ut 
H AN argears wa: AStons Fi 
WYATT THA TATU Cl 
sfa sttfaraygerat varnish arereyt: ora: 
"Salutation to you, who is uniform and 
manifold, all-pervading, supreme spirit, of 
inconceivable glory, and who are simple 
existence. Salutation to you, O inscrutable, 
who are truth, and the essence of oblations. 
Salutation to you, O lord, whose nature is 
unknown, who is beyond primeval matter, 
who exist in five forms, as one with the 
elements, with the faculties, with matter, with 
the living soul, with supreme spirit. Show 
favour to me, O soul of the universe, essence 
of all things, perishable or eternal, whether 
addressed by the designation of Brahma, Vis 
nu, Siva, or the like. I adore you, O god, 
whose nature is indescribable, whose purposes 
are inscrutable, whose name even is unknown; 
for the attributes of kind or appellation are not 
applicable to you, who is THAT®, the supreme 
Brahma, eternal, unchangeable, uncreated. But 
as the accomplishment of our object cannot be 
attained except through some specific form, 
you are termed by us Krsna, Achyuta, Ananta, 
or Visnu. You, unborn divinity, are all the 
objects of thesc impersonations; you are the 
gods, and all other beings; you are the whole 
world; you are all. Soul of the universe you are 
exempt from change, and there is nothing 
except you in all this existence. You are 
Brahma, Pasupati, Aryaman, Dhéatri, and 
Vidhatri; you are Indra, air, fire, the regent of 
the waters, the god of wealth, and judge of the 
dead; and you, although but one, preside over 
the world with various energies, addressed to 
various purposes. You, identical with the solar 


ray, create the universe; all elementary 
substance 1s composed of thy qualities; and 
thy supreme form is denoted by the 
imperishable term sat (existence). To him who 
is one with true knowledge, who is and is not 
perceptible, I bow. Glory be to him, the lord 
Vasudeva, to Sankarsana, to Pradyumna, and 
to Aniruddha.’ 


NOTES 


1 In the Bhagavata, Hari Vamsa, etc. several 
adventures of Krsna, during his residence at Vraja, 
are recorded, of which our text makes no mention. 
Of these, the two most popular are Krsna's taking 
away the clothes of the Gopis whilst bathing, and 
his liberating the Gopas from the mouth of 
Aghasura, disguished as a vast serpent, into which 
they had entered, thinking it a cavern in a 
mountain. The omission of these two legends, or of 
any of the rest, is not much to be regretted. 

2 The noonday prayer; or-Sandhya. 

3 By his Dhyana, or force of meditation, in 
which it is attempted to bring before the mind's eye 
some definite form of the object of adoration, In 
this case Akrira is compelled to see a form he did 
not anticipate. The Hari VamSa very clumsily sets 
him to meditate upon the serpent Sesha, which 
spoils the story, intended as that is to exhibit the 
identity of Balarama and Krsna with the supreme. 

4 Balaréma was thus visible in his real character 
of Sesa, the chief of serpents, the couch of Visnu, 
and supporter or the world. 

5 Or rather, he beheld Ghanasy4ma, an 
appellation of Krsna, who is so called from being as 
black (Syama) as a cloud (ghana). 

6 Tad, ‘that’; all that is, or that can be conceived. 

7 Akraira's piety is here prophetic; the son and 
grandson of Krsna (see Bk. IV. Ch. XV.) are not 
yet born:’ but this is the Vaisnava style of 
addressing Krsna or Visnu, as identical with four 
Vyihas, ‘arrangements’ or ‘dispositions,’ Krsna, 
Balarama, Pradyumna, and Aniruddha, See As. Res. 
XVI. 35. In this, as in several other places, the Vis 
nu PUR&4nA differs from some of the other 
narratives of Krsna, by the length and character of 
the prayers addressed to Visnu. The Hari Vamsa, 
for instance, here has no prayer or panegyric at all: 
the Bhagavata inserts one. 


464 
CHAPTER 19 
Talat: Seat: 


(St PUT Tina: , Weare Ways) 
TUM Jara 


Tate faa F aed: | 
SHAT TAM FTI AATA V1 Vi 
ufterarafaray area Faye a: 
Taye fart fercat fara aarfara: 11 1 
PAPA AAA RTA: 
rete we yey Frey TATA: 13 1 
TAH BT east qarged TH Fert 
fatereraerates HONS ITT I YI 
Watt Gomes! BATS 
FEAR TAT MH TTI GH 
Thus the Yaddava Akrira, standing in the 
river, praised <rsna, and worshipped him with 
imaginary incense and flowers, Disregarding 
all other objects, he fixed his whole mind upon 
the deity; and having continued for a long time 
in spiritual contemplation, he at last desisted 
from his abstraction, conceiving he had 
effected the purposes of soul. Coming up from 
the water of the Yamuna, he went to the car, 
and there he beheld Rama, and Krsna seated as 
before. As his looks denoted surprise, Krshna 
said to him, “Surely, Akriira, you have seen 
some marvel in the stream of the Yamun4, for 
your eyes are staring as if with astonishment.” 


3THt Jara 
ariel Ader ee aa WaAA: | 
dearta fe upante yfing ora: Perc gi 
WTAEIA WH TET WRT: | 
AAPA AAMT FET! WET: M91 
ae fenrert WERT SATAY TEAST 
faite aenfay ar uefrosresitfaarqi ¢ it 
SURAT MSI aA FAL ANA: | 
PHM MAAaS BSH AMT THT 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


facitera Ratt woot Wrse W Aes: | 

Tea ant Werateat teat fayTeTSAI Ro Il 

Teel AYLI VARA 7 TA Wer 

qaatte Ha Fa: GU HAT Free Ve 

Akrtra replied, “The marvel that I have 
seen in the stream of the Yamund I behold 
before me, even here, in a bodily shape; for he 
whom I have encountered in the water, Krsna, 
is also your wondrous self, of whose 
illustrious person the whole world is the 
miraculous developement. But enough of this, 
let us proceed to Mathura: I am afraid Kansa 
will be angry at our delay: such is the 
wretched consequence of eating the bread of 
another.” Thus speaking, he urged on the quick 
horses, and they arrived after sunset at 
Mathura. When they came in sight of the city, 
Akrira said to Krsna and Rama, “You must 
now journey on foot, whilst I proceed alone in 
the car; and you must not go to the house of 
Vasudeva, for the elder has been banished by 
Kansa on your account.” 


TUN SAT 
SURAT Waaywns Asa WT FAT 
Mia TaN a TATU 8 
Siirtaa urerd streratfarat 
Mga at sat arerranfaa 23 11 
WARN F at GVA Werh AHA 
STATA PRINT araites STAT Vv 
HUT TAH: ASA Warerastaaa: | 
AGATA wre TA- Sera BI 
CAAT FONT STITT: | 
Uae alert Trees Foret yfan 26 1 
eearera senior deterrent aa: 
FO- UMA Yat Yet AAAS Tat! VI 
faarioragnel areas fatatera: | 
Ut HA Hat Aat Wrafaacae AUT Vi 
teint at eparafartedh 
AHIMA Tal Ys SaTAUPTA VV 


BOOK V, CHAP. 19 


465 





faariryarenat asat year aera: | 
qa fas gemat werst force wath 2 ot 
Wareaat aeat wa SeqaTT 


Akritra having thus spoken, left them, and 
entered the city; whilst Rama and Krsna 
continued to walk along the royal road. 
Regarded with pleasure by men and women, 
they went along sportivery, looking like two 
young clephants. As they roamed about, they 
saw a washerman colouring clothes, and with 
smiling countenances they went and threw 
down some of his fine linen. The washerman 
was the servaut of Kansa, made insolent by his 
master's favour; and he provoked the two lads 
with loud and scurrilous abuse, until Krsna 
struck him down, with his head to the ground, 
and killed him. Then taking the clothes, they 
went their way, clad in yellow and blue 
raiment, until they came to a flower-seller's 
shop. The flower-seller looked at them with 
astonishment, and wondered who they could 
be, or whence they could have come. Seeing 
two youths so lovely, dressed in yellow and 
blue garments, he imagined them to be 
divinities descended upon earth. Being 
addressed by them with mouths budding like 
lotuses, and asked for some flowers, he placed 
his hands upon the ground, and touched it with 
his head, saying, “My lords have shown me 
great kindness in coming to my _ house, 
fortunate that I am; I will pay them homage.” 


SANS TAA ATA ATS a ATTA : tt 2 Vt 
Wat: Weare: Yeafor Aaa: | 
URSVAAAAAT eet A Fa 2 2 
A: UA: worearat retreat Area 

cat yerrfor arate wreraeenht a BSH 
ATARI FOOTISH WHA: Weel ST 
seat Wea wR! A HAT: WeTeaAATH Bvt 
acett & tra! eaeada a 
Sates Arar A APSE Tea IG 
qa o faery ae WeTeTETA 
TATE wre feat SiaaTCaT A 2 & Mt 


qa Way a ug! adaret vfacafea 


qEedienart searafasafan 219 tt 

aramtigas ate gored: | 

Taree wert: Taq wat afreafern 2c 

Having thus spoken, the flower-seller, with 
a smiling aspect, gave them whatever choice- 
flowers they selected, to conciliate their 
favour. Repeatedly prostracing himself before 
them, he presented them with flowers 
beautiful, fragrant, and fresh. Krsna then, 
being much pleased with him, gave him this 
blessing; “Fortune, good friend, who depends 
upon me, shall never forsake you: never shall 
you suffer loss of vigour, or loss of wealth: as 
long as time shall last your descendants shall 
not fail. Having long tasted various delights on 
earth, you shall finally obtain, by calling me to 
recollection, a heavenly’ region, the 
consequence of my favour. Your heart shall 
ever be intent on righteousness, and fulness of 
days shall be the portion of your posterity. 
Your descendants shall not be subject to 
natural infirmities, as long as the sun shall 
endure.” 


WU Sara 


SYA ATE PON AeIeaTeTAAr| 
Fetara gets! arereartor gfara: 28 


Sia stage uaraist Walafayt: areas: 

Having thus spoken, Krsna and Réma, 
worshipped by the flower-seller, went forth 
from his dwelling. 
NOTES 

1 These incidents are told, with some 
unimportant differences, in the other accounts of 
Krsna's youth. 

kee 


466 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





CHAPTER 20 
fasise: 


(MPO HAGA: TMI: , AAAI!) 
UUSNT Tare 


THAT Aa: FO: AFA! 
See HOTA TAMAATATTATH BU 
ame werd Hur: HANIA 
TAM AAT WT ASTATAAA ZU 
GHMAT UT Wear AT Ble wha 

We MT cert Hoan TP AACIPAT 3 

ard! Sata alfa heather 
Taecate faerarrereraafori & tt 
Aras fe wees Wiest Bye 

MATACAM AT WATT ATTA & 

As they proceeded along the high road, 
they saw coming towards them a young girl, 
who was crooked, carrying a pot of unguent, 
Krsna addressed her sportively, and said, “For 
whom are you carrying that unguent? tell me, 
lovely maiden; tell me truly.” Spoken to as it 
were through affcction, Kubj4 well disposed 
towards Hari, replied to him also mirthfully, 
being smitten by his appearance; “Know you 
not, beloved, that I am the servant of Kansa, 
and appointed, crooked as I am, to prepare his 
perfumes. Unguent ground by any other he 
does not approve of: hence I am enriched 
through his liberal rewards.” 


SFM Jara 
grade ware ofat ofa 
STATS STATA TTT G Ut 


Then said Krsna, “Fair-faced damsel, give 
us of this unguent, fragrant and fit for kings, as 
much as we may rub upon our bodies.” 


QUIT Sara 


gratele OT Hom yerntatt aac 
STATS Weel WAAAY: 1119 


| UfeesaTgierangt aaa Jeet 
ara farsat farwonfraragetn c ti 
arent faga wifitearetfeenatad 


SET HATA LAAT ATUL 8 Ut 
Tah VAS eT YS HANS ATL 

Wa: BW aya Wat Afaarmwag aT Yo’ 
facraciert ste Sameera 

aA Wye Mad ar TE Taf Au een 
sTarea wadhrefate at weary ett: 
fara Herat WaT ATT LTH 


“Take it,” answered Kubja; and she gave 
them as much of the unguent as was sufficient 
for their persons; and they rubbed it on various 
parts of their faces and bodies,’ till they 
looked like two clouds, one white and one 
black, decorated by the many-tinted bow of 
Indra. Then Krsna, skilled in the curative are, 
took hold of her, under the chin, with the 
thumb and two fingers, and lifted up her head, 
whilst with his feet he pressed down her feet; 
and in this way he made her straight. When 
she was thus relieved from her deformity, she 
was a most beautiful woman; and, filled with 
gratitude and affection, she took Govinda by 
the garment, and invited him to her house, 
Promising to come at some other time, Krsna 
smilingly dismissed her, and then laughed 
aloud on beholding the countenance of 
Baladeva.” 


aftsakargferrat Stentarent a a 

qs Meit dat aay feraareaaeTaat 3 
STANT TT TAT aT AAT: | 

STA AEA HON TEANTT ASTM Vil 
aa: Waa Va VSIA ASNT: 

TEI YASS HIT AA UAT Rutt 
Sgr! ARM J THY ayTT Tea: 

Vere Feat Feat arfercrargit 26 1 


Dressed in blue and yellow garments, and 
anointed with fragrant unguents, KeSava and 
Rama proceeded to the hall of arms, which 


BOOK V, CHAP. 29 


was hung round with garlands: Inquiring of 
the warders which bow he was to try, and 
being directed to it, he took it, and bent it; but 
drawing it with violence, he snapped it in 
two, and all Mathura resounded with the 
noise which its fracture occasioned. Abused by 
the warders for breaking the bow, Krsna and 
Rama retorted, and defied them, and left the 
hall. 


ARUTAPGArAA eR AMT Aq: | 

Wr Fras sarstT wre aTope-AhsaAln vit 

When Kansa knew that Akrira had 
returned, and heard that the bow had been 


broken, he thus said to Chantira and Mustika, 
his boxers: 


Ha Java 
TVGTTSTTAL WT aR SY ATT: | 
Wagar ere wr wrorett fe atu ec 
Fraga ae faa waar aifvet wen 
STATA HUT AAT AAT 88 UI 
ARS Araay aia sever at woanfeah 
erent AaNS TH Aras At faa 201 


Sea B at west aa aga wera 
Wararereaay AseT WATTS HBT 2 I 
WAT: FATAMASAT Tt aTaraN 
arate Fraesra TSA UTTATH 2 2H 


THUR FEAT YT WAM HAGA GHA 
SAAN: HA: Taeaqeara 23 1 


“Two youths, cowherd boys, have arrived; 
you must kill them both, in a trial of,strength, 
in my presence; for they practise against my 
life. I shall be well pleased if you kill them in 
the match, and will give you whatever you 
wish; not else. These two foes of mine must be 
killed by you fairly or unfairly. The kingdom 
shall be ours in common, when they have 
perished.’ Having given them these orders, he 
sent next for his elephant driver, and desired 
him to station his’ great elephant 
Kuvalayapida, who was as vast as a cloud 
charged with rain, near the gate of the arena, 


467 


and drive him upon the two boys when they 
should attempt to enter. When Kansa had 
issued these commands, and ascertained that 
the platforms were all ready for the spectators, 
he awaited the rising of the sun, unconscious 
of impending death. 


Wa: WARAARY AMT: MW AAT WA: 

THAR UTS: ARMAS: 11 2 ¥ II 
TMS TEE ATTA : | 

aa: Har Hasty Tens raf ert V4 Il 
SAU AT Ta Uitalera: | 

SPT OT SAAT ATTA 2 & I 
TANGA MWA ASAT TAT: | 
THAT B Aaa Safer VN 
anTaafee HA Saat Yaa 
sTaareishe Gas gente Sat FSA Vc 
array ae wat wily aon 
BTSTAINT ores MreHeaet ATAU 2H 
Sea HaTANMNS FRaemonfedry! 
WANA eaaIgT AHSAN 3 © 11 
mrs sen feet waetentaciferctt 


WB Wares AeNIF-AATEATH 3 2 


In the morning the citizens assembled on 
the platforms set apart for them, and the 
princes, with the ministers and courtiers, 
occupied the royal, seats. Near the centre of 
the circle judges of the games were stationed 
by Kansa, whilst he himself sat apart close by 
upon a lofty throne. Separate platforms were 
erected for the ladies of the palace, for the 
courtesans, and for the wives of the citizens.’ 
Nanda and the cowherds had places 
appropriated to them, at the end of which sat 
Akrira and Vasudeva. Amongst the wives of 
the citizens appeared Devaki, mourning for 
her son, whose lovely face she longed to 
behold even in the hour of his destruction. 
When the musical instruments sounded, 
Cantra sprang forth, and the people cried, 
“Alas I’ and Mustika slapped his arms in 
defiance. Covered with must and blood from 


468 


the elephant, whom, when goaded upon them 
by his driver, they had slain, and armed with 
his tusks, Balabhadra and  Janarddana 
confidently entered the arena, like two lions 
amidst a herd of deer. 


RTA MEM a AAA 
FOUST TAASAAT HT ASAT NF VU 


ana At gat MNT Wear Ar Fryar 


fers prend ar Wr a eA 3 3 

asd a: afer ant arate aeTH:| 

ga Maga It Waa FerfaT: 113 wi 

ater aya: Agi cesta Weert 

Fred Ft SSM Sead AIST TAL 4 I 

SAMA UA GAAAR STANTS AT: | 

werfet citer AAT 113 GN 

ard WT aR Wit: FuUTalaen feat: | 

Moret area aot wae eafan 3 oi 

at a wae faa aon: 

satan Wali Ta MET TAUB CU 

Exclamations of pity arose from all the 
spectators, along with expressions of 
astonishment. "This then,” said the people, "is 
Krsna! this is Balabhadra! This is he by whom 
the fierce night-walker Pttand was slain; by 
whom the waggon was overturned, and the 
two Arjuna trees felled! This is the boy who 
trampled and danced on the serpent Kaliya; 
who upheld the mountain Govarddhana for 
seven nights; who killed, as if in play, the 
iniquitous Arista, Dhenuka, and Kesin! This 
whom we see is Acyuta! This is he who has 
been foretold by the wise, skilled in the sense 
to the Puranas, as Gopala, who shall exalt the 
the depressed Yadava race! This is a portion of 
the all-existing,  all-generating Visnu, 
descended upon earth, who will assuredly 
lighten her load !” 


sald afore at wa Hert wT ae 
STEAMY CAF: ASATAAEATATN 3 8 1 
vartafraraa yaratacianay) 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


gaa ayqeaisyg fasta FAT ol 
farnftnergrent wert: geaeary 
AMA aE FE AT aT TAI Y 
TE: Uys Hore Taney 
TAT SHAMAA- arg orMvAT TU ¥ 2 
SMHANS AES severe FrereTATA 
Ufa fat Sat anet Beatat sits v3 
HANS Tea aerate faeteaart 
faquernot aat yar waPm sen 


Thus did the citizens describe Rama and 
Krsna, as soon as they appeared; whilst the 
breast of Devaki glowed with maternal 
affection; and Vasudeva, forgetting his 
infirmities, felt himself young again, on 
beholding the countenances to his sons as a 
season of rejoicing. The women to the palace, 
and the wives of the citizens, wide opened 
their eyes, and gazed intently upon Krsna. 
“Look, friends,’ said they to their 
companions; “look at the face of Krsna; his 
eyes are reddened by his conflict with the 
elephant, and the drops to perspiration stand 
upon his checks, outvieing a full blown lotus 
in autumn, Studded with glittering dew. Avail 
yourself now of the faculty of vision. Observe 
his breast, the seat of splendour, marked with 
the mystic sign; and his arms, menacing 
destruction to his foes. 


fers Upafe Seg-goTeeaerAT 
TIS Aet- WATT TAA TALN 8 & I 
aern ose ver ata! 

fad TaUger srelafectesarT ¥ GU 
wea! yaad at agent eft 
aayrafa 4 aaa fe gar qaanftar: von 
we MeATSYA- YHA: 

FT AARSATT- PASS ABTYT 1 SE Il 
Sal Yoel we add Aaaeat 

SAA AAIULL- WATALASTOUT: 11% 8 I 
Prag migra were cater: 

Ug aerators TATA: WMATA 4 oI 


BOOK V, CHAP. 29 


Do you not notice Balabhadra, dressed in a 
blue garment; his countenance as fair as the 
jasmine, as the moon, as the fibres to the lotus 
seem? See how he gently smiles at the 
gestures to Mustika and C4niira, as they spring 
up. And now behold Hari advance to 
encounter Canira. What I are there no elders, 
judges of the field? How can the delicate form 
of Hari, only yet in the dawn of adolescence, 
be regarded as a match for the vast and 
adamantine bulk of the great demon ? Two 
youths, of light and elegant persons, are in the 
arena, to oppose athlelic fiends, headed by the 
cruel Canira. This is a great sin in the judges 
of the games, for the umpires to suffer a 
contest between boys and strong men.” 


WU Tare 
Sa Weieteney aaaanereary Ya 
FACT TSRASAAAT WTA SAT: WG 21 
aeniasta urenied aaet afer aan 
Ue Ue dar afta vin aaa Vt 
Soo sal Heat FayersPrafarswA: 
Praga Seat aero Awa 31 
afaararagdg aroptor aa eft: 
auchffehwla atoraaaray: nk vu 
wahengafatteadan aefaase: 
Wekgd: WERT TaN GG UI 
AMAA AT AAG Fare! 
SAMOA MATA ATE by GU 
mag Mas GT Bae Vitor Te 
WUTSAaa Waaayasa i & 9 II 
Hs gaa wt cera WAT: 
SMTA HLTA PATA TTA & CU 
aod fagtgsr quar wow: | 
SATA FAT HA: BTTTATT 1 & BI 
yegtieg gay wfafiey aaron! 

@ WpAsaErt caqaweatny: | 
wa Mifare! aot wife agra! ara 
SHAM eareareactreteat: 11 & ot 


469 


mop fat act mifecar waAST: 
SNA UAT ARE AEA 2M 
omaferer yrenpor aenamataatard 
YRTARCATAT TTY MTA ETAT & 2 
TATARSTAN ATTN: PITA SATA 
THala-AeMgt WaT A Tal YAH G 3 
ATCASH Teale Alwar Wea: | 
age sea aor Ber Vf 1G Vil 


Tsat yf Yelet aareareed SAT 

Urafacan gs Frere WMATA g & I 

As thus the women of the city conversed 
with one another, Hari, having tightened his 
girdle, danced in the ring, shaking the ground 
on which he told, Balabhadra also danced, 
slapping his arms in defiance. Where the 
ground was firm, the invincible Krsna con- 
tended foot to foot with Cantira. The practised 
demon Mustika was opposed by Balabhadra. 
Mutually entwining, and pushing, and pulling, 
and beating each other with fists, arms, and 
elbows, pressing each other with their knees, 
interlacing their arms, kicking with their feet, 
pressing with their whole weight upon one 
another, fought Hari and Canara. Desperate 
was the struggle, though without weapons, and 
one for life and death, to the great gratification 
of the spectators. In proportion as the contest 
continued, so Canara was gradually losing 
something of his original vigour, and the 
wreath upon his head trembled from his fury 
and distress®; whilst the world-comprehending 
Krsna wrestled with him as if but in sport. 
Beholding Cantra losing, and Krsna gaining 
strength, Kansa, furious with rage, 
commanded the music to cease. As soon as the 
drums and trumpets were silenced, a numerous 
band of heavenly instruments was heard in the 
sky, and the gods invisibly exclaimed, 
“Victory to Govinda! Kesava, kill the demon 
Cantira! Madhustidana having for a long time 
dallied with his adversary, at last lifted him 
up, and whirled him round, with the intention 
of putting an end to him. Having whirled 


470 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





Cantra round a hundred times, until his breath 
was expended in the air, Krsna dashed him on 
the ground with such violence as to smash his 
body into a hundred fragments, and strew the 
earth with a hundred pools of gory mire. 
Whilst this took place, the mighty Baladeva 
was engaged in the same manner with the 
demon bruiser Mustika. Striking him on the 
head with his fists, and on the breast with his 
knees, he stretched him on the ground, and 
pummelled him there till he was dead. 

AMTASMSTOT UTATATAT A TCT & & I 

aot Fed wes yee farrafac 

aid at aes Ue HET: MARTIN gol 

aaa al TS POTASAONGUT | 

AAAATa War Tetras Baath & cit 

ash alae: Mkteagary TWA 

Taradt Warsiterfaenreaat Seria: & Bi 

weta yet ue asad 

AIAN GSA AYeaISHT AMAA 9 0 tt 

aout Wat: Ha Yay alsa: YI 

Tray ferartast water ag fas y ei 

Again, Krsna encountered the royal bruiser 
Tomalaka, and felled him to the earth with a 
blow to his left hand. When the other athlete 
saw Chanira, Mustika, and Tomalaka killed, 
they fied from the field; and Krsna and 
Sankarsana danced victorious on the arena, 
dragging along with them by force the 
cowherds of their own age. Kansa, his eyes 
reddening with wrath, called aloud to the 
surrounding people, “Drive those two cow” 
boys out of the assembly: seize the villain 
Nanda, and secure him with chains of iron: put 
Vasudeva to death with tortures intolerable to 
his years: and lay hands upon the cattle, and 
whatever else belongs to those cowherds who 
are the associates of Krsna.” 


UAHUIAS WET ATS: | | 
SAS F AS Ha TMS ATT 2 


arearHel farterifentenatac 

HA A Ua TANG Wort AN 311 
fa: 319-STTEEMR- ou Tarahy 

POM Maa: MUNA FTI 9 YI 
UT SAVY Tey Rea HP YST: | 

dae Fs HAT WMA ATA Nk I 
TaUMfaAeA UAT AA PETA 

FA HA SSA AMAT ATTA: 11196 II 


HA YEA FONT TEMTATAPTAY TAT 
Barret senag citerta Frarfart: 1ov9tt 
aa Blelget WAAAY AKFAVSH! 
HATA Sa FRA HOM ATA 92 11 
Push ayes Wel HME AAT: | 
CAST ACTA AIAASTAAL 9 8 Il 
TUT Aya Sahil A WATE 
WAAMAIA aaa Wat Frat c oll 


Upon hearing these orders, the destroyer of 
Madhu laughed at Kansa, and, springing up to 
the place where he was seated, laid hold of 
him by the hair of his head, and struck his tiara 
to the ground: then casting him down upon the 
earth, Govinda threw himself upon him. 
Crushed by the weight of the upholder of the 
universe, the son of Ugrasena, Karisa the king, 
gave up the ghost, Krsna then dragged the 
dead body, by the hair of the head, into the 
centre of the arena, and a deep furrow’ was 
made by the vast and heavy carcass of Kansa, 
when it was dragged along, the ground by Krs 
na, as if a torrent of water had ran through it’ 
Seeing Kansa thus treated, his brother Sum4lin 
came to his succour; but he was encountered, 
and easily killed, by Balabhadra. Then arose a 
general cry of grief from the surrounding 
circle, as they beheld the king of Mathura thus 
Slain, and treated with such contumely, by 
Krsna. Krsna, accompanied by Balabhadra, 
embraced the feet to Vasudeva and of Devaki; 
but Vasudeva raised him up; and he and 
Devaki recalling to recollection what he had 
said to them at his birth, they bowed to 


BOOK V, CHAP. 29 


471 





Janarddana, and the former thus addressed 
him: 
aye sare 

Wate deat wer! sari ara: wat 

AMAA: WATT HAA APTA c 

smal TeTaradat Fe WAI 


sdittarnata wt A: Ufad Hes Vu 
TIM: MAYA WayErat wrt: | 

Wadd Ure! wad yerfaerttii ¢ 3 1 
apa fret qdetararega 

ANE Val APT TAMA WADE CS 
aga WH at ee afar Sa 
RASTA TERIA STATI C4 I 


“Have compassion upon mortals, O god, 
benefactor and lord of deities: it is by thy 
favour to us two that you have become the 
(present) upholder of the world. That, for the 
punishment of the rebellious, you have 
descended upon earth in my house, having 
been propitiated by my prayers, sanctifies our 
race. You are the heart of all creatures, you 
abide in all creatures; and al] that has been, or 
will be, emanates from you, O universal spirit! 
You, Achyuta, who comprehen all the gods, 
are eternally worshipped with sacrifices: you 
are sacrifice itself, and the offerer of 
sacrifices. The affection that inspires my heart 
and the heart of Devaki towards you, is 1f you 
were our child, is indeed but error, and a great 
delusion. 


ea Gut wayne wart 

wa FY agente fire gata aaa ¢ gt 

were! wept BA: 

wal Jar fat arat wiser: Wetfaeafai ¢ 9 

afer wfatedt wad sy VATS AT 

A RSA MAN AAS FATS oI 

a wale ata! unis fea- 
UpraarcRrt waa Tat 


SMTA STATS | 
wat fanteata fe westeqic 8 

How shall the tongue of a mortal such as I 
am call the creator of all things, who is 
without beginning or end, son? Is it consistent 
that the lord of the world, from whom the 
world proceeds, should be born of me, except 
through illusion? How should he, in whom all 
fixed and moveable things are contained, be 
conceived in the womb and born of a mortal 
being? 


Trafantedge war Aah 
HART BATAAN 
ataisfa aemerfaatsfraraeres 
Bex WAST AA Ae AACTATSTI eS ott 


arena aft a water Protea 
we fatter! srrarqenrvent: 
wrersfa A: afer ferret fe ares gu 
ste sitfeenygerar wararyt fart: SeaTe: It 


Have compassion therefore indeed, O 
supreme lord, and in thy descended portions 
protect the universe. You are no son of mine. 
This whole world, from Brahma to a tree, you 
are. Wherefore do you, who are one with the 
supreme, beguile us? Blinded by delusion, I 
thought you my son ; and for you, who are 
beyond all fear, I dreaded the anger of Kansa, 
and therefore did I take you in my terror to 
Gokula, where you have grown up; but I no 
longer claim you aS mine own. You, Visnu, 
the sovereign lord of all, whose actions Rudra, 
the Maruts, the Asvins, Indra, and the gods, 
cannot equal, although they behold them; you 
who has come amongst us for 'the benefit of 
the world, are recognised, and delusion is no 
more.” 


NOTES 


1 They had their bodies smeared in the style 
called Bhaktichheda (sfe=terfearst); that is, with 
the separating or distinguishing (cheda) marks of 


472 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





Vaisnava devotion (bhakti) : certain streaks on the 
forehead, nose, cheeks, breast, and arms, which 
denote a follower of Visnu. See As.Res.XV1.33. 

2 The story is similarly told in the Bhagavata, 
etc. 

3 The bending or breaking of a bow is a 
favourite incident in Hindu heroic poetry, 
borrowed, no doubt, from the Ramayana, where, 
however, it has an object: here it is quite gratuitous. 

4 The Bhagavata enters into even fewer 
particulars than our text of the place set apart for 
the games. The Hari VamSa gives a much more 
detailed description, which is in some respects 
curious. The want of any technical glossary, and 
the general manner in which technical terms are 
explained in the ordinary dictionaries, reader it 
difficult to understand exactly what is intended, and 
any translation to the passages must be defective. 
The French version, however, probably represents a 
much more splendid and threatrical scene-than the 
text authorizes, and may therefore admit of 
correction. The general plan is nothing more than 
an enclosed space, surrounded by temporary 
structures of timber or bamboos, open or enclosed, 
and decorated with hangings and garlands. It may 
be doubted it the details described by the compiler 
of the Hari VamSa were very familiar even to him; 
for his description is not always very cosistent or 
precise. Of two commentators, one evidently knows 
nothing of what be attempts to explain; but with the 
assistance of the other the passages may be thus, 
though not always confidently. rendered: 

“The king, Kanisa, meditating on these things, 
went forth from his palace to the place which had 
been prepared for the sight of the ceremonial (1). to 
inspect the scaffolds (2). which had _ been 
constructed. He found the place close set with the 
several platforms (3), of the different public bodies 
(4), strongly put togethcr, and decorated with 
roofed pavilions of various sizes, supported by 
colums. and divided into commodious chambers 
(5). The edifice was extensive, well arranged, 
secured by strong rafters (6) spacious and lofty, and 
commodious and secure. Stairs led to the different 
galleries (7). Chairs to state (8) were placed in 
various parts of it. The avenues that conducted to it 
were narrow (9). It was covered with temporary 
stages and sheds (10), and was capable of 
sustaining the weight of a multitude. 


Having seen the place to the festival thus 
adorned, Kama gave orders, and said, To-morrow 
let the platforms and terraces and pavilions (11) be 
decorated with pictures and garlands and flags and 
images (12), and let them be scented with fragrant 
odours, and covered over with awnings (13). Let 
there be ample heaps of dry, pounded cow-dung 
(14) provided on the ground, and _ suitable 
refreshment chambers be covered over, and 
decorated with bells and ornamented arches (15). 
Let large water-jars be securely fixed in order, 
capable of holding a copious supply, and provided 
with golden drinking-cups. Let apartments be 
prepared (16), and various kinds of beverage, in 
appropriate vessels, be ready. Let judges of the 
games be invited, and corporations with their 
chiefs. Let orders be issued to the wrestlers, and 
notice be given to the spectators; and let platforms 
for their accommodation be fitted up in the place of 
assembly’ "(17). 

When the meeting takes place, the site of the 
games is thus described: “Upon the following day 
the amphitheatre (18) was filled by the citizens. 
anxious to behold the games. The place of 
assemby(19) was supported by octagonal painted 
pillars (20), fitted up with terraces and doors and 
bolts, with windows circular or crescent; shaped, 
and accommodated with seats with cushions (21). 
and it shone like the ocean whilst large clouds hang 
upon it, with spacious, substantial pavilions (22), 
fitted up for the sight of the combat; open to the 
front (23). but screend with beautiful and fine 
curtains (24), crowned with festoons of flowers, 
and glistening with radiance like autumnal clouds. 
The pavilions of the different companies and 
corporations, vast as mountains, were decorated 
with banners, bearing upon them the implements 
and emblems of the several crafts (25). The 
chambers of the inhabitants of the inner apartments 
shone near at hand, bright with gold and painting 
and net-work of gems: they were richly decorated 
with precious stones, were enclosed below with 
costly hanging, and ornamented above with spires 
and banners, and looked like mountains spreading 
their wings in the sky; while the rays of light 
reflected from the valuable of jewel were blended 
with the waving of white chowries, and the musical 
tinkling of female ornaments. The separate 
pavilions of the courtesans were graced by lovely 


BOOK V, CHAP. 39 


473 





women, attired in the most splendid dresses (27), 
and emulated the radiance of the cars of the gods, 
In the place of assembly there were excellent seats, 
couches made of gold, and hangings of various 
colours, intermixed with bunches of flowers: and 
there were golden vases of water, and handsome 
places for refreshment, filled with fruits of various 
kinds, and cooling juices, and sherbets fit for 
drinking (28). And there were many other stages 
and platforms, constructed of strong timber, and 
hangings by hundreds and thousands were 
displayed: and upon the tops of the houses, cham- 
bers fitted up with delicate jalousies, through which 
the women might behold the sports, appeared like 
swans flying through the air, 

“In front stood the pavilion of Kansa, surpassing 
all the rest in splendour, looking like mount Meru 
in radiance; its sides, its columns, being covered 
with burnished gold : fastened with coloured cords; 
and every way worthy the presence of a king.” 

{n justification of the rendering of the above, an 
explanation of the technical terms, taken either 
from dictionaries or from the commentators, may 
be subjoined. (1) Kansa went to the Preksigira 
(arm), literally ‘house of seeing;’ but it is evident, 
from its interior being visible to spectators on the 
tops of the houses, as subsequently mentioned, that 
it was not a theatre, or covered edifice. If a building 
at all, it was merely a sort of stockade. One 
commentator calls it, 'a place made for seeing the 
sacrifice, wqtesermnd gd ear (2) Mafichanam 
avalokaka (qarmacites:), The Mafichi is commonly 
understood to signify a raised platform, with a floor 
and a roof, ascended by a ladder: see Dictionary, 
(3) Maficha-vata (H#ae:). Vata is either ‘site’ or 
'inclosure,' and is used here without much affecting 
the sense of Marjicha. The compound is explained 
by the commentators, 'prepared places’ (faa: ), 
or ‘the sites of the platforms’ (Waya:). (4) The 
Srenis (2I), associations of artificers practising 
the same art. One of the commentaries understands 
the term to be here used to denote, not their station, 
but their labours: 'The structure was the work of the 
artificers' (vita yart). (5) Several words occur here 
of technical import. The passage is, @aarm 
mayday eitiavgcine weayfid: Valabhi 
is said by the commentator to mean a structure with 
a pent roof, supported by six columns, Kuti, a 
circular one, having seven roofs—something 


perhaps hke a Chinese pagoda—and four columns. 
The Eka-stambha is a chamber, supported by one 
column: aeaiitewaa asa welt: oq een 
eafiargaih: awa: SASH TRE: Ml (6) 
Saraniryytham (aRhzg)- It is difficult to 
understand the necessity of rafters in an inclosure in 
which the platforms and stages seem to have been 
erected independently of any floor or wall: but the 
commentary explains Niryyiha, strong brackets, 
projecting from a house: ares gearless: 
qeraimersty! (7) Aslisnta suslista manchérohanam. 
The first epithet is explained, ‘not contracted’ 
(sdgfad); the second, ‘well constructed’ (anya); 
and for the ‘ascending’ (Arohanam) we have 
aries ‘where was a line of steps,’ or ‘ladders’. 
There is another reading to the text, however, 
which may be rendered, ‘Having steps well secured 
in their ascent above’ (seq yarrgfere Fue). (8) 
‘Seats for king’ (ssraas ). (9) Such is the literal 
purport of Saficdra-patha-sankulam (aurqaage ), 
implying, possibly, the formation of passages by 
fences on either side. (10) This is doubtful; the 
phrase is (sa aefeaiy: ) Channam-tad-vedikabhi. 
Channam means, literally, ‘covered,’ and can 
scarcely be used in the sense of 'overspread or filled 
with.’ Vedika means an elevated floor or terrace, 
with which a halt or edifice cannot well be ‘covered 
;’ and therefore requires the sense here given to 
Channa. The commentators are silent. (11) The 
Mancavatas and Valabhis, as above : the other term 
is Vithi, "a shop.’ ‘a terrace,’ 'a road.’ (12) Let them 
be Vapusmanta (aq); ‘having painted or 
sculptured figures' (faxqeafe year:). The other 
commentary render it merely ‘pleasant’ or 
‘agreeable’ (eget). (13) ‘Covered above with 
cloths' (3vtaracser:). The use of the awning or 
Samiana is very common in India. (14) For the 
wrestlers to rub over their bodies to absorb the 
perspiration (avari waeand ). (15) This is all 
rather questionable: the passage is most usually, 
WARM Araaqe: | Vali or Ball in one sense 
means ‘the edge of a thatch,’ and may be put for 
some sort of temporary structure, a kind of retiring 
or refreshment room for the boxers and wrestlers. 
In some copies it is read, Wren: ‘beautiful with 
clothes spread,’ on which the performers may sit 
when disengaged ; perhaps a sort of carpet on the 
ground. (16) The expression is again Vali 
(amaattaecant ). Another sense of the word is. 


474 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





offering of viands, or of the remains of a sacrifice, 
to all beings; but that cannot be its purport here; nor 
is it ever used in the sense of viands in general. The 
verb Kalpa or Klrip also usually implies 'making.' 
(17) Maficavata ; ‘in the Samaja,’ or ‘assembly.’ 
(18) Maharafiga (Aer#) ‘the great place of the 
performance.’ Rajiga is ‘acting’ or ‘representation.’ 
also the place or site of it (19) All the copies 
consulted, except one, offer an irregularlity of 
construction, which, although defended by the 
commentators, is a license scarcely allowable. The 
epithets of the first verse are all in the plural 
number; they then occur in the singular, to agree 
with the only substantive in the description, 
Samajavata. According to the commentaries, the 
plural term Maricaés (Ha: ) understood is the 
substantive to the epithets of the first stanza, and 
Samajavata the singular to those of the other verses. 
This awkardness is however avoided by the reading 
of an old and very good copy, which puts it all in 
the singular; as, afareriran: artagraes: wraensasa 
accra: (20) The expression is Charana, 
literally ‘foot ;' explained by the commentator, 
Stambha, 'post’ or ‘pillar.’ (21) The reading of most 
of the copies is Sayanottama (wrrars: ), which may 
be taken as the sense of Talottama. 'couches or 
benches with cushions.’ (22) Mancagarais (7am), 
‘temporary houses,’ (23) Or ‘fronting to the east’ 
(we @:). (24) Nirmuktais (Frfs:): explained by the 
commentator to mean ‘fine threads, "network,’ or 
‘gauze.’ through which persons, females especially, 
may see without being seen. (25) tmastg aaah: 
qarat:1 (26) ‘With ridges and projections’ (a 
agryetn), The commentator explains this, ‘with 
flages on the top of them (saft ext ayaa), (27) This 
appears to be intended for an epithet of the women, 
although Astarana is not usually applied to dreas: 
sreorat wire ogee: (21) weraérquia uae. 
urafin:!| Phala to course, is ‘fruit?’ Avadanga is 
explained in lexicons, 'what is eaten to excite thirst 
:’ one comment gives it, ‘what may be sucked,' as 
tamarinds, and the like. Changeri is explained, 
‘fluids for drinking, made with sorrel, or acid fruits; 
’ that is, sherbets. (29) saarmRa or saermat is an 
epithet of the Preksagara, or look-out house of the 
women (et WeTyeT:), situated on the tops of their 
houses, according to the commentators; Jerk Fé aq 
ASAT AAA: «= WeYeI:1 an arrangement very 
compatible with the form of Indian houses, which 


have flat roofs, commonly enclosed by a trellis 
work, or jalousie of masonry. It is observable, that 
in the Visnu Purana, and in the Mahabharata, on 
various public occasions, the women take their 
places on the platforms, or in the pavilions, without 
curtains or screens. 

5 The terms here used are technical, and refer to 
the established modes of wrestling amongst Hindu 
athlete. 1. Sannipita (afmr:) is described 'mutual 
laying hold of.’ 2. Avadita (sraq@: ), ‘letting go of 
the adversary.’ 3. Ksepana (891), ‘pulling to, and 
casting back.’ 4. Mustinipata (afsfrm:), ‘striking 
with fists.’ 5. Kilanipadta (@rafor:), ‘striking with 
the elbow.’ 6. Vajranipata (asfrad: ), ‘striking with 
the fore-arm.' 7, Janunirghata (orgrafa: ), ‘pressing 
or ‘striking with the knees.’ 8. Bahuvighattana 
(agfasqec4), "interlacing the arms.' 9. Padoddhita 
(areleua), ‘kicking.’ 10. Prasrshta (7981) ‘intertwining 
of the whole body.' In some copies another term 
occurs, Asmaoirghata (srafeia:). ‘striking with 
stones,’ or, striking blows as hard as with stones;' 
for stones could scarcely be used in a contest 
specified as ‘onc without weapons' (3 FS) 

6 Krsna contended with Chania, ‘who through 
distress and anger shook the flowers of his crest; 
areraan ~aierrarm) The two last terms are 
explained. 'the flower of the wreath on his head:'’ 
Taras TS | 

7. Et latus median sulcus diducit arenam. "The 
yielding sand being furrowed into a ditch or water- 
course, by the dead bodies being dragged over it. 
The text is TRavntiaen uta ea Hern Ha sHaer Wa 
As AST: Il 

etek 


474 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


CHAPTER 21 
Tafagnseaa: 
(sreter Taft: , weit argeaey 
fares) 
WUT JaTT 

at ayaa wmracantestard 

caal-ageal J ewan wat Gee: 

Were agumer fadary a serstrqi gi 


BOOK V, CHAP. 21 


475 





Sara Ura! sareta! faragenftads Ai 
Taatt Halest Fat AFIT A 2 
Haat Alt a: let oraVaAT 
avenge setae fe sea 3 
7e-2a-faardiat arenfester WT 
Haat MHet wr Afeat ara! Sra vit 
ad aceatad wantrange fora: 
AMATI AAAN: WATT: 1 4 


Having permitted to Devaki and Vasudeva 
an interval of true knowledge, through the 
contemplation of his actions, Hari again 
spread the delusions of his power over them 
and the tribe of Yadu. He said to them, 
“Mother; venerable father; you have both been 
long observed by Sankarsana and myself with 
sorrow, and in fear of Kansa. He whose time 
passes not in respect to his father and mother, 
1s a vile being, who descends in vain from 
virtuous parents. The lives of those produce 
good fruit, who reverence their parents, their 
spiritual guides, the Brahmanas, and the gods. 
Pardon therefore, father, the impropriety of 
which we may have been culpable, in 
resenting without your orders, to which we 
acknowledge that we are subject, the 
oppression we suffered from the power and 
violence of Kansa.” 


SYA wort AggaMA TANT 
aaraahraeT Mag: U-AAATH § II 
HAUT: He Utard et aha 
factquiawmre § :tapenatteyay: 1911 
agra WIAA ete: | 

a: AAPTaAaATA Tar afacrayay: 11 oH 
ST Tat TIAA Wee: | 
snatiar wat Fares FaTeATI 8 1 
Tafa: Aor vefse: Great a: 
Gea WetHraifor Y UY AA UAfAAT: 1 Vo tt 
gitgqaeed a4 fagrartd eft: 


sarararag fart! aq ariafasisa: 1 ee 
TaaAMaS AM SAATTATS ST ATTA 
ata yet Peat tarngroag fe FI gai 


Thus speaking, they offered homage to the 
elders of the Yadu tribe in order, and then in a 
suitable manner paid their respects to the 
citizens. The wives of Kansa, and those of his 
father, then surrounded the body to the king, 
lying on the ground, and bewailed his fate in 
deep affliction, Hari in various ways expressed 
his regret for what had chanced, and 
endeavoured to console them, his own eyes 
being suffused with tears. The foe of Madhu 
then liberated Ugrasena from confinement, 
and placed him on the throne, which the death 
of his son had left vacant. The chief of the 
Yadavas, being crowned, performed the 
funeral rites of Karnsa, and of the rest of the 
slain. When the ceremony was over, and 
Ugrasena had resumed his royal seat, Krsna 
addressed him, and said, “Sovereign lord, 
command boldly what clse is to be done. The 
curse of Yayati has pronounced our race 
unworthy of dominion:' but with me, for your 
servant, you may issue your orders to the gods. 
How should kings disobey them? ” 


GUM Sara 


SYR MSS SAAT A ATAU! 

SAT VT WTA Hea: HAATA: 11 V3 tl 

Trays Ble Arar! caqet eur area 

AAATGAAATT FIAT MAT WAT XII 

HO TAA WaTEvagerayATAA 

Qa WT Beat wera AG y V4 

Thus having spoken, the human Kesava 
summoned mentally the deity of the wind, 
who came upon the instant, and said to him, 
“Go, Vayu, to Indra, and desire him to lay 
aside his pomp, and resign to Ugrasena his 
splendid hall Sudharman: tell him that Krsna 
commands him to send the royal hall, the 
unrivalled gem of princely courts, for the 
assemblage of the race of Yadu.” 


476 


GUST Jar 


Sam: Va Tear Wdare yrerakey 

eat Bisht Beare BA at: YTET: gn 

arent agar feeat Bat A Ag GRAN: 

Sy: TATTEaT Maas 29 

fafenfaatart waarrarata 

fread ant Great wari ee 
Accordingly Vayu went, and delivered the 


message to the hushand of Saci, who 
immediately gave up to him the hall 
Sudharman, and Vayu conveyed it to the 
Yadavas, the chiefs of whom thenceforth 
possessed this celestial court, emblazoned with 
jewels, and defended by the arm of Govinda. 
The two excellent Yadu youths, versed in all 
knowledge, and possessed of all wisdom, then 
submitted to instruction, as the disciples of 
teacher. 

at: Urcah aeMadtgarera 

seared WGA Tersa-HATEAT I VS 

ae frente qequat fe ah 

CH DIESE ACIRICID IRI mac lE RT] 

Awe Tad WaeAATAATA! 

aTeltraayy apaTgayeTayS FEA: 2 2 

areal Tar: Hniferarye 

fafa at dar AA wet as-feareati 2 2H 

STITT WAATTATET tl 

Saafsaat a at ararar We sao 2 31 

ASadreaaNaea Tat: at ETAT: 

TAA Ta YT WA HATTUTA 2 ¥ I 

Terareal aaeit F etarat wearer: 

STATI A WAT GAT Bat: APS ATA TAA VG 

Cel: USS ATT VIET: A AAT 

wae Bishet Blower AAATYT ASAI 2 & A 
Accocdingly they repaired to 
Sandipani—who, though born in K4si, resided 
at Avanti-to study the science of arms, and, 
becoming his pupils, were obedient and 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


attentive to their master, exhibiting an 
example to all men of the observance of 
instituted rules. In the course to sixty-four 
days they had gone through the elements to 
military science, with the treatises on the use 
of arms, and directions for the mystic 
incantacions, which secure the aid of 
supernatural weapons,’ SAndipani, astonished 
at such proficiency, and knowing that it 
exceeded human faculties, imagined that the 
sun and moon had become his scholars. When 
they had acquired all that he could teach, they 
said to him, "Now say what present shall be 
given to you, as the preceptor's fee." The 
prudent Sandjpani, perceiving that they were 
endowed with more then mortal powers, 
requested them to give him his dead son, 
drowned in the sea of Prabhasa.” Taking up 
their arms, they marched against the ocean; 
but the all-comprehending sea said to them, “I 
have not killed the son of Sandipani; a demon 
named Panchajana, who lives in the form of a 
conch shell, seized the boy: he is still under 
my waters. 


SHASTA Wal Fa Ta GENT 

PON ANE TAMA-WIST VIS UATAT 2911 

Tel Aer Searat aereraTaTaA 

cart age Wal aI Parr 211 

af Ural Tear age eft: 

aeeay aca free aaa AAAI 28 

a wet aes serra 

fox Wena FON aes aferat aT: 3 ot 

TOUTS YA: MATa Tear 

Weerareitaragyy WA-WATEAT 3 2 

sfa sifaegeoy usemigt wafagr: sara: II 
On hearing this, Krsna plunged into the 

sea; and having slain the vile Panchajana, he 
took the conch shell, which was formed of his 
bones (and bore it as his horn), the sound of 
which fills the demon hosts with dismay, 


animates the vigour of the gods, and 
annihilates unrighteousness. The heroes also 


BOOK V, CHAP. 272 477 





recovered the boy from the pains of death, and 
restored him in his former person to his father, 
Rama and Janarddana then returned to 
Mathura, which was well presided over by 
Ugrasena, and abounded in a happy population 
both of men and women. 


NOTES 


| The curse pronounced on the elder sons of 
Yayati, on their refusing to take upon them their 
father's infirmities, SecBk. IV.CH. X. 

2 They read through the Dhanur-veda, which 
treats of military matters; with the Rahasya, ‘the 
mystical part ;’ and the Sangraha, ‘collection’ or 
‘compendium, said to be here the Astra-prayoga, 
‘the employment of weapons.’ 

3 Prabhasa is a place of pilgrimage in the west of 
India, on the coast of Guzerat, near the temple of 
Somanath, and town of Pattan Somanath. It is also 
known by the name of Soma-tirtha; Soma, or the 
moon, having been here cured of the consumption 
brought upon him by the imprecation of Daksa, his 
father-in-law, Mahabharata, Salya Parva. 

4 The incidents of the two last chapters an 
related in the Bhagavata and Hari Vamsa. often in 
the words of the text, but with many 
embellishments and additions, especially in the 
latter. The Brahma Vaivartta, on the other hand, 
makes still shorter work of these occurrences than 
our text 

kK 


BOOK V, CHAP. 272 477 


agar ar wer afer aferatra: i xi 
Ta Ae HOT Waa As TTATTI 
AGIA YMA UPSTATE GU 
ara Bl: ME Wt aerrarrat 
srearonendt at! aar arateat WANN GI 
TAT GMA WATT Hal 
araishrad fas! dr yaet qa oi 
aa Fae Wafer west arenferry 

Wa fafargqairgat wa-srreatii ct 


ParaSara said— The mighty Kansa had 
married the two daughters of Jarasandha, one 
named Asti, the other Prapti, Jarasandha was 
king of Magadha, and a very ‘powerful 
prince;! who, when he heard that Krsna had 
killed his son-in-law, was mueh ineensed, and, 
eallecting a large force, marched against 
Mathura determined to put the Yadavas and 
Krsna to the sword. Accordingly he invested 
the city with three and twenty numerous 
divisions of his forees”* Rama and Janarddana 
sallied from the town with a slender, but 
resolute force, and fought bravely with the 
armies of Magadha. The two youthful leaders 
prudently resolved to have reeourse to their 
aneient weapons, and aeecrdingly the bow of 
Hari, with two quivers filled with exhaustless 
arrows, and the mace called Kaumodaki, and 





CHAPTER 22 the ploughshare of Balabhadra, as well as the 
club Saunanda, descended at a wish from 
BUaASISEATa: heaven. Armed with these weapons, they 
speedily discomfited the king of Magadha and 
(HTAAET WNT: ) his hosts, and re-encered the city in triumph. 
WUT TATA fad afer Ugda werearesl Wena 
MUTA TA HA STAY Wear: | Saar wa Qwored aed PTT et 
ater wifagy tora! waned riced ed FASTA STN Tea: | 
aerreratiany wrenteateraen FRAT TA- OMA FESTAAN Qo I 
SURAT ATA: TASAATI 2A Se Met T VATA: | 
SUT AAT Bisa SUT ATT: | ag hratrat Wa Ua BOTTA: 1 eH 


stalfeontst: dren werfayrfahrsa: 113 1 waaay Tay Wed: w wafer: 
Remarriage wasnt AUST ATT: TATA ATTA 11 83 


478 


Although the wicked king of Magadha, 
Jarasandha, was defeated, yet Krsna knew that 
whilst he escaped alive he was not subdued, 
and in, fact he soon returned with a mighty 
force, and was again forced by Rama and Krs 
na to fly, Eighteen times’ did the haughty 
prince of Magadha renew his attack upon the 
Yadavas, headed by Krsna; and was as often 
defeated and put to the rout by them, with very 
inferior numbers. 

ae wet Meat atid ae: | 

ay ahatemrerra feoityrer aR 83 
TAMA Ste AT GATT: Tet 
AAUOIAHSUTTT ARTA AR Vv 
Waa Wee dens Haft a1 
ATATTURTATUUT AISAETALACAT: 11 24 I 
aaa at aye eeaqara 

Haq seraat ale Bes acteratii 2g 1 
A BUTEAR Ta As WEVA 

Hilla Gs eafaea TARA Vo 
aqetet wnfiaaqada:| 

CHAT STUART SST: AMAT 8S I 


That the Yadavas were not overpowered by 
their foes, was owing to the vresent might of 
the portion of the discusarmed Visnu. It was 
the pastime of tne lord of the universe, in his 
capacity of man, to launch various weapons 
against his enemies; for what effort of power 
to annihilate his foes could be necessary to 
him, whose fiat creates and destroys the 
world? but as subjecting himself to human 
customs, he formed alliances with the brave, 
and engaged in hostilities with the base. He 
had recourse to the four devices of policy, or 
negotiation, presents, sowing dissension, and 
chastisement; and sometimes even betook 
himself to flight. Thus imitating the conduct of 
human beings, the lord of the world pursued at 
will his sports. 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


NOTES | 


1 See Bk. IV. Ch. XIX. 

2 With twenty-three Aksouhinis, each consisting 
of 109,300 infantry. 65,610 horse, 21,870 chariots, 
and as many elephants. The Hari Vamsa 
enumerates, as the allies or tributaries of 
Jarasandha, a number of princes ‘from various parts 
of India, but this is a gratuitous embellishment. 

3. The Bhagavata and Hari Vamsa say ‘seventeen 
times.' The latter indulges in a prolix description of 
the first encounter; nothing of which occurs in the 
Bhagavata, any more than in our text. 

ke 


478 THE VISNU-PURANAM 


CHAPTER 23 
TAA : SATA: 


(Sar SAM, IIa FIR 
BUCCRSIG ESD 
WIM Sava 
Tra We fei vat: wes sear fe 
wea Ufaat wa Beg: Waaear: 11 gH 
aa: areranfaey efaronfenqaer A: 
Gare AIT AAT 2 
URAL Mele MSA HAT 
acl ate geet aret wast St 3 
WAAaMATA BF TaAM WATT: | 


TENA AAT YAS eer aay: 1 Yl 


ParaSara-Syala having called Gargya the 
Brahman, whilst at the cow-pens, impotent, in 
an assembly of the Yadavas, they all laughed; 
at which he was highly offended, and repaired 
to the shores of the western sea, where be 
engaged in arduous penance to obtain a son, 
who should be terror to the tribe of Yadu. 
Propitiating Mahadeva, and living upon iron 
sand for twelve years, the deity at last was 
pleased with him, and gave him the desired 
boon. The king of the Yavanas, who was 
childless, became the friend of Gargya; and 
the latter begot a son by his wife, who was as 
black as a bee, and was thence called 
Kélayavana’. 


BOOK V, CHAP. 33 


df Heat A Tea TA AAT: | 
safer at oral SaASATA GM 
ag ane: yfaeat afer yar 
UNS ANT SAAT AAMT & 1 
wisalferganmnt aeelag irda: | 
THAT ATAPI 9 1 
weal wrerafast fara fer fer 


Seay wie araat Aaa! wegen ci 


The Yavana king having placed his son, 
whose breast was as hard as the point of the 
thunderbolt, upon the throne, retired to the 
woods. Inflated with conceit of his prowess, 
Kalayavana demanded of Narada who were 
the most mighty heroes on earth. To which the 
sage answered, “The Yddavas." Accordingly 
Kalayavana assembled many myriads of 
Mlecchas and barbarians’, and with a vast 
armament of elephants, cavalry, chariot, and 
foot, advanced impatiently against Mathura 
and the'Yddavas, wearying every day the 
animals that carried him, but insensible of 
fatigue himself. 


omsty farmer afd area Tery 
Gat THY Wey Upeer wfapea A 8 
TMT Get St A ATeaaal Feit! 

eM aaa Aart Scat FRET ott 
ree ot eaiteaty agg aT 
feraista aa gery: fear gag horggar: 1 ge 
afa wat wae aT YA wafad qa 
Seas SET UT HAT VLA LVM 
sft afera miferet aieenh eter 
aaa gem et great aa Fr e381 
TSM UetaMt ASrreraTS ATT 
TARY SAA ASTANA 8% I 
Raanfaatt Marea SATE: | 
ATA HATA VYTST Tt TAT LG 


When Krsna knew of his approach, he 
reflected that if the Yadavas encountered the 
Yavana, they would be so much weakened by 


479 


the conflict, that they would then be overcome 
by the king of Magadha; that their force was 
much reduced by the war with Magadha, 
whilst that of Kalayavana was unbroken, and 
that the enemy might be therefore victorious. 
Thus the Yadavas were exposed to a double 
danger. He resolved therefore to construct a 
citadel for the Yadu tribe, that should not be 
easily taken; one ‘that even women might 
defend, and in which therefore the heroes of 
the house of Vrisni should be secure; one in 
which the male combatants of the Yddavas 
should dread no peril, though he himself 
should be drunk or careless, asleep or abroad, 
‘thus reflecting, Krsna solicited a space of 
twelve furlongs from the ocean, and there he 
built the city of Dwaraka’, defended by high 
ramparts, and beautified with gardens and 
reservoirs of water, crowded with houses and 
buildings, and splendid as the capital of Indra, 
Amaravati. Thither Janarddana conducted the 
inhabitants of Mathura, and then awaited at 
that city the approach of Kalayavana. 


afenratad a2 ayant Fraga: 
Pea & Maret eet AIT VE 
a Wear ayes FT TENE FTI 
STATA WSTAT-AAIAT: WAT A Ts VO 
cya: BUSH wary AETTETLI 

aa Ba Veratal Wasa AWAIT Ve 
ast wage gaat Ewan wear FTA 
Wer ASAATA Ara HOt YSU: 1 VV 
sana Axa! wales AASTUTLN 2 o I 
a f targt ge vet Rrear vargqamt 
Fant: Grete Fa at al FUT 2 Vi 
ings ta: dae cRanerafeait 
SR Ba: TF sates 2 


When the hostile army encamped round 
Mathura Krsna unarmed went forth, and 
beheld the Yavana king, K4alayavana, the 
strong-armed, recognizing Vasudeva, pursued 
him; him whom the thoughts of perfect 
ascetics connot overtake. Thus pursued, Krsna 


480 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





entered a large cavern, where Mucukunda, the 
king of men, was asleep. The rash Yavana 
entering the cave, and beholding a man lying 
asleep there, concluded it must be Krsna and 
kicked him; at which Mucukunda awoke, and 
casting on him an angry glance, the Yavana 
was instantly consumed, and reduced to ashes. 
For in a battle between the gods and demons, 
Mucukunda had formerly contributed to the 
defeat of the latter; and, being overcome with 
sleep, he solicited of the gods as a boon that he 
should enjoy a long repose. “Sleep long and 
soundly,” said the gods; “and whoever disturbs 
you shall be instantly burnt to ashes by fire 


emanating from your body*.” 


Ud cual ad UG Geet a WAY 

HAMS BISAMS Wass PA: Het 

FUCA TAA ALAM AT HA ZI 

Tepes qaret qametaaiser 

Hage witht wayeat eft 2 

We Wet vary faotigred weet: 

ae aretor afrannfearaay ZN 

BT Tiarat Taree wea 24 1 

Ua Wel A Weel TRTTENTE 

qate Bred Aa Are WISAS TaN EI 

aus WaeA-Arewat TAI 

aad anfa waral wer wrewdtfsan 2911 

Saat Nags erat AEMwT: | 

A MHA TATRA TARTAR 2 CU 

Having burnt up the iniquitous Yavana, and 

beholding the foe of Madhu, Mucukunda 
asked him who he was, I am born," he replied, 
"in the lunar race, in the tribe of Yadu, and am 
the son of Vasudeva." Muchukuda, 
reccliccting the prophecy of old Garga fell 
down before the lord of all, Hari, saying, “You 
are known, supreme lord, to be a portion of 
Visnu; for it was said of old by Garga, that at 
the end of the twenty-eighth Dwapara age Hari 
would be born in the family of Yadu. You are 


he, without doubt, the benefactor of mankind; 
for thy glory I am unable to endure. Thy words 


are of deeper tone than the muttering of the 
rain cloud; and earth sinks down beneath the 
pressure of thy feet. As in the battle between 
the gods and demons the Asuras were unable 
to sustain my lustre, so even am I incapable of 
bearing thy radiance. 

Tarafadelal Wares PT TA 

G wale woaisal Sx WATT 28 UI 

wi Walaa: vet: afta aft 

Det WH aes aes TA WALZ oll 

arated WOT: WUrge aaT FATT 

Ya: wat Sy STAT ATI 3 VM 

Peres aaahiny 

Sgteaet Ace AAEraaaaa TU 3 I 

TAMISAT: Ufaad Aar-WeIa-faT: | 

FARA AAMT: THT: TAT 3 3 

WUT YM: Ta aA: Wa WEE: | 

aa Wd Magers fafyer UTI 3 VI 

ard TATA Wet Venat Perry 

aad w Wqerat afer fear cara FAT 3 & I 

You alone are the refuge of every living 
being who has lighted on the world. Do you, 
who are the alleviator of all distress, show 
favour upon me, and remove from me all that 
is evil. You are the oceans, the mountains, the 
rivers, the forests: you are earth, sky, air, 
water, and fire: you are mind, intelligence, the 
unevolved principle, the vital airs, the lord of 
life-the soul; all that is beyond the soul; the 
all-pervading; exempt from the vicissitudes of 
birth; devoid of sensible properties, sound and 
the like: undecaying, illimitable, imperishable, 
subject neither to increase nor diminution: you 
are that which is Brahma, without beginning 
or end. From you the immortals, the 
progenitors, the Yaksas, Gandharbhas, and 
kinnaras, the Siddhas, the nymphs of heaven, 
men, animals, birds, deer, reptiles, and all the 
vegetable world, proceed; and ail that has 
been, or will be, or is now, moveable or fixed. 
All that is amorphous or has form, all that 1s 
subtile, gross, stable, or moveable, you are, O 


BOOK V, CHAP. 23 


481 





creator of the world; and beside you there is 
not any thing. 
WaT WaT ASST TAT AT AAT 
araaaryat a wren fra: gafaq 3 ei 
Zaria garifa page erga 
aM ATA! Wealha My AAA ANAT 3 II 
TEyat aet are fever: | 
Ma YA J a yreran fara: wAUacu 
Fars war wa yerahranca 
UU TAS AAT 3 8A 


© lord, I have been whirled round in the 
circle of worldly, existence for ever and have 
suffered the three classes of affliction, and 
there is no rest whatever. I have mistaken 
pains for pleasures, like sultry vapours for a 
pool of water; and their enjoyment has yielded 
me nothing but sorrow. The earth, dominion, 
forces, treasures, friends, children, wife, 
dependants, all the objects of sense, have I 
posscssed, imagining them to be sourccs of 
happiness; but I found that in their changcable 
nature, O lord, they were nothing but vexation. 


cactenfant wat ater! zanviseray 
Wd: Wears Hr Fest: ¥ ot 
MANIA Wat WaT WraTATST 
Wry Wed ar ata! Friar: we 
TATE SA-BRI- ST 
SATAY ATA, WATT ATS PN 
dat Potrargeateataarsuny 
WAT AMT FTA RATA ETAT & 3 II 
VeNeraaga Aerts WAT 
AAT ATAPI UTAATI ¥ XII 
Aisé wat preormmarciteraisai 
wore: UT aat 7 fafa 
Waresaraafranaerela4 
Frator ofcoraenter arene 1x 4 II 
sft sifaeorgerar USratst Tatler: SATA: II 
The gods themselves, though high in 
heaven, were in need of my alliance. Where 


then is everlasting repose? Who without 
adoring you, who are the origin of all worlds, 
shall attain, O supreme deity, that rest which 
endures for ever .? Beguiled by thy delusions, 
and ignorant of thy nature, men. after suffering 
the various penalties of birth, death and 
infirmity, behold the countenance of the king 
of ghosts, and suffer in hell dreadful tortures, 
the reward of their own deeds. Addicted to 
sensual objects, through thy. delusions I 
revolve in the whirpool of selfishness and 
pride; and hence I come to you, as my final 
refuge, who are the lord deserving of all 
homage, than whom there is no other asylum; 
my mind afflicted with repentance for my trust 
in the world, and desiring the fulness of 
fclicity, emancipation from all existence." 
kkk 


NOTES 


1. This legend of the origin of Kdlayavana is 
given also by the Hari Vamsa. The Bhagavata, like 
our text, comes at once to the siege of Mathura by 
this chief; but the Hari VamSa suspendeds the story, 
for more than thirty chapters, to narrate an origin of 
the Yadavas, and sundry adventures of Krsna and 
Rama to the south-west. Most of these have no 
other authority, and are no doubt inventions of the 
Dakhini compiler; and the others are misplaced. 

2. So the Bhagavata describes him as leading a 
host of Mlecchas, or barbariam, againct Krsna: but 
in the Mahabharta, Sabha Parvan, where Krsna 
deaeribes the power of Jarasandha, he admits that 
he and the Yadavas fled from Mathura to the west, 
through fear of that king, but no account is given of 
any siege of Mathura, by Kalayavana. The only 
indication of such a person is the mention that 
Bhagadatta, the Yavana king, ‘who rules over Muru 
and Naraka in the west and south, is one of his most 
attached feudatories. This king is in various other 
places called king to Pragjyotish, as he is in a 
subsequent passage of the same book, Sabha P.; 
and this name is always applied to the west of 
Assam. His subjects are, however, still Yavanas 
and Mlecchas, and he presents horses, caps set with 
jewels, and swords with ivory hilts", articles 
scarcely to be found in Assam, which cantiot well 
be the seat of his sovereignty. It seems most likely 


482 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





therefore that the story may have originated in 
some knowledge of the power and position of the 
Greek-Bactrian princes, or their Scythian 
succcssors, although in the latter compilations it has 
been mixed up with allusions to the first 
Mohammedan aggressians. See As, Res. V. 306. 
and XV 100. 

3. According to the Mahabharata, he only 
enlarged and fortified the ancient city of Kusasthalf, 
founded by Raivata, Sabba P.: see also Bk. IV. Ch. 
I of our text. 


4. The name of Mucukunda, as one of the sons 
of Mandhatri occurs io Bk. IV. Ch. II.; but no. 
further notice is taken of him. The Bhagavata 
specifies his being the son of that King, and relates 
the same story of his long sleep as the text The 
Same occurs in the Hart Vamsa. The general 
character of the legends in this chapter is that of 
reference to something familiar, rather than its 
narration, In the Hari Vamsa the opposite extreme 
is observable, and there the legends are as prolix as 
here they are concise. The Bhagavata follows a 
middle course; but it seems unlikely that in either 
of the three we have the original fables. 


KK 


482 


CHAPTER 24 
Uafasseara: 
(ATS FUPCA WIA, ATTA SAAT UI) 
UU sara 
Set Waal AA Yeraret staan 
WSN: Wayararnfestary BT a 
AUATATTATA 
aanrarseary fear Wey rary ALT 
seedaat wararalas feds I 
Wea wy Tatler wears warp 


HUTA STATA Ta MATTAPAN 3 


Thus praised by the wise Mucukunda, the 
sovereign of all things, the eternal lord, Hari, 
said to him, "Go to whatever celestial regions 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


you wish, lord of men, possessed of might 
irresistible, honoured by my favour. When you 
have fully enjoyed all heavenly pleasures, you 
shall be born in a distinguished family, 
retaining the recollection to your former 
births; and you. shall finally obtain 
emancipation.” 


WIT Sata 
Sa: Moree Seraregd FT: 
qergarg fafrenraht eae Biscay AUN 
AA: Bory Meal Wt AT FIAT: 
TOTO TTA TTATETA & I 
Having heard this promise, and prostrated 
himself before Acyuta, the lord of the world. 
Mucukunda, went forth from the cave, and be- 
holding men of diminutive stature, now first 
Knew that the Kali age had arrived. The king 


therefore departed to Gandhamadana, the 
shrine of Narandrayana, to perform penance. 


Posts uaa fe aarerzi 
FE AYUTAT SRT SATAN & Il 
Sata IAAT Rat Aaa 
ToRMAaM- Ws Ty UT Yel HeTT W911 
aceaiste Waa! werenfactare: . 
airaayraenus: Wash WaT 2 
aat Tey Tair sargeafrar 
AANA VOT ACA: ATTN 8 
dante wmoftean: aif a ofa 
Bas Ut diye Tote Yon 
Haaragay MUTT TUATT! 
Trey Waanhta: wa: SeAaTIT: We 
WA: URUT APSE: | 
HATA YS PUAN ATATT SH: | 22 
weETIEaT ahaa Yraeany 
araraaratcdh Hata aordee: 1 2301 
cael CAR A: HON MATT Be 
ATA AAT FF URSA ev 


BOOK V, CHAP. 25 


swat f& aera radi ae 
aearentstaat at faarench afer e4 1 


Krsna having by this stratagem destroyed 
his enemy, returned to Mathura, and took 
captive his army, rich in horses, elephants and 
cars, which he conducted to Dvaraka, and 
delivered to Ugrasena, and the Yadu race was 
relieved from all fear of invasion. Baladeva, 
when hostilities had entirely ceased, being 
desirous of seeing his kinsmen. went to 
Nanda's cow-pens, and there again conversed 
with the herdsmen and their females, with 
affection and respect. By some, the elders, he 
was embraced; others, the juniors, he 
embraced and with those of his own age, male 
or female, he talked and laughed. The cow 
herds made many kind speeches to Halayudha; 
but some of the Gopis spoke to him with the 
affectation of anger, or with feelings of 
jealousy, as they inquired after the loves of 
Krsna with the women of Mathura. “Is all well 
with the fickle and inconstant Krsna ?" said 
they: “Does the volatile swain, the friend of an 
instant, amuse the women of the city by 
laughing at our rustic efforts (to please him)? 
Does he ever think of us, singing in chorus to 
his songs ? Will he not come here once again 
to see his mother ? But why talk of these 
things? it is a different tale to tell for him 
without us, and for us without him. 


faa Brat Ta Brat FAT GA farn 

A WH eoHaS ae FE AT OG 

crente raferareratrearr rere 

HU FON AHA AAATHOT ATTAIN VW 

armlatisal gest: whan tn eet 

Father, mother, brother, hushand, kin, what 

have we not abandoned for his sake ? but he is 
a monument of ingratitude. Yet tell us does 
not Krsna talk of coming here ? Falsehood is 
never, O Krsna, to be uttered by you, Verily 
this is Damodara, this is Govinda, who has 
given up his heart to the damsels of the city, 
who has no longer any regard for us, but looks 
upon us with disdain.” 


483 


WU Jara 


snbad @ aeola yaataette a 

REQ: Fat Wer elon TragTT: 11 22 

we: wag: draiwfaad: | 
TWaopafaat Arar: FeworenfAAarVSt: 1! Jot 
wirtex qeay Wa: UfTeTAAATTT: | 

SUBTA TY a aE Adora 2 a 

gia sttfampygaray usr Ugfalgt: SEAT: 

So saying, the Gopis, whose minds were 
fixed on Krsna, addressed Rama in his place, 
calling him Damodara and Govinda, and 
laughed and were merry; and Rama consoled 
them by communicating to them agreeable, 
mocest, affectionate, and gentle messages 
from Krsna, With the cowherds he talked 
mirthfully, as he had been wont to do, and 
rambled along with them over the lands of 
Vraja.' 

NOTES 

1. This visit of Balarama to Vraja is placed by 
the Hari VamSa anterior to the fall of Mathura; by 
the Bhagavata, long subsequent to the 
establishment of the Yadus at Dv4raka. 

tke 


BOOK V, CHAP. 25 


CHAPTER 25 
Uafayisear: 
(aR aase: APATaUTs) 
WU Jara | 

at fears we wWihter:. 
AGATE PTT TOT: 1 VI 
Frofanrecreer anretutratererteur: | 
STE TST: WE ASV 211 
aiet waat wer wfet wa! wetsrT:| 
SATAN TAT TD FS PT FI 


484 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





STITT APTA TAT TATAT TN It 
Wd: HAA USA AAMT A oigei 
Uae atest Waar! wert aa WEAN I 
aut a mane: waa Yara: 
Waal cferdt tiaarafagnee: en 
Sardar: aftrenrelfeientesetet: | 


Wires TA! aafeoniieare Agee 
AS ares Act UT A WATT a 


AAT Ad: HaGl ST WANS STFS 
Tete at ae Aa wad aafage:| 

OTe ATA Aaa Tere: 11 Qo It 
Wl HSI a Veet ant aaee fromm 
TATE TAUASA WHASTATA TEATN VII 


Whilst the mighty Sesa' the upholder of the 
globe, was thus engaged in wandering amidst 
the forests with the herdsmen, in the disguise 
of a mortal—having rendered great services to 
earth, and still considering what more was. to 
be achieved—Varuna, in order to provide for 
his recreation, said to his wife V4aruni (the 
goddess of wine). You. Madira, are ever 
acceptable to the powerful Ananta; go 
therefore, auspicious and kind goddess, and 
promote his enjoyments." Obeying these 
commands, Varuni went and established her- 
self in the hollow of a Kadamba tree in the 
woods of Vrnddvana, Baladeva, roaming 
about, came there, and smelling the pleasant 
fragrance of liquor, resumed his ancient 
passion for strong drink. The holder of the 
ploughshare observing the vinous drops 
distilling from the Kadamba tree, was much 
delighted, and gathered and quaffed them? 
along with the herdsmen and the Gopis, whilst 
those who were skilful with voice and lute 
celebrated him in their songs. Being inebriated 
with the wine, and the drops of perspiration 
standing like pearls upon his limbs, he called 
out, not knowing what he said, "Come hither, 
Yamuna river, I want to bathe." The river, 
disregarding the words to a drunken man, 
came not at his bidding: on which Rama in a 


rage took up his ploughshare, which he 
plunged into her bank, and dragged her to him, 
calling out, “Will you not come, You jade? 
Will you not come? Now go where you please 
(if you can).” Thus saying, he compelled the 
dark river to quit its ordinary course, and 
follow him whithersoever he wandered 
through the wood. 


Wilf agers aafageerern 

wateraaia Wt Ws AT PAC TAT LVI 

wisadieasnfa wa yilact afer 

Wise cat gerarast favors Wes! 23 1 

Assuming a mortal figure, the Yamuna. 
with distracted looks, approached Balabhadra, 
and entreated him to pardon her, and let her 
go: but he replied, “I will drag you with my 
ploughshare in a thousand directions, since 
you contemn my prowess and strength.” 


GU Sard 


Sea aaany Tat AEM Wafer: | 

say wenfad ase Fara SPAT Ter: 1 VS 

Wd: SITS aS BRITT Te: | 

VSIA Ae UTS WAAHA HVSETTN 4 I 

SeUNSa AT ATTA SAT 

ARTY Tea aes Ate Create VE I 

HUA: FT Tal AaHvSseryfad: | 

TASER: Sat YET aATATT: 1 Vo tt 

At last, however, appeased by her reiterated 

prayers, he let her go after she had watered all 
the country.” When he had bathed, the goddess 
of beauty Laksmi, came and gave him a 
beautiful lotus to place in one car, and an 
earring for the other; a fresh necklace of lotus 
flowers, sent byVaruna; and garments of a 
dark blue colour, as costly as the wealth of the 
ocean; and thus decorated with a lotus in one 
ear, a ring in the other, dressed in blue 
garments, and wearing a garland, Balarama 
appeared united with loveliness. 


set fanaa TA aa Were at 
TEA AT TA: A Beat TATU Ve 


BOOK V, CHAP. 26 485 


Yadt ama aaat taqet Weta: | 
STAY ToT TTA FrprateqaArn eit 
Stet sttfaaygeet waist wsfag: steare:it 
Thus decorated, Rama spotted two months 
in Vraja, and then returned to Dvadraké, where 
he married Revati, the daughter of king 


Raivata, by whom he had two sons, Nisatha 
and Ulmuka.* 





NOTES 


| The great serpent, of whom Balaréma is an 
incarnation. 

2 There is no vinous exudation from the 
Kadamba tree (Nauclea Kadamba), but its flowers 
are said to yield a spirit by distillation ; whence 
Kadambari is one the synonyms of wine, or 
spiritous liqour. The grammarians, however, also 
derive the word from some legend, stating it to be 
so called because it was praduced from the hollow 
of a Kadamba tree on the Gomantha mountain: 
TWereaMtedd merraleteart| The Hari Vamsa. which 
alone makes the Gomantha mountain the scene of 
an exploit of Krsna and Rama, makes no mention 
of this origin of wine; and the Bhagavata merely 
says that V4runi took up her abode in the hollow of 
a tree. There must be some other authority therefore 
for this story. 

3 The Bhagavata and Hari Varhsa repeat this 
story; the latter very imperfectly : the former adds, 
that the Yamuni4'is still to be seen following the 
course along which she was dragged by Balarama. 
The legend probably alludes to the construction of 
canals from the Jumna, for the purposes of 
irrigation; and the works of the Mohammedans in 
this way, which are well known, were no doubt 
preceded by similar canals dug by order of Flindu 
princes. 4 See Bk. IV. Ch. XIV. 

Heke 


BOOK V, CHAP. 26 485 


CHAPTER 26 
Tefaysead: 
(aferruTteTUry) 


WUT Sara 

fiery: Hoss ton faadfaaassad | 

GH TAMA FA VST TT ATSATI Vil 

Sfanuh GHA Hot: Bi a dt areata 

Tet Oral Mat wet BROT abACT VII 

Bay et ARATE HATTA ATT: | 

Teray Vato are wlanUTy ea: 1 3 UN 

faarert at: Ae WTAE FAT: | 

Heras yt aq: fergqaredeafeor: wit 

PONS argued: | 

Waal fuera 38 faaresa yy 4 

arifats faa g at eat waar eft: 

FaTAATTAAST WHET TTI & I 

aay Usa: sary eaant fase: 

FOOT eA- AUT I- NCATE WEN TT: 1119 1 

airaret aft oy aPSEITTAT! 

fates wares warekigg ga: 61 

Bhismaka was king of Vidarbha, residing 

at Kundina.' He had a son named Rukmin, and 
a beautiful daughter named Rukmini, Krsna 
fell in love with the latter, and solicited her in 
marriage; but her brother who hated Krsna, 
would not assent to the espousals. At the 
suggestion to Jardsandha, and with the 
concurrence of his son, the powerful sovereign 
Bhismaka affianced Rukmini to Sisupala. In 
order to celebrate the nuptials, Jarasandha and 
other princes, the friends of Sisupala, 
assembled in the capital of Vidarbha; and Krs 
na, attended by Balabhadra and many other 
Yadavas, also went to Kundina to witness the 
wedding. When there, Hari contrived, on the 
eve of the unptials, to carry off the princess,” 


leaving Rama and his kinsmen to sustain the 
weight of his enemies. Paundraka, the 


486 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





illustrious Dantavakra, Viduratha, Sisupila, 
Jarasandha, Salya, and other kings, indignant 
at the insult, exerted themselves to kill Krsna, 
but were repelled by Balarama and _ the 
Yédavas. 


alted + waeatt recat gla Ayan 

HA Wig VEN DT Sat HOTA: eI 
CA Tet TANT- Ui TAT 

fifsia: ufaasieat citerta a afaor 11 goll 
we Baar: Got earot TagaT 

worey afaat gery Sfaoa wary BT een 


Ua Wa AA Wa A PTAA 
ald Fray caer! urgiten water et 


Rukmin, vowing that he would never enter 
Kundina again until he had slain KeSava in 
fight, pursued and overtook him, In the 
combat that ensued, Krsna destroyed with his 
discus, as if in sport, the host to Rukmin, with 
all its horse, and elephants, and foot, and 
chariots, and overthrew him, and hurled him 
on the ground, and would have put him to 
death, but was withheld by the entreaties to 
Rukmini. "He is my only brother," she 
exclaimed, "and must not be slain by you: 
restrain your wrath, O divinc lord, and give me 
my brother in charity." 


sat oem: HUrTiasadon 

SEU MHS ATT OL FATAT AAT 23 Il 
fiir ofenut wend a afaquiy 
TAA frarey Wat VPTSA: | ev 
TRA FAST MEP AAT: FT Aeaary 
Wa WA Fa AM TI FT MATTN eG I 
sf stifaeqgaat warnist wafer: sree: 

Thus addressed by her, Krsna, whom no 
acts affect, spared Rukmin;’ and he (in pur- 
suance of his vow) founded the city Bhojakat 
a, and ever afterwards dwelt therein. After the 
defeat of Rukmin, Krsna married Rukmini in 
due form, having first made her his own by the 


Rakshasa ritual.” She bore him the gallant 
Pradyumna, a portion of the deity of love. The 


demon Sambara carried him off, but he slew 
the demon. 


NOTES 


1 Vidarbha is the country of Berar, and the name 
remains in the present city of Bedar: the capital 
however, Kundinapur, is commonly identified with 
a place called Kundapur about forty miles north- 
east to Amaravati (in Berar). 

2 When she had gone forth from the city to 
wordship Ambika: Bhagavata. Indrani. the wife of 
Indra: Hari Vamsa. Our text tells the circumstance 
more concisely than the others. 

3 After depriving him of his eyebrows and hair. 
In the Bhagavata, Balarama also interferes in 
favour of Rukmin, and reproves Krsna _ for 
disfiguring him. 

4 Of course this was somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of Kundina or Vidarbha, and 
usually supposed to be situated on the Narmada. 

5 That is, by violence: thus Manu: "The seizure 
of a maiden by force, whilst she weeps and calls for 
assistance, after her kinsmen and friends have been 
slain in battle, or wounded, and their houses broken 
open, is the marriage called Raksasa." III. 33. 
According to the Bhagavata, Rukmini sends to 
invite Krsna to carry her off, and instruct him how 
to proceed. 

eK 


486 THE VISNU-PURANAM 


CHAPTER 27 
Wefagnseara: 
(WATT VIATaZT) 
WALT Eat AT: MET: A Tet WA 
Was Netareal: MEE Set TAs H VU 


Maitreya said—How, Muni, happened it that 
the hero Pradyumna was carried away by 
Sambara? and in what manner was the mighty 
Sambara killed by Pradyumna? 


WUT SarT 
wsfg wag weet Ofrearyend 
ate Saft GA aaa ATTTAT 11 VI 
ear fata dat weet caurratal 


BOOK V, CHAP. 27 


HAA AMA YANL ATTA 3 I 
Ufa at decent We See aT 
TAA a eae Hats: Uv I 
qeray Asa wea: aE fea 
Unfadtsyrreare wrest Frere: 1 I 


ParaSara replied—When Pradyumna was but 
six days old, he was stolen from the lying-in 
chamber by Sambara, terrible as death; for the 
demon foreknew that Pradyumna, if he lived, 
would be his destroyer. Taking away the boy, 
Sambara cast him into the ocean, swarming 
with monsters, into a whirlpool of roaring 
waves, the haunt of the huge creatures of the 
deep. A large fish swallowed the child, but he 
died not, and was born anew from its belly:’ 
for that fish, with others, was caught by the 
fishermen, and delivered by them to the great 
Asura Sambara. 


AT AAA ATT Ustt Waye aT 


HATA YSTATATT TASTING I 

alta areastat ar cepifrgnray 

FAL TIATTT WIT ETA!| Ol 

casey Heat UST MAUI: | 

seq alganfasi at vat wre AE: cit 

ae UE: Alrsarcanfeon 

WAR EA: HN-Ta AtHrTEqI FI 

fam: Way nea Fatoke agi at: 

Tata ay faaen afar 1 oll 

His wife Mayadevi, the mistress of his 

household, superintended the operations of the 
cooks, and saw, when the fish was cut open, a 
beautiful child, looking like a new shoot of the 
blighted tree of love. Whilst wondering who 
this should be, and how be could have got into 
the belly of the fish, Narada came to satisfy 
her curiosity, and said to the graceful dame, 
“This is the son of him by whom the whole 
world is created and destroyed, the son of Vis 
nu, who was stolen by Sambara from the 
lying-in chamber, and tossed by him into the 


487 


sea, where he was swallowed by the fish. He is 
now in thy power; do you, beautiful woman, 
tenderly rear this jewel of mankind." 


WIM sara 


ATE AT TATA Ft ARTETA! 
TEMA TAT WTA PTAATSATI 8 A 
O Fer Baan yeas qarerae 
SUSTETAT TAT ATT AST ASTTPAAT I VU 
Wraradt Sal TS Aa: War Way 
WIAA AHARATTARTOT! 23 1 


Thus counselled by Narada, Maydadevi took 
charge of the boy, and carefully reared him 
from childhood, being fascinated by the 
beauty of his person. Her affection became 
still more impassioned when he was decorated 
with the bloom of adolescence. The 
gracefully-moving Mayavati then, fixing her 
heart and eyes upon the high-minded 
Pradyumna, gave him, whom she regarded as 
herself, all her magic (and illusive) powers. 


Weer aATE Wo aarfeat: aera 
araMranaerd fate adaszen i evi 

OT Ua BAA A Yaa TNT Sh 

ara cara faantgaary HIATT Vk I 
far: At ATER VAY STATA 

SH g fet F wre ararereiracden 26 1 


Observing these marks of passionate 
affection, the son of Krsna said to the lotus- 
eyed Mayaddevi, “Why do you indulge in 
feelings so unbecoming the character of a 
mother? ' To which she replied, "You are not a 
son of mine; you are the son of Visnu, whom 
Kala Sambara carried away, and threw into the 
sea: you was swallowed by a fish, but was 
rescued by me from its belly. Thy fond 
mother, O beloved, is still weeping for you." 


UUM SAT 
sey: Wat Yas MET: UAE 
MOATPAUHUA JAX A UAT: 11 VII 


488 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





Bear Va’ Ts Sees Trafa:| 

Aa Ara Safely WIT WAPASTATT ur Ve tt 
Aa Waa F Sel AAT Alera 

SUS A AIM ASAT FIG TSAU Let 
Sat Frafad wraracat waaay 

at FRAT PUTAZEM AYA: FOTIA ot 
sfenut maeq tom wees 
TUM: ead Yat add Aaatarru 2 vit 


afer aate gat & weet afe staf 

BT ST aeT! waa cara fara 2 ett 

BMT AM: Sel WT AGL APATa 

ae Forth Vary aca! afavatrn 23 

When the valiant Pradyumna heard this, he 
was filled with wrath, and defied Sambara to 
battle. In the conflict that ensued, the son of 
Madhava slew the whole host of Sambara. 
Seven times, he foiled the delusions of the 
enchanter, and making himself master of the 
eighth, turned it against Sambara, and killed 
him. By the same faculty he aseended into the 
air, and proceeded to his father's house, where 
he alighted, along with MAyavati, in the inner 
apartments. When the women beheld 
Pradyumna, they thought it was Krsna 
himself:. Rukmini, her eyes dimmed with 
tears, spoke tenderly to him, and said, “Happy 
is she who has a son like this, in the bloom of 
youth. Such would be the age of my son 
Pradyumna, if he was alive. Who is the 
fortunate mother adorned by you? and yet 
from thy appearance, and from the affection I 
feel for you, you are assuredly the son of 
Hari." 


WY Sata 
WafStaatt Wa: Ae HOM ANE: 
set yTa sat feat wre eva ev 
Ws FTAA: YY! SA Mea: 
Sal AAMAS AY Ta: TAHTSTL V4 tt 
Sa Wraadl wal qraearesa FT Tat 
WATT FT MTA TATA SHITOT TN 2 & 


TA F Ud Ae Ag RATTAN 
Mat AAAS ATAAoT STITH ott 

SSA WAT AAT YETI 

aparere tera were AfSterut Ici 
Misael: Yat Tees afer The: 

faygt WA HAM QV Aa VITA WW 

aa eaaaifasr wlaroi Ayaan 

ATT AAT AT AY AARIATTATI 3 0 1 

fart ada Rut Ua Mes alarvii 

Tay fered Wal gaa ATATAT 3 Vl 

sfa stifaeguat varaist wafagt: seater: 

At this moment Krsna, accompanied by 
Narada, arrived; and the latter said to the 
delighted Rukmini, "This is your own son, 
who has come hither after killing Sambara, by 
whom, when an infant, he was stolen from the 
lying-in chamber. This is the virtuous 
May4avati, his wife, and not the wife of 
Sambara. Hear the reason. When Manmatha, 
the deity of love, had perished,” the goddess of 
beauty, desirous to seeure his revival, assumed 
a delusive form, and by her eharms faseinated 
the demon Sambara, and exhibited herself to 
him in various illusory enjoyments. This thy 
son is the descended Kama; and this is the 
goddess Rati, his wife.’ There is no oeeasion 
for any uncertainty: this is thy daughter-in- 
law.”” Then Rukmini was glad, and Kesava 
also; the whole city resounded with exclama- 
tions of joy, and all the people of Dvaraka 
were surprised at Rukmini's recovering a son 
who had so long been lost. 


NOTES 


1 The Bhagavata tells the story in the same 
manner, but the Hari Vamsa omits the part of the 
fish. 

2 When he was reduced to ashes by a fiery 
glance from Siva, in resentment of his inflaming 
him with passion for Uma. This legend is a 
favourite with the Saiva Puranas, and is told in the 
Linga and Kalika, also in the Padma Purana. and 
Kasi Khanda of the Skanda PUR&nA They do not 
say much about his resuscitation however; Siva, in 


BOOK V, CHAP. 28 


pity of Rati's grief. restoring him only to a bodiless 
existence as Anafiga, whose place is to be in the 
hearts of men. The Linga adds, that when Visnu, in 
consequence of the curse of Bhrgu, shall be bom as 
the son of Vasudeva, Kama shall be born as one of 
his sons. 

3 The daughter of Daksa, but not enumerated 
amongst those formerly specified (Bk. I. Ch. VII.): 
she was born from his perspiration, according to the 
Kalika PUR&anA 

fokk 


489 


BOOK V, CHAP. 28 


CHAPTER 28 
SBTay Sea: 
(aferaa:) 


QU Jaret 


Ureewt Yow wecas area 

FAT ASTTS AKITS TATTTT 11 211 
aretag Gares aes afer avy 
Seas Yar Sat areca Far 2H 
STAM ATA: HOTT ay: GA PTT: | 
alferat faafarat a ear araferay aan 3 
cat raat ante Ufsott arraftrath 


ARAYA AM Ye Pe AVSAT I ¥ I 
TAR AMM SAAT ArSethaay| 
Weal Asari AoA VHT! 


Rukmini bore to Krsna these other sons, 
Charudesna, Sudesna, Charndeha, Susena, 
Chaérugupta, § Bhadrachaéru, Charuvinda, 
Such4ru, and the very mighty Charu; also one 
daughter, Charumati. Krsna had seven other 
beautiful wives, Kd4lindi, Mitravrnda, the 
virtuous Ndagnajiti, the queen Jambavanti; 
Rohini of beautiful form; the amiable and 
excellent daughter of the king of Madra, 
MaAdri; Satyabhamd, the daughter of Satrujit: 
and Laksmana, of lovely smiles'. Besides 
these, he had sixteen thousand other wives’. 


Wash yerdrat eferorerrat Fry 
TATA SME BM ad ws STNG I 


489 


aaa WaT Aa: | 

afregt Wl Hal drealefatieet: 91 

wena fen: wet aaa aera: | 

aifgara cel cael aT eras vitro ci 

wen ars Waren areat Bfton wal 

Sree art arate saternd faa et 

The heroic Pradyumna was chosen for her 
lord, at her public choice of a hushand, by the 
daughter of Rukmin; and he had by her the 
powerful and gallant prince Aniruddha, who 
was fierce in fight, an ocean of prowess, and 
the tamer of his foes. KeSava demanded in 
marriage for him the granddaughter of 
Rukmin; and although the latter was inimical 
to Krsna, he betrothed the maiden (who was 
his son's daughter) to the son of his own 
daugher (her cousin Aniruddha). Upon the 
occasion of the nuptials Rama and other 
Yadavas attended Krsna to Bhojakata, the city 
of Rukmin. 


fare wa Fret wert: querer: 
HasIAIAyal Van AMGAT |! oll 
sre Sent Bt Tae ST WEA 
AWAY Set HATS ETT WETTA 11 Vall 


After the wedding had been solemnized, 
several of the kings, headed by him of 
Kalinga, said to Rukmin, "This wielder of the 
ploughshare is ignorant of the dice, which may 
be convertcd into his misfortune: why may we 
not contend with him, and beat him, in play?" 


WUT Saray 
cafe ware JU] GA seraafart:| 
WTA WE WAT wa WAST F AAT VM 
deans Fea afar fara ae: 
fadaste wt araq age Sfenor Faraz 3 1 
aay Set VeaTioT Frearett wore 
SAMAISHAMT VM Bafseat AT LI 
aa Weta Taraq cafersrterafatew: | 
aay faayiery Wel GA Ure WeraT: 11841 





490 THE VISNU-PURANAM 
sfagisd Wa Wa aes: Wasa: | afaginned faaprd aes ae: | 
TATRA A: Ta Wisaralfaay ee I SUS AIM Hltal GI: Wargt WaTsA FT: WU 
Gea HSU FT RAVE! GST TEAST ATTRA eT: | 


Brent gatet art MA TONTAA: NV 

aa: alaadtareey Frenette wey: 

THE WME GEM DW acaesarararaqq Ve 11 

waa Teeaet wTeteet fart Tai 

Taft Gath wert Ter Ve 11 

The potent Rukmin replied to them, and 
said, "So let it be:' and he engaged Balarama at 
a game of dice in the palace,: Balarama soon 
lost to Rukmin a thousand Niskas*: he then 
staked and lost another thousand; and then 
pledged ten thousand, which Rukmin, who 
was well skilled in gambling, also won. At this 
the king of Kalinga laughed aloud, and the 
weak and exulting Rukmin grinned, and said, 
"Baladeva is losing, for he knows nothing of 
the game; although, blinded by a vain passion 
for play, he thinks he understands the dice." 
Halayudha, galled by the broad laughter of the 
Kalinga prince, and the eontemptuous speech 
of Rukmin, was exceedingly angry, and, 
overcome with passion, increased his stake to 
ten millions of Niskas. Rukmin accepted the 
challenge, and therefore threw the dice. 
Baladeva won, and cried aloud, "The stake is 
mine.” But Rukmin called out as loudly, that 
he was the winner. 


AIS THe: Ted A UdEsqatfea: | 

Ua wan de fafa wen a fafa aerqi 2011 

“Tell no lies, Bala," said he:”’the stake is 
yours; that is true; but I did not agree to it: 


although this be won by you, yet still J am the 
winner." 


STARA at: We Tere 

TACT ACH TEAM ATH: 2 Il 

fad aera edur claro sift Wart 

ayaa aa: fata Bi waht So 22 
aN TA: WYANT BIT Web: | 
TIATBTISAS GH YASTAT: 123M 


War Asay ee wa: BURY Te VGA 
A deep voice was then heard in the sky, 

inflaming still more the anger of the high- 
spirited Baladeva, saying, "Bala has rightly 
won the whole sum, and Rukmin speaks 
falsely: altuough be did not accept the pledge 
in words, he did so by his acts (having cast the 
dice).” Balaréma thus excited, his eyes red 
with rage, started up, and struck Rukmin with 
the board on which the game was played, and 
killed him’. Taking hold ot’ the trembling king 
of Kalinga, he knocked out the tecth which he 
had shown when he laughed. Laying hold of a 
golden column, he dragged it from its place, 
and used it as a weapon to kill those princes 
who had taken part with his adversaries. 

dl BelAd Wa weaaat fam 

agavset siht aya apfar Te E11 

aera Fad seat efanot aes: | 

Tara fafrita! afaruit-aerararg 200 

aaisPregnrara Fareys fester 


ARATARTINTT Use MAMAAN Vo 
sta sifaeygeer wsratst aretfetyt: Stee: II 

Upon which the whole circle, crying out 
with terror, took to fight, and escaped from the 
wrath of Baladeva. When Krsna heard that 
Rukmin had been kilted by his brother, he 
made no remark, being afraid to Rukmini on 
the one hand, and of Bala on the other; but 
taking with him the newly wedded Aniruddha, 
and the Yadava tribe, he returned to Dvaraka. 


NOTES 


1 The number specified, however, both in this 
place and in c. 32, is nine, instead of eight. The 
commentator endeavours to explain the difference 
by identifying Rohini with Jambavati: but in the 
notices of Krsna's posterity, both in this work and 
in the Bhagavata. she is distinct from Jambavati. 


BOOK V, CHAP. 29 


491 





She seems, however, to be an addition to the more favourable picture of courtly manners; but scenes 
usually specified eight, of whose several marriages of violence have never been infrequent at the courts 


the Bhagavata gives the best account. In addition to of Rajput princes. 


the three first respectng whom particulars are 
found in all, K4alindi, or the Yamuna, is the 
daughter of the sun, whom Krsna meets on one of 
his visits to Indraprastha, and who claims him as 
the reward of her penance. His next wife. 
Mitravindaé, is the daughter of his maternal aunt 
Rajadhidevi (Bk. IV. Ch. XIV.). and sister of Vinda 
and Anuvinda, kings of Avanti: she chooses him at 
her Svayamvara. The Hari Varhsa calls her 
Saudattd, daughter of Sivi; and she is subsequently 
termed Saivya by our text. Nagnajiti or Satya, the 
next wife, was the daughter of Nagnajit, king of 
KauSala, and was the prize of Krsna's overcoming 
seven fierce bulls, whom no other hero had 
encountered with success, Bhadra, princess of 
Kekaya, alsto Krsna's cousin, the daughter of 
Srutakirtti (Bk. IV. Ch. XV.), was his next: and his 
eighth wife was Madri, the daughter of the king of 
Madra; named, according to the Bhagavata, Laks 
ana; and to the Hari V., Saubhim4; distinguishing, 
as does our text, clearly Laksmana from Ma4dri. and 
like it having no satisfactory equivalent for Bhadra. 
The Hari Vamsa does not name Rohini, but 
specifies other names, as Vrhati etc. In the life of 
Krsna, taken from the Bhagavata through a Persian 
translation, published by Maurice, there is a curious 
instance of the barbarous distortion of Sanskrit 
names by the joint labours of the English and 
Persian translators: the wives of Krsna are written. 
Rokemenee (Rukmini), Seteebhavani 
(Satyabhama), Jamoometee (Jambavati), 
Kalenderee (Ka4lindi), Lechmeena (Laksmana), 
Soeta (Satyé?), Bhedravatee (Bhadra). Mihrbeoda 
(Mitravinda). 

2 These, according to the Mahabharata. Adi P,, 
were Apsarasas, or nymphs. In the Dana Dharma 
they become Krsna's wives through a boon given 
him by Uma. 

3 The Niska is a weight of gold, but according to 
different authorities of very different amount. The 
commentator here terms it a weight of four 
Suvarnas, each about 175 grains troy. 

4 The Bhagavata and Hari Vaméa, which both 
tell this story, agree in the death of Rukmin; but in 
the Mahabharata he appears in the war, on the side 
of the Pandavas. The occurrence is a not very 


KKK 


BOOK V, CHAP. 29 491 


CHAPTER 29 
Tanltatseara: 
(ALHTYTAT: ) 
WUT SAT 
Baa aa: Mere TAT: | 
sTRMTaTa WaT! aATayHT: 1 eh 
Wasa grant Bisex weer efor ad: 
amare corey weet fafa 2 
waar Te tara AqErashy fersan 
WH agar Aas AAS 3 1 
aatea-HAATGTT BISHBY ere! 
aU Wives: weit a ad Ferrara vii 
HA: HATIMNS YA aera! 
aiet Arareearat We ASA SATAN 11 4 
quetdus-aagig Ufa are 
ufsaaaraaoren ofa ura featara 1&1 
Mss Ararat sated wares 
THA TAAGTA YAS 9! 
Wasa weal AAT NANA: 
HU MALTA VNATAT TSA 2 1 
Caesarea FATS WAT 
weal fe Bsa: aeat eda Fometi eit 
Oa A Wicreranfa AAS wera: 
WaT TM FF Ear AfoTIg ATTN Vo 1 
agranaut feor AT: HoT Sen 
TE ASAUSeeM aepeadlad ST Ve! 
surat Mss! WaT dea Tatfary 
ea Niue a Lat wrayerarqn 221 
Sakra, the lord of the three worlds, came 
mounted on his fierce elephant Airavata to 


visit Sauri (Krsna) ac Dvarakaé. Having entered 
the city, and been welcomed by Hari, he 


492 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





related to the hero the deeds of the demon 
Naraka. “By you, Madhustdana, lord of the 
gods,” said Indra, “in a mortal condition, all 
sufferings have been soothed. Arista. 
Dhenuka, Chantra, Mustika, Kesin, who 
sought to injure helpless man, have all been 
slain by you, Kansa, Kuvalayapida, the child- 
destroying Putand, have becn killed by you; 
and so have other oppressors to the world. By 
you valour and wisdom the three worlds have 
been preserved, and the gods, obtaining their 
share of the sacrifices offered by the devout, 
enjoy satisfaction. But now hear the occasion 
on which I have come to you, and which you 
are able to remedy. The son of the earth,’ 
called Naraka, who rules over the city of 
Pragjyotisa,” inflicts a great injury upon all 
creatures. Carrying off the maidens of gods, 
saints, demons, and kings, he shuts them up in 
his own palace. He has taken away the 
umbrella of Varuna, impermeable to water, the 
jewel mountain crest of Mandara, and the 
celestial nectar-dropping earings of my mother 
Aditi; and he now demands my elephant 
Airavata. I have thus explained to you, 
Govinda, the tyranny of the Asura; you can 
best determinc now it is to be prevented." 


TUT Satay 


sf sen fart Frat war taaitga: | 

Tera aaa TA AGA ATTN 2311 

fercarara o faye WATT 

Visrrrgaea Wed TTA 

TATA TUT A MPSA UTA es 

sregtiad ant yentstr fafzareray 

Having heard this account, the divine Hari 

gently smiled, and, rising from his throne, took 
Indra by the hand: then wishing for the eater 
of the serpents, Garuda immediately appeared; 
upon whom his master, having first seated 
Satyabh4ma upon his back, ascended, and flew 
to Pragjyotisa. Indra mounted his elephant, 
and, in the sight of the inhabitants of Dvaraka, 
went to the abode of the gods. 


aat SET ater! UpeaT eA eh I 

ISAT AAT 

anferat Aa: Ut: QTPAy ETAT FEU 

difverde aft: ureny farce ah YastrT 

ddl FS: WHAM FT Wa aT Aya: 1 Voll 

WU WAL Wa Aeaiaarat ae: 

CEM INECIE CsI CII ce MIRA] 

Beat YS sea aa Vad fear 

USAT AT HATA AANTAT: 11 88 

THOTT CANES WAT: | 

FOTAT BT Marat Wer SA ATA: Ml Jot 

Waray Ws whi f ATH ait 

farcar oh feat ass wal SaaTeHETN 2 VN 

Bd J Ata afenfetear fafrevecti 

SUA WTA atest Vana TN 2 VM 

The environs of Pragjyotisa were defended 
by nooses, constructed by the demon Muru, 
the edges of which were as sharp as razors; but 
Hari, throwing his discus Sudarsgana amongst 
them, cut them to pieces. Then Muru started 
up, but Kesava slew him, and burnt his seven 
thousand sons, like moths, with the flame of 
the edge of his discus. Having slain Muru, 
Hayagriva. and Parichajana, the wise Hari 
rapidly reached the city of Pragjyotisa: tnere a 
fierce conflict took place with the troops of 
Naraka in which Govinda destroyed thousands 
of demons; and when Naraka came into the 
field, showering upon the deity all sorts of 
weapons, the wielder of the discus, and 
annihilator. of the demon tribe, cut him in two 
with his celestial missile. Naraka being slain. 
Earth, bearing the two earrings of Aditi, 
approached the lord of the world, and said, 


ylaeqara 
aeredaga ate! earar gency 
ARTA: ARTS WAATTA 2 3 tt 
sa waa at 8 vada fara: 
TRIN Huse BA USAT BT Maan vil 


BOOK V, CHAP. 29 


ATA WS wan 

Vt MHA: WATERS: WIN VI 
a cdl we faa a ded wars: 
Wat a WII: adeqd! fa Tan 211 
carat carer: Gear aut arta wary aan 
TARTANA ae Ta fee TAM VM 


TON SWAT WEA UST Wary 
Bet aar eee! feat A waren Ve 


Wate Paya! Aho fe aq HAT 

we AAAS aaa: ahaa VN 

The Earth said “When, O lord, I was 
upheld by you in the form of a boar, your 
contact then engendered this my son. He 
whom you gave me has now been killed by 
you: take therefore these two earrings, and 
cherish his progeny. You, lord, whose aspect 
is ever gracious, has come to this sphere, in a 
portion of yourself, to lighten my burden. You 
are the eternal creator, preserver, and 
descrover of the universe; the origin of all 
worlds, and one with the universe: what praise 
can be worthily offered to you? You are the 
pervader, and that which 1s pervaded; the are, 
the agent, and the effect; the universal spirit of 
all beings; what praise can be worthily offered 
to you? You are the abstract soul, the sentient 
and the living soul of all beings, the 
imperishable: but since it is not possible to 
praise you worthily, then why should the 
hopeless attempt proceed? Have compassion, 
© universal soul, and forgive the sins which 
Naraka has committed. Verily it is for the 
sanctification of thy son that he has been killed 
by you.” 


WU Sara 
Tae UST al war saa: 
THI ATHTATANTS APART 3 ot 


The lord, who is the substance of all 
creatures, having replied to the earth, “Even 
so”, proceeded to redeem the various gems 
from the dwelling of Naraka. 


493 


Sag 8 Sart semgeiaaa: | 

viet eet Aearfor wWaTAa 3 

gear WHI THEA T FEAL! 

ara wart Fras fergrferg 3 Vn 

SUM MAMA Bat TTT! 

Waar Mare: Welt Aenfeaget: 13 30 

zavl arent oa Aaa aforaaT 

STITT BTISS TATGTATN 3 VI 

atte A aT HOM: AIAMl- Aeraary! 

onfarn: Huser at swam Fafeareraqn 34 

ofa sitferaygarar warty WaT: SAT: I 

In the apartments of the women he found 
sixteen thousand and one hundred damsels’ : 
he also beheld in the palace six thousand large 
elephants, each having four tusks; twency-one 
lakhs of horses of Kamboja and _ other 
excellent breeds: these Govinda dispatched to 
Dvaraka, in charge of the servants of Naraka. 
The umbrella of Varuna, the jewel mountain 
which he also rccovered, he placed upon 
Garuda; and mounting him himself, and 
taking Satyabhama with him, he sct off to the 
heaven of the gods, to restore the earrings of 
Aditi*. 

KEK 


NOTES 


| By Visnu. as the Varaha Avatara; but found 
and adopted by Janaka. Kalika Purana 

2 In the centre of the country of Kamaripa, 
inhabited by Kiratas ; the site of the shrines of 
Devi, as Dikkaravasini and Kamakhya. Kalika 
Purana. 

3 Theae were captive princesscs, according to 
the Bhagavata; Aparasas, or cclestial nymphs, 
according to the Kalika Purana; and these upon 
their rescue by Krsna became his wives. 

4 The legend of Naraka is related in more detail 
in the Bhagavata and Hari Vamsa. but ts still more 
fully narrated in the Kalika Upapurana. It may be 
considered as one of the various intimations that 
occur in the Puranas of hostilities between the 
worshippers of Visnu and Siva; Naraka being in an 
especial degree favoured by the latter. 





494 THE VISNU-PURANAM 
CHAPTER 30 Pea UREN aTaTg TT 
fagtiseara: Siert wat gheshiced waa < 
Ule-fata-faargrmt sat ad oferta! 
: te Tar- Feray]- era TAT ATN Yo U1 
WU sara Sat Tae eat Tatar: fagoam: 
Test arent wrt aa uforraay HOTOS EY fepreanga Wal WTA 8H 


WAR ita citetta sey warn gi 
aa: Pgyuearite eatgraa aft: 
SUTRA SAT: MASA SATE 2 
a eatea: HoT tanga 
fanafratran wfaya easisfefry 3 
OT MOTT MAT UE T HUSA 

Sel ACHAT WHAT TATE: Wt 
Aa: Ma TAMA MTA TAT STAI 


Tea Heat AAAI ATG 


Garuda, laden with the umbrella of Varuna 
and the jewel mountain, and bearing HrshikeSa 
on his back to the court of Indra, went lightly. 
as Jf in sport, along. When they arrived at the 
portals of Svarga, Hari blew his shell; on 
which the gods advanced to meet him, bearing 
respectful offerings. Having received the 
homage of the divinities, Krsna went to the 
palace of the mother of the gods, whose turrets 
resembled white clouds; and on beholding 
Aditi, paid his respects to her, along with 
Sakra, and, presenting to her own earrings, 
informed her of the destruction of the demon 
Naraka. The mother of the world, well 
pleased, then fixed her whole thoughts upon 
Hari, the creator, and thus pronounced his 
praise: 


afafreare 
THE YOST SAAT TI 
TARTS Valera! serery! SETA & 1 
were ATA Garant ToT 
fryondta! Fea! yagera! efe Feranion 
faadratfert :sra-aeaarafiafeia 
wares! cacrizartaftan ci 


Weal WMATA A ATT: | 
FV-TOR-coaT TGA, AAAS: tt YIM 
TT ATA YR: A FUATIT 
Setar war wa J hay YaTAAT: un VBM 


Glory to you, O god with the lotus eyes, 
who removest all fear from those that worship 
you. You are thé eternal, universal, and living 
soul; the origin of all beings; the instigator of 
the mental faculty, and faculties of sense; one 
with the three qualities; beyond the three 
qualities; exempt from contraries; pure; 
existing in the hearts of all; void of colour, 
extension, and every transient modification; 
unaffected by the vicissitudes of birth or death, 
sleep or walking. You are evening, night, and 
day; earth, sky, air, water, and fire; mind, 
intellect, and individuality. You are the agent 
of creation, duration, and dissolution; the 
master over the agent; in thy forms which are 
called Brahma, Visnu, and Siva. You are gods, 
Yaksas. Daityas, Raksasas, Siddhas, Punnagas, 
Kiismandas, Pisachas, Gandharbas, men, 
animals, deer, elephants, reptiles, trees, shrubs, 
creepers, climbers, and grasses; all things, 
large, middling, small, immense, or minute: 
you are all bodies whatsover, composed of 
aggregated atoms. 


Ara Aaa ATAU ATA ae 
SATA Ta Wet FRAT Nn exit 


This thy illusion beguiless all who are 
ignorant of thy true nature, the fools who 
imagine soul to be in that which is not spirit. 


sea Aft Masa, UL Taras 
aT Wala Wasa Aq MAAS 


Marea uaa aa! ATTN VU 


BOOK V, CHAP. 30 


495 





a: wqaaatata! atrafaat wary 
af acaharemtat waaay Ha Ve HI 


TAME: WHT SAT ATM: THETA 


FAMTATAT ARTA AAT ARTA: 11 V9 Ui 


The notions that “I am-—this is mine,” which 
influence mankind, are but the delusions of the 
mother of the world, originating in thy active 
agency. Those men who, attentive to their 
duties, diligently worship you, traverse all this 
illusion, and obtain spiritual freedom, Brahma 
and all the gods, men and animals, are alike 
invested by the thick darkness of, fascination, 
in the gulf of the illusions of Visnu. 


ST APTA HATA Aaa | 

Bel YEA WAT AAS PTAA VC UI 

Wa tat aratftea aftoeerarst aI 
amfadt + Arena arefaetad fe aT ei 
HUTPSTSANTA ATT HEAZATSAT 

TAA FEYVAT ASU: TANT: Vo tt 
A Wee aeeN TATA ee TTT 

SAA MATHIAS Yor! ATTA 2 Rit 


That men, who having worshipped you, 
should seek the gratification of their desires, 
and their own preservation, this, O lord, is also 
thy delusion. It is the sport of thy fascinations, 
that induces men to glorify you, to obtain 
thereby the continuance of their race, or the 
annihilation of their enemies, instead of 
eternal liberation. It is the fault of the impure 
acts of the unrighteous (to proffer such idle 
requests to one able to confer much more 
important benefits), like asking for a rag to 
cover one’s nakedness from the tree that 
bestows whatever is solicited. Be propitious 
then, imperishable author of all the error that 
deceives the world; and dispel, O lord of all 
creatures, the conceit of knowledge, which 
proceeds from ignorance. 


TTA UHM MSA FAT: 
TeTeeaa Ft feet! MQ*TRATA TTA 
Wa Teente t wt wrefearrertaTTT 


qT Wea at aa Wale VTAIT 23H 


Glory to you, grasper of the discus, wielder 
of the bow brandisher of the mace, holder of 
the shell; for such do I behold you in thy 
perceptible form: nor do I know that form of 
your, which is beyond perception ! Have 
compassion on me, supreme god.” 


WU sara 


stfedtd et faa: wecare Gator 

Wat ef! aM Wate ATET AA Vil 

Visnu, thus hymned by Aditi, smiled, and 
said to the mother of the gods, “Mother 
goddess, do you show favour unto me, and 
grant me thy blessing.” 


atetrearea 
Wang aT I ANN: Gg: | 
shit: Taree: ! aed afarafan 24 UI 


“So be it,” replied Aditi, “ever as you will; 
and whilst you dwell amongst mortals, the first 
of men, you shall be invincible by gods or 
demons." 


UUM FATT 
aisTAMaRa waruitateantarrr 
AINA wore watefs GA: GTN kU 

afaiteara 


Taare t YY! ST teeta a 
viaaeraenis! great vaattarqn 911 


PardSara said~ Then. Satyabhamé, 
accompained by the queen of Indra, addressed 
Aditi respectfully, and solicited her 


benedictions: and Aditi in reply said to her, 
“Fair-browed dame, you shall never suffer 
decay, nor loss of beauty: you shall be the 
asylum of all loveliness, dame of faultless 
shade." 


WUE sare 
HRM FT FAIA CATT HATTA! 


GMAT UAT AAA: ATTN 2 
Bret aT Ges UT ETAT 


496 


a cat Maat Weal Tas GeeSATII 2 II 
dat cast Heonsht WeaMaraeaart 
CAI CET TEATS AAA 3 ol 
aaet a Gree wartiygerenfrorg 
PReageeat ATaTAeAMTTTN 3 8 
TAMAS ya Wd STANT 
Uiftardt Serart gra: afgrger: 13 VI 
dapat wre wMfas were fee 
Het BHAT Aaa STITT 13 BH 
afe 4 aga: Ut weareast fata a 


Weep aes Aaa FS: usw 

With the assent of Aditi. Indra then 
respectfully saluted Janarddana in all due 
form, and conducted him and Satyabbama 
through Nandana and other pleasant gardens 
of the gods; where KeSava, the destroyer of 
Kesi, saw the Parijata tree, the favourite of 
Saci, which was produced when the ocean was 
churned for ambrosia: the bark was of gold, 
and it was embellished with young sprouting 
Icavcs of a copper colour, and fruit-stalks 
bearing numerous clusters of fragrant fruit. 
When Satyabhéma noticed this tree, she said 
to her beloved lord, Govinda, “Why should not 
this divine tree be transported to Dvarika? If 
what you say is true, and | am really dear to 
you, then let this tree be taken away from 
hence, and planted in the gardens of my 
dwelling. 


aU Waadt cenit a a afer 

Wel ant waite aa Hoa aT 3 & tt 
Ue we we Were! aware aa 

aes Uiteraet we NefaTorT 3 It 

fourdt wiftarrer Zpraaor Werhy 

auc weal Sahat arva 3911 


You have often said to me, ‘Neither 
Jambavati nor Rukmini is so dear to me, 
Satya, as you are, If you have spoken the truth, 
and not mere flattery, then let this Parijata tree 
be the ornament of my mansion. I long to 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


shine amidst my fellow queens, wearing the 
flowers of this tree in the braids of my hair.” 


QUIS Saray 

Sarh: WMA Uftend Tecate 

ATTA SARA TTA ATAU: 11 3 SU 

at Wet cares afew aq UET 

ufterd 3 Mifare! By Fels MATT 3 <I 

pried SATA TA 

Sfetsa + at yeast wae soll 

cata Wawa weedeat: wer 

ASAT WATS AT Wetet FE AT TTI ¥ 

Thus solicited by Satyabhama, Hari smiled 
upon her, and taking the Parijata plant, put it 
upon Garuda. The keepers of the garden 
remonstrated, and said, “This Parijata tree 
belongs to Saci, the queen of the sovereign of 
the gods: it is not proper, Govinda, for you to 
remove it. At the time when the ocean was 
churned for the beverage of immortality, this 
tree was produced, for the purpose of 
providing Saci with flowery ornaments. You 
cannot be suffered to depart with it. It is 
through ignorance that this is sought for by 
any one, as it is the especial property of her on 
whose countenance the king of the gods 
delights to look; and who shall go away with 
impunity, who attempts to carry it off ? 


APTA cael Pepi Fert! aac 


Sah VRAIN ATS I 
deel Waelcafareut Tareza 
fauna] aq wat aa vrater ufdsars ny 3 


Assuredly the king of the gods will punish 
this audacity; for his hand launches the 
thunderbolt, and the immortals attend upon his 
steps. Forbcar then, Krsna, nor provoke the 
hostility of all the gods. The wise will not 
commence actions that can be productive only 
of unplesant consequences.” 


Sawh dearly Beara heat 
cal Meat UST SAT AT PER: HUTT YI 


BOOK V, CHAP. 30 


497 





AMAA: Velen qerais gaara 
BATA: YU: HANH YEO AAT UY I 


FN YU ateeten sitelaefer: 
AM: AACN UTA FANE I 


MPAA TA VUSat TMT Pra 

AT RATA AEM BMT WLAT FAT ion 

Satyabham4, on hearing these words, was 
exceedingly offcnded, and said, “What nght 
has Saci—what has Indra—to the Parijata tree? It 
was produced at the churning of the ocean as 
the common property of all worlds. 
Wherefore, gods. should Indra alone possess 
it? In the same manner, guardians of the 
grove, as nectar, as the moon, as the goddess 
Sri herself, so the Parijata tree is the common 
property of all the world: and since Saci, 
confiding in the-strength of her husband's arm, 
would keep it to herself, away with submission 
to her: Satya takes away the tree. 

RATS Fa WaT Ulett sat TA 

Aaa Uséll 

afe wi cfam sniafe aya: uireal 

Wade getty Ata Parry se 

amita ¢ uff yea aie fafa 

Ua TATA ATTA BTCA TG of 

Go quickly, and let Paulomi be told what I 
have said: repeat to her this contemptuous 
message from Satyabhama; ‘If you are the 
beloved wife of your lord. if your husband is 
obedient to your authority, let him prevent my 
husband from carrying off this tree. I know 
your husband Sakra : I know the sovereign of 
the divinities; and I, who am a mortal, take 
this Parijata tree away from you.” 


Sear UaTUT Tear reat Seater 
Wet arearearara Fregrterata where 4 BN 
Wa. UIE Sa: Usa BA 

raat uitraarst aera fay 
“aa: Uber. Fafeage aT I-A: 
ayaa: Vat: Yen aeet TaN G3 


cat Frtet meat array 

Ws SAUTE JRA WATT ATAT & VI 

Ta BMA fae: WET TA | 

TAT VARTA AEA: FAT G GI 

ait fast wela ger prepare 

Waa: Wa SAAT THT & GUI 

Whar Wes cath wea 

fase ciety stat ATTSTs I 4 oll 

Accordingly the warders of the garden 
went and reported to Saci the message of 
Satyabhama, Sachi appealed to her husband, 
and excited the king of the gods to resent this 
affront: and Indra accordingly, attended by the 
army of the celestials, marched to attack Hari, 
in defence of the Parijata tree. The gods were 
armed with clubs, swords, maces, and darts; 
and- Indra wielded the thunderbolt. As soon as 
Govinda saw the king of the gods advancing 
against him on his elephant, attended by the 
immortals, he blew his shell so that the sound 
filled all the regions, and he showered 
smilingly myriads of arrows upon his 
assailants. Beholding the air in all directions 
overspread with his darts, the celestials in 
return hurled innumerable missiles; but every 
one of these the destroyer of Madhu and lord 
of all worlds, cut playfully into a thousand 
pieces with his shafts. 


Ust VENT TAHT: | 

Ta GUSIGA AATTATEATI & 6 I 
aH Wed Us verfaaraitsdy! 

UST: UAT WTA, Va G SH 
forfaarer argrer assur frert fay: 
aa wifes sfrewedsTaq § 01 
ataista: wag autgifaat aaat fest: 
THfaraagona Vat Yar Farka: 1 & 2H 
aren fasts weal Weal arta: | 
wifgon witeten eater yrenferqeraql & 2 
TRay Feaut WANA Eee: 
TAARNSAL CAML A WENT SG 3 


498 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





The devourer of serpents, Garuda, laid hold hurl his discus, and only called out to Indra to 


of the noose of the sovereign of the waters, 
and tore it to fragments with his beak, as if it 
had been a little snake. The son of Devaki 
threw his mace at the club of Yama, and cast it 
broken upon the ground: he cut in bits. the 
litter of the lord of wealth with his discus: a 
glancc of his eye eclipsed the radiance of the 
sun: be sevcred Agni into a hundred parts with 
his arrows, and scattered the Vasus through 
the realms of space: with his discus he cut off 
the points of the tridents of the Rudras, and 
cast themselves upon the earth: and with the 
shafts shot from his bow he dispersed the 
Sédhyas, Visvas, Maruts, and Gandharbas, like 
fleeces of cotton from the pods of the Simul 
tree, through the sky, Garuda also diligently 
plied his beak and wings and nails, and bit and 
bruised and scratched the deities who opposed 
his lord. 


ad: PRAGA SAAT 

uveat qaaie arufuita arate vi 

Ueraat Weel Fy TA GAM 

Sa: MATA VA WT WATT NE 4 I 

PTAA Way T aT 

WME Wal as POM Yass & i 

aa elead wa Actes fire 

AR-UHM FLAN SATA-HATEATH & 19 11 

fart aamersgur ware wary aft: 

qT Ware dar ws fas fasta aradiqi ci 

Then the king of the gods and the foe of 
Madhu encountercd and overwhelmcd each 
other with countless shafts, like rain-drops 
falling from two heavy clouds, Garuda in the 
conflict engaged with Alravata, and 
Janarddana was opposed to all the deities. 
When all the other weapons had been cut to 
pieces, Indra stood armed with his thunderbolt, 
and Krsna with discus Sudarsana. Beholding 
them thus prepared for fight, all the people of 
the three spheres exclaimed, “Alas ! alas |" 


Indra launched his bolt, but in vain, for Hari 
caught and arrested it: he, forbore, however, to 


stay. 
Wea VaR WHEAT 
AAMAS AE TATA ATTN & VU 
Fear? AA Bh Mey Wea 
UAT TATU PEAT 9 0 11 
alert tana Witarrayaacry 
SOPAM AAG WTAaMat Parqi 9 V 
Stet WH! WAR A Gist wapTEta 
aaa Utardss Sar: Bay WASTAT: 19 2 
ufaralaner AGUA: AAI 
J cael WS AAT Ut Beto 3 


Satyabhama seeing Indra disarmed, and his 
elephant disabled by Garuda, and the deity 
himself about to retreat, said to him, “King of 
the triple sphere, it ill becomes the husband of 
Sachi to run away, Ornamented with Parijata 
garlands, she will approach you. Of what use 
is the sovereignty of heaven, embellished with 
the Parijdata tree, no longer beholding Saci 
meet you with offection as of yore ? Nay, 
Sakra. fly not; you must not suffer shame: 
here, take the Parijdta tree; let the gods be no 
longer annoyed. Sachi, inflated with pride of 
her husband, has not welcomed me to her 
dwelling with respectful presents. 

rarer Guys 

ad: Haat WR Aad AE fareq 9% 
daet UifIaMsa WAT FAA AI 

BUN Afaat A YF Wat TAY aT a Afaao gi 


As a woman, I am light of purpose, and am 
anxious for my husband's fame; therefore have 
I instigated, Sakra, this contest with you. But I 
do not want the Parijata tree, nor do I wish to 
take that which is another's property. Sachi is 
proud of her beauty. What woman is not proud 
of her husband ?” 


sal fattadisal tacsrean fen 
we daract alts! wey: Garfafaat: ogi 


BOOK V, CHAP. 31 


499 





Tafa wil-den-Rattealfacres a: 

fara 33 8 Get wad fagefiomiven 

ae ST WaeMeatifenet 

Tans Tay + aawaa Waser 
WAT RA-MeTA- Wer aU 
aret at wafa efa! frrauieci 

Thus spoken to by Satyabhama, the king of 
the gods turned back, and said to her, “Desist, 
wrathful dame, from afflicting your friend by 
further reproaches. I am not ashamed of being 
vanquished by him who is the author of the 
creation, preservation, and destruction ‘of the 
world; who is the substance of all things; in 
whom, without beginning or middle, the 
universe 1s comprised; and from whom, and by 
whom, identical with all things, it proceeds, 
and will cease to be. What disgrace is it, O 
goddess, to any one to be discomfited by him 
who is the cause of creation, continuance, and 
dissolution ? 


fafenaacacslad wet ard: 
aa ae 
agua al fasry AAG: 1119 8 I 
sta sttfacoygeror ussite Fret: SMT: 

His form is the parent of all worlds, though 
inflitely subtle, and known to those only by 
whom all that may be known 1s known. Who 
is able to overcome the unborn, unconstituted, 
eternal lord, who has willed to become a 
mortal for the good of the world 2" 


NOTES 
1 The Bhagavata merely says. “Incited by his 


wife, Krsna look away the P4arijata tree, having. 


subdued the gods, and planted it in the garden of 
Satyabhamda, The Hari V. makes a long story of it, 
and tells it with some variations, especially in the 
commencement, Satyabhama's desire for the 
Parijata tree having been excited by Narada's 
presenting a flower from it to Krsna's other spouse. 
Rukmini. 
KKK 


BOOK V, CHAP. 31 


499 


CHAPTER 31 
Uanfagisena: 


(AVATAR ETAT ATTRA 
Valraglsraeacaany: ae faaress) 


WUT SaTT 
Segal wae Saas Aya: | 
We Mariya AAAI gi 


KeSava, being thus eulogized by the king of 
the gods, smiled, and spake gravely to him in 


reply, 
SHOT Sara 

cauet VaR aa wat sera 

el VAM AAT AAI 2 I 

Uiwraterars Area fara 

Teasa TA eH! AAT AAUT 13 

aage Yerot a aan wed aa 

added Wer wea! afifaarony ux 

“You are Indra,” said he, “the king of the 
celestials: we are but mortals, O lord of the 
world: you must pardon therefore the offence 
that I have committed. Let this Parijata tree be 
taken to its appropriate situation. I removed it 
in compliance with the words of Satya. 
Receive back also this your thunderbolt, cast 


at me; for this is your proper weapon, the 
destroyer of your foes.” 


Wa sara 


fanieata uniter! aaisefata fe aeqi 

ariaeat wad Ty genteel aa 4 I 

asfa asta smart! seat arr! aera: 

ST: VICAR HUTITTSTI G I 

araat Uteratsa Hor! gradi yr 

Brae aa eh Ae eae Yan ol 
TU Jara 


Indra answered and said. "You beguilest 
us, O lord, in calling thyself a mortal; but we 
know you to be the lord, although not 


500 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





endowed with subtlety of discernment. You 
are that you are, engaged in the active 
preservation of the earth; you extractest the 
thorns implanted in her bosom, destroyer of 
the demon race. Let this Parijaéta tree be 
transferred to Dvadraka, and it shall remain 
upon earth as long as you abidest in the world 
of mortals.” 

waaay FT saga Yet VfTs 

wan: frg-wad: qearrarafaty i ¢1 

Hari, having assented to the proposal of 

Indra, returned to earth, hymned by attendant 
Sage, Saints, and quiristers of heaven. 

aad: WAU srcArare Tie: | 

PER ICO RIC RACC ACEC SCOR I KS) 

ACTA Ws] AIT ATA | 

Frepe WTAE USTs WATT ST Voll 

amare aa: Tal aft wrefa wifey 

area Gea Yerevan Veit 

Ate BAU: GB WMATA 

Se: Wed ae Haat WaeTT ez 

When Krsna arrived over Dvaraka, be blew 
his shell, and delighted all the inhabitants with 
the sound. Then alighting from Garuda, he 
proceeded with Satyabhama to her garden, and 
there planted the great Parijdta tree, the smell 
of which perfumed the earth for three furlongs, 
and an approach to which enabled every one to 
recollect the events of a prior existence; so 
that on beholding their faces in that tree, all 


the Yadavas contemplated themselves in their 
(original) celestial forms. 


fragt: wqurit eae adl ay 

FAT HON TE WHAT UTS 83 1 
ad: aaret YT Wa SuaN WATE: | 

AT: BAM ALANA Aaa A: WATEAT | YY 
Valtaa Was: ret arat Bera 

ware fafa Woy YaST IAAT: 1 84 I 


Then Krsna took possession of the wealth, 
elephants, horses, and women, which he had 
recovered from Naraka, and which had been 


brought to Dvaraka by the servants of the 
demon; and at an auspicious season he 
espoused all the maidens whom Naraka had 
carried off from their friends; at one and the 
same moment he received the hands of all of 
them, according to the ritual, in separate 
mansions. 

HSTATASATUT VT TEMA 

arate Ua WUT STA ATTA 2G II 

waa A: Beat AAT wT 

aaa Uforent sary srarhaferii go 1 

Fg ST WTAE AAT Wey Hyra: 

sara fas! watat fasrecett eft:1 ec 


eft sitter vais wate: START: 113 211 


Sixteen thousand and one hundred was the 
number of the maidens, and into so many 
different forms did the foe of Madhu multiply 
himself; so that every one of the damsels 
thought that he had wedded her in his single 
person; and the creator of the world, Hari, the 
assumer of universal shape, abode severally in 
the dwelling of each of these his wives. 

KkK* 


500 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





CHAPTER 32 
BATA: 
(Saray) 


WUT Sate 
WIEN Bt: Yat Sfanoa: aAfeararal 
Uy Aaa MATA SASTATI VI 
SAY AVENE Visca TAI Br: 
AYTAATAT VATE THT MTPTT U 
a ARlarat AAA Ala: | 
AERA VATA] Fae: 1 3 
FHT YT MRA WATTS Yay 
SAT HAAON GAT: eT ATT: A wi 
saga watt Wyerahs aR: | 
STOMA YAO ASST Vet TAT GH 


BOOK V, CHAP. 32 


501 





WT: wate waar Baro ga: | 
WAM TS TARTANA & I 
areal TWh Ggl ae: We Weta: | 
anorey TAIMTETATAY FEATTAI 9 1 

aa TeguyE Ut Bft- yeaa 

fea Wea Aga aa aoreT UfwHOMI cI 


Parasara said— I have enumerated to you 
Pradyumna and the other sons of Rukmini. 
Satyabhama bore Bhanu and Bhairika. The 
sons Of Rohini were Diptimat, Témrapaksi, 
and others. The powerful Samba and other 
sons were bom of Jambavati. Bhadravinda and 
other valiant youths were the sons of Nagnajiti 
Saivya (or Mitra-vinda) had several sons, of 
whom Sangramajit was the chief. Vrka and 
others were begotten by Hari on Madri Laks 
mana had Gatravat and others: and Sruta and 
others were the sons of KAlindi.’ Krsna had 
sons also by his other wives, in all one 
hundred and eighty thousand. The eldest of, 
the whole was Pradyumna, the son of 
Rukmini: his son was Aniruddha, from whom 
Vraja was born: his mother was Usa, the 
daughter of Bana, and grand-daughter of Bali, 
whom. Aniruddha won in war. On that 
occasion a fierce battle took place between 
Hari and Sankara, in which the thousand arms 
of Bana were lopped away by the discus of the 
former. 


a sara 


St THATS TAG S- HOTA: | 

St AIF AUT. AEA Haar STS 

Ud Ha AST! WAG areal 

Weq aldect wrt Hat sqfirat et: eo 

Maitreya said How happened it, 

venerable Brahman, that a contest on account 
of Usa arose between Siva and Krsna ? and in 
what manner did Hari cut off the thousand 


arms Of Bana ? This, illustrious sir; you are 
able to narrate. 


TUL Sara 


Sat aurge far! ret WE YwsyAn 

MISTI: WES ACATN VAI 

ad: Wanted Wet are wf 

BAMA Wat TANT TATA LAI 

Sah A Tal Uae Bela Ara: | 

al AT Wat Waa ATS Wed 23 

Parasara said— Usa the daughter of Bana, 

having seen Parvati sporting with her lord, 
Sambhu, was inspired with a wish for similar 
dalliance. The beautiful Gauri, who knows the 
hearts of all, said to Usa, "Do not grieve; you 
shall have a husband.” “But when will this 


be?” Thought Usa to herself, “or who will be 
my lord?" On which Parvati continued; 


AMY HSara TaATY Arshad Ta 

cafteafa a at oral weft! sfeeaht nevi 

"He who shall appear to you, princess, in a 
dream on the twelfth lunation of the light half 
of Vaisakha, he will be your husband.” 
WUISt Jara 

wea fret gary ay war gear salieri 

Aaa TA TH AAT AT Vk I 

Ta: WISI RITA TRYST 

aa Tasaifa Fete Arahat WET 26 1 

Accordingly, as the goddess had foretold, 
on that lunar day a youth appeared to Usa in a 
dream, of whose person she became 
enamoured. When she woke, and no longer 
perceived him, she was Overcome with sorrow, 
and, unrestrained by modesty, demanded of 
her companion, whither he had gone. 


SUS Haat SMTVS AHS F Agar 

TAM: WIMAT UD We Asa AGAMA Vol 
aeal AaHeN AY BTA AT Ta 

Wal PaaTAaaa WAVAVAATEATI Ve I 
fafamatsy areas Great sate 

SoM TAT TSA ASYTTA: HET ATM LVI 


502 


The companion and friend of the princess 
was Chitralekha, the daughter to Kubhanda, 
the minister of Bana. “Of whom do you speak 
?” Inquired she of Usa. But the princess, 
recollecting herself, was ashamed, and 
remained silent. At length, however, 
Chitralekha conciliated her confidence, and 
she related to her what had passed, and what 
the goddess had foretold; and she requested 
her friend to devise some means of uniting her 
with the person whom she had bcheld in her 
dream. 


UU Saray 

aa: Ue AU Seay Wea War: | 

aqEientatersreas farcrar arated i120 1 

WITT A F WAAR UA | 

aya cal efs TerereHaiangn 2 en 

HUM fareaat querawsa ari 
owe -der-efe Feiss faa 220 

gear aa: GA yeaa feat 

quaradtcentgrean oar sate Frat 2 3 

aise Bsa Tar A arnt 

Sa Bade AAMT At: ATTN 2 VI 

ofa sitfamrqaat varnist afar: sare: 
Citralekha then delineated the most 

eminent gods, demons, spirits, and mortals, 
and showed them to Usa. Putting aside the 
portraits to gods, spirits, snake-gods, and 
demons, the princess selected those of mortals, 
and amongst them the heroes of the races of 
Andhaka and Vrisni. When she came to the 
likenesses of Krsna and Rama, she was 
confused with shame; from the portrait of 
Pradyumna she modestly averted her eyes; but 
the moment she beheld the picture of his son, 
the object of her passion, her eyes wide 
expanded, and all her bashfulness was 
discarded. “This is he! this is he!” said she to 
Citralekha; and her friend, who was endowed 
with magic power, bade her be of good cheer, 
and sec off through the air to Dvaraka. 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


NOTES 
1 The Bhagavata says, each of his eight queens 
had ten sons, and gives the ten names to each set, 
with one or two exceptions. 
kk 


502 THE VISNU-PURANAM 


CHAPTER 33 
TARAS EAT: 
(FON-AUTTA: agTa:) 
UMM Saver 
amiste ufos tame freq 
aq! argagann fifaoutsé farreeq git 
Sarat Beat AHCI TT: | 
afacata faa ge are we fee ATI 
Before this took place, Bana had been 
engaged in the adoration of the three-eyed 
god, and had thus prayed to him: “I am 
humiliated, O lord, by the possession of a 
thousand arms in a state of peace; let some 
hostilities ensue, in which I may derive some 
advantage from their possession. Without war, 


what is the use to these arms ? They are but a 
burden to me.” 


TVET Tara 
TAA Tal Aor! fae 
fofsraferrarard wera eat cat TOT N 3 
Sankara replied, "When thy peacock 
banner shall be broken, you shall have war, the 


delight of the evil spirits that feast on the flesh 
to man.” 


TUM Sara 
aa: Worl yfedt: PAA WEA 
WAS AAT EB SAAC TAT wh 


Bana, pleased by this promise, proffered 
his thanks to Sambhu, and returned to his 
palace, where he found his standard broken; at 
which his joy was increased. 


Wahaaa set 7 amfaaracst aq 
ares’ FATT STOTT I 


BOOK V, CHAP. 33 


BUTT F TAMU Tere 

ferra tien Treat WTS: 1G 0 

snfes fastorg Wat aa gue 

TET UfteS SEAT UTaTVTH VII 

Bay ag aronsfe wreredgeend:| | 

Gary Gages Ber ater Fate 2 

TTA Jeet AT w eer aferatea | 

AAR TATA GAT ASTSATN 8 I 

At that time the nymph Citralekha returned 
from Dvaraka, and by the exercise of her 
magic power brought Aniruddha along with 
her. The guards of the inner apartments 
discovering him there with Us§, reported it to 
the king who immediately sent a body of his 
followers to seize the prince; but the valiant 
youth, taking up an iron club, slew his 
asSailants: on which Bana mounted his car, 
advanced against him, and endeavoured to put 
him to death. Finding however, that Aniruddha 
was not to be subdued by prowess, he 
followed the counsel of his minister, and 
brought his magical faculties into the conflict, 
by which he succeeded in capturing the Yadu 
prince, and binding him in serpent bonds. 


Bae Fa Usa ea HeTAT! 

AGATA Ft AT AUT ANS: oll 

at wiforagt sear ate ferenfaqeran 

Afra weara saree atin ee 

When Aniruddha was missed from 

Dvaravati, and Yadavas were inquiring of one 
another whither he had gone, Narada came to 
them, and told them that he was the prisoner of 
Bana, having been conveyed by a female, 
possessed of magic faculties, to Sonitapura.' 
When they heared this, they were satisfied; for 
they had imagined he had been taken away by 
the gods (in reprisal for the Parijata tree). 

Aal WHSATSS VATA Stes 

TAWA VS ATTRA WTA FTN VI 

Gina wae sara ares: | 

Sat SOTA Aa APL Marat BAT V3 


503 


dafermrefeaterer Say ATA AEH 
SOTA FAY PIGOTT 11 VI 


Krsna therefore immediately summoned 
Garuda, who came with a wish; and mounting 
upon him, along with Bala and Pradyumna, he 
set off for the city of Bana. On their approach 
to the city they were opposed by the spirits 
who attend on Rudra, but these were soon 
destroyed by Hari, and he and his companions 
reached the vicinity of the town. Here mighty 
Fever, an emanation from Maheswara, having 
three feet and three heads,” fought desperately 
with Visnu in defence of Bana. 


TRAM: HUTFASATT! 
STANT Boreas ha se SaVrUT: 11 VG A 
aa: A yeaa We taa wnfgum 
AAT TACO] FOUTS AT PAT: | VE Il 


ANTON SANT ATTA TU SA aseTy 

a alert eraamreieare ca: frarg:i voll 

aay aTrANAT Wat dt awa TATA 

Tara oe Fat aA ATS Vl 

Wy Mat at ge o aaah aat:! 

fara afasrsiiegqaca Ut wal saz: een 

Baladeva, upon whom his ashes were 
scattered, was seized with burning heat, and 
his eyelids trembled: but he obtained relief by 
clinging to the body of Krsna. Contending thus 
with the divine holder of the bow, the Fever 
emanating from Siva was quickly expelled 
from the person of Krsna by Fever which he 
himself engendered. Brahma bcholding the 
impersonatcd malady bewildered by the 
beating inflicted by the arms of the deity, 
entreated the latter to desist; and the foe of 
Madhu refrained, and absorbed into himself 
the fever he had created. The rival Fever then 
departed, saying to Krsna, “Those men who 
call to memory the combat between us shall be 
ever exempt from febrile disease.” 


AAS War Wat farcat- Fran Tar aay 
aMari aet fawpyorearara Sea 2 01 


504 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





ad: MAA Seat Tet: Aa: | 

aq vga aificnasr vif 2 en 

eft Reta Garay 

DAY: MH: Meal: MAAN MATA: 2 2H 
TARSTT PTT STA FTAA: | 

RRR eg aa aA WeTEa 2 31 
FOTN Meret BMA VST 


Ad: WMA: WATT WATT VII 
Peay et wre Safargd| 
Tees AMT Bas HTTeHaoM 24 
TRSaAAaesy WeATATA Se: | 

PUGS AaatMs FN TE: NEM 
Wert yest aS tears we fart 

aa WaMeAT BT Gert VIPAT 9H 


Tale Teerrnfaest HERAT 

TUTAATAN BG HON-Hitaet: WS cit 

Next Visnu overcame and demolished the 
five fires,” and with perfect case annihilated 
the army of the Danavas. Then the son of Bail 
(Bana), with thc whole of the Daitya host, 
assisted by Sankara and Kartikeya, fought with 
Sauri. A fierce combat took place between 
Hari and Sankara, all the regions shook, 
scorched by their flaming weapons, and the 
celestials felt assured that the end to the 
universe was at hand. Govinda, with the 
weapon of yawning set Sankara a gape; and 
then the demons and the demigods attendant 
upon Siva were destroyed on every side; for 
Hara, overcome with incessant gaping, sat 
down in his car, and was unable longer to 
contend with Krsna, whom no acts affect. The 
deity of war, Kartikeya, wounded in the arm 
by Garuda, struck by the weapons of 
Pradyumna, and disarmed by the shout of 
Hari, took to flight, Bana, when he saw 
Sankara disabled, the Daityas destroyed, Guha 
fled, and Siva's followers slain, advanced on 
his vast car, the horses to which were 
harnessed by Nandi§ga, to encounter Krsna and 
his associates Bala and Pradyumna. 


TAUN Terstal aoa AT 
farereT GU WRT TAA TeTAT 2 8 


AHA AGATA GATT AT AT 
Get TAA SAN SOT arUtey AFRO 3 ol 


ad: HOTA a Fear WIAA: | 
Trea Stary ATAATOaA APL 3 I 
Punreade aA aM wees 
fava tod arnt art faena GAIT 3 21 
Wat arene aur-_et Fria 
ure afaad waren fest 1330 


farang were Ft atefe 

wed eftaror eqawe AAT WANE VI 

The valiant Balabbadra, attacking the host 
of Bana, wounded them in many ways with his 
arrows, and put them to a shameful rout; and 
their sovereign beheld them dragged about by 
Rama with his ploughshare, or beaten by him 
with his club, or pierced by Krsna with his 
arrows: he therefore attacked Krsna, and a 
fight took place between them: they cast at 
each other fiery shafts, that pierced through 
their armour; but Krsna intercepted with his 
arrows those of Bana, and cut them to pieces. 
Bana nevertheless wounded KeSava, and the 
wielder of the discus wounded Bana; and both 
desirous of victory, and seeking enraged the 
death of his antagonist, hurled various missiles 
at each other. When an infinite number of 
arrows had been cut to pieces, and the 
weapons began to be exhausted. Krsna 
resolved to put Bana to death. 


Cite AGATA AGMA 

Ne serrate YSvAAN 3 4 I 
Fae AUMes at wh Wee: | 

Tr eae HST FLAT STB EM 
armaat eftdpar diferent: Yas 
Ware anormfera we aigad frat: 301 
HAT AY Aga aMoraregetars 

SAB MS MATA AAO 3 CUI 


BOOK V, CHAP. 33 


for agai ay ate AAYCT: 

querer faaratearggann 3 811 

a sene Tas arrgdaarata: | 

facies aot eeveserqaaraateurq x oll 


The destroyer of the demon host therefore 
took up his discus SudarSana, blazing with the 
radiance of a hundred suns. As he was in the 
act to casting it, the mystical goddess Kotavi, 
the magic lore of the demons, stood naked 
before him." Seeing her before him, Krsna, 
with unclosed eyes, cast SudarSana, to cut off 
the arms of Bana. The discus, dreaded in its 
flight by the whole of the weapons of the 
demons, lopped off successively the numerous 
arms of the Asura. Beholding Krsna with the 
discus again in his hand, and preparing to 
launch it once more, for the total demolition of 
Bana, the foe of Tripura (Siva) respectfully 
addressed him. The husband of Uma, sceing 
the blood strcaming from thc 'dissevercd arms 
of Bana, approached Govinda, to solicit a 
suspension of hostilities, and said to him, 

GR SATA 


qeaot! wT! SAT WA! wat Tea 

Tet warere—-Ret TAI Y a 

ca-frdeeaqay yriaeonferen 

Sera AAT TT TOTTI % 2 Mt 

ay Wales Set TOT Tat TaN 

RAM Atyt Hl AA Ated AMIN 

SAUAAT SISA ATTRACT 

TAT SHA CATR ATTATATS AN BVI 

“Krsna, Krsna, lord of the world,’ I know 
you, first of spirits, the supreme lord, infinite 
felicity, without beginning or end, and beyond 
all things. This sport of universal being, in 
which you take the persons of god, animals, 
and men, is a subordinate attribute of thy 
energy. Be propitious therefore, O lord, unto 
me. I have given Bana assurance of safety; do 
not you falsify that which I have spoken. He 
has grown old in devotion to me; let him not 
incur thy displeasure. The Daitya has received 


505 


a boon from me, and therefore I deprecate thy 
wrath.” 


UT Jara 


Sar: We Whae: Yeraforgarafay 

WaAaeA Year WaTaSs|T MAT Use I 

When he _ had_ concluded, Govinda. 
dismissing his resentment against the Asura, 
looked graciously .on the lord of Uma, the 
wielder of the trident, and said to him, 


sTTTaT Tara 
GMETaAY GUN SiteaaTas FIST 
eae wh Fatty Wei 
aa Fens Se aEdahaet WM 
TSAR FTAA PFT WII 
Ase WE Wea yTayT 
waarmee: Fear rae: uci 
Sel Waal Her: wreferds fete 


veaafurt Agplestrerhfra4r: uy ei 

TaISPEgaRIT Tait Meche 

Tyga Tawtatent: TANG ol 

Sta stfamygarat users safeagr: SteaT: It 

"Since you, Sankara, have given a boon 
unto Bana, Let him live, from respect to your 
promises, my discus is arrested: the assurance 
of safety granted by you is granted also by me. 
You are fit to apprehend that you are not 
distinct from me. That which I am, you are; 
and that also is this world, with its gods, 
demons, and mankind. Men _ contemplate 
distinctions, became they are scupified by 
ignorance." So saying, Krsna went to the place 
where the son of Pradyumna was confined. 
The snakes that bound him were destroyed, 
being blasted by the breath of Garuda: and Krs 
na, placing him, along with his wife, upon the 
celestial bird, returned with Pradyumna and 
Rama to Dvaraka.” 


NOTES 


1. The synonyms of Sonitapura in the Trikanda 
Sesa are Devikota, Banapur, Kotivarsam, and Us 


506 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





avana. The first is usually considered to be the Khanda). Vamana Purana, and Brahma Vaivartta 
modern Devicotta in the Karnatic, which is Purana (Krsna Janma Khanda). 
commonly believed to be the scene of Bana's KKK 
defeat. The name, however, occurs in other parts of 

India; in the Dekhin, on the banks of the Godavari, 

according to Wilford the capital of Munja (As. Res. 

IX. 199); and in Assam, near Goalpara, as the city 

of the Daityas. As. Res. XIV. 443. Hamilton notices 

the remains of a city so called in Dinajpur. in the 

Kalika Purana Bana is described as the friend, and 

apparently neighbour, of Naraka. king of Pragjyotis 

or Assam. 

2 Alluding to the three stages of febrile 
paroxysms, or to the recurrence of tertian ague. A 
contest with this enemy, in the course of military 
operations is an allegory which the British armies 
in India too often illustrate. 

3 The Ahavaniya, Garhapatya. Daksina, Sabhya, 
and Avasathya, are the five fires; of which the three 
first have a religious, and the other two a secular 
character. The first is a fire prepared for oblations 
at an occasional sacrifice : the second is the 
household fire, to be perpetually maintained: the 
third is a sacrifical fire, in the centre of the other 
two, and placed to the south: the Sabhya is a fire 
lighted to warm a party: and the Avasathya the 
common domestic or culinary fire. Manu. IIfl. 
100,185, and Kullika Bhatta's explanation. 

4 Kotavi (#leat ) is said to be an eighth portion of 
Rudrani, and the tutelary goddess of the Daityas, 
composed of incantations (A=tF). The Hari V. calls 
her also Lamba and intimates her being the mother 
of Bana, and as identical with Durgd. The word in 
the lexicons designates a naked woman, and is 
thence appticable to Durga in some of her forms. 

5 There can be little doubt that this legend 
describes a serious struggle between the Saivas and 
Vaisnavas. in which the latter, according to their 
own report, were victorious : and the Saivas. 
although they attempt to make out a sort of 
compromise between Rudra and Krsna, are obliged 
to admit his having the worst of the conflict, and 
his inability to protect his votary. The Bhagavata 
tells the story much as the text. The Hari V. 
amplifics even more than usual, the narrative 
occupying nearly seventy pages of the French 
translation. The legend is to be found to the same 
purport, but in various degrees of detail, in the Agni 
Purana Karma Purana, Padma. Purana (Uttara 


506 THE VISNU-PURANAM 


CHAPTER 34 
aqheayseara: 
(dlugaad:, weer) 
Wa sara 
wr Hal yeasty arse aA 


frre we Was Bacay cievan en 

qarteaty amy feerwfaarcdad 

a Bela Wert! at algect fe Anan 

Maitreya said—-Of a truth the divine Sauri, 
having assumed a mortal body. performed 
great achievements in his easy victories over 
Sakra and Siva and all their attendant 
divinities. 1 am now desirous to hear from 
you, illustrious sage, what other mighty 
exploit the humiliator of the prowess of the 
celestials performed. 


WAY JarT 
Tea wa fant! srerentrenrete 
ATA FO Vet Arora BTN 3 


Parasara said - Hear, excellent Brahman, 
with reverent attention, an account of the 
burning of Varanasi by Krsna, in the course of 
his relieving the burdens of the earth. 


Cosa arya aTyeaiswag ya 
sadly SATA ed: 1s 

a Ay argqeasenadtuit wetAcn 
Aware: Wa fanfare 14 u 
Fas Was Hears Yaa! 
natalia fag ears Ae aA Ng 1 
argearna we! qacat we fasted: 
ST Vifameaer dat We wor SAW 
Sy Wet Ut We WATT: | 
Frfagné aa ayeaed waetfr Ane 


BOOK V, CHAP. 34 


507 





area: @ Wogal wear wat ga! aay AT 

MARAT SAA TA A Sars afgerTATTN I 

Verdtag varearmaents t 77 

ayant tah Fafa go I 

aga afeqarredia eralfedq 

Teel seqer qaerars facia 2 2H 

Wot A Asal Haller Fad! aan 

aa waray wat ar tT feefsreafecatan ez 

sqwMsaTd ad TeMANs Bt. 

Tene att agit Tat gai 

There was a Vasudeva who was called 

Paundraka’, and who. Though not the 
Vasudeva was flattered by ignorant people as 
the descended deity, until he fancied himself 


to be the Vasudeva’ who had come down upon 
earth. Losing all recollection of his real 


character, he assumed the emblems of Visnu, 


and sent an ambassador to the magnanimous 
Krsna with this message; “Relinquish, you 
foolish fellow, the discus; lay aside all my 
insignia, my name, and the character of 
Vasudeva; and come and do me homage ; and 
I will vouchsafe you means of subsistence.” At 
which Janarddana laughed, and replied, “Go 
messenger, back to Paundraka, and say to him 
from me, 'T will dispatch to you my emblem 
the discus without fail. You will nightly 
apprehend my meaning, and consider what is 
to be done, for I shall come to thy city, 
bringing the discus with me, and _ shall 
undoubtedy consign it to you. If you will 
command me to come, I will immediately 
obey, and be with you tomorrow; there shall 
be no delay: and, having sought thy asylum, I 
will so provide, O king that I shall never more 
have any thing to dread from you." So saying, 
he dismissed the ambassador to report these 
words to his sovereign; and summoning 
Garuda, mounted him, and set off for the city 
of Paundraka’. 


a ale dearart sar anfgrafererent 
Waeartant: wfsiae Saraat Bvt 


aa Fert Wea BiiyraTaers a 

Tugel areas Hyrarhays Tat V4 UI 

a cast eftgugerceret faa 

Whee WeRaFAS UTOTAPASAI LE II 

GR TAM SS Worry 

SWI FIBA Hard Ter BAT11 Vo 

fatequseent Gaara: waaay 

SEAT FT MIATA ASA TRS: LCI 

qaqa a aera eeasatert fea 

Pattagrisrersrersitenrey a enferanil 29 

aria ergfreits: witfigirarect: 

Tee TATA Teas dqdqay ll Roll 

HUSA At Alea FATEH: 

TaN Toss WEarafagrTeeyorq | 2 2 

When the king of Kasi heard of the 
preparations of KeSava, he sent his army (to 
the aid of Paundraka), himself bringing up the 
rear; and with the force of the king of Kasi, 
and his own troops, Paundraka, the false 
Vasudeva, marched to meet Krsna. Hari 
beheld him afar off, standing in his car, 
holding a discus, a club, a mace, a scimitar, 
and a lotus, in his hands; ornamented with a 
garland of flowers ; beating a bow; and having 
his standard made of gold: he had also the 
Srivatsa mark delineated on his breast; he was 
dressed to yellow garments, and decorated 
with earrings and a tiara. When the god whose 
standard is Garuda beheld him, he laughed 
with a deep laugh, and engaged in conflict 
with the hostile host of cavalry and elephants, 
fighting with swords, scimitars, maces, 
tridents, spears, and bows. Showering upon the 
enemy the shafts from his Sdranga bow, and 
hurling at them his mace and discus, he 
quickly destroyed both the army of Paundraka 
and that of the king of Kasi. 


sTMTAyaTa 
Whogah Ma ay aaron at wher 
agra Paratha WMATA 2 2 


308 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





aH UGE Ned F feast 

Trea ffes: Wate FT ATTN 23M 

He then said to the former, who was 
foolishly wearing his emblems, “Paundraka, 
you desired me by your envoy to resign to you 
all my insignia. I now deliver them to you. 
Here is my discus; here I give up my mace; 
and here is Garuda, let him mount upon thy 
standard.” 


WIG Sara 


seereay fagha wut faentter:t 


Uraat WAT WAT WHAT Wee#anr ex 


aa MelHa Me anfrgeifeay ae 

aaa anges farearafert Fert 24 

ad: MPA igaral TT Vt: FHT 
aalferqeatas Faara aay creer freer ri 2 & i 
rar a Wess MR: ara WTA 
Wraltadl Wray TA ATTA BATH Voit 


Thus speaking, he let fly the discus and the 
mace, by which Paundraka was cut to pieces, 
and cast on the ground; whilst the Garuda on 
his banner was demolished by the Garuda of 
Visnu. The people, beholding this sight, 
exclaimed, “Alas! alas!” but the valiant king 
of Kasi, adhering to the imposture of his 
friend, continued the confict, till Sauri 
decapitated him with his arrows, shooting his 
head into the city of Kasi, to the marvel of all 
the inhabitants. Having thus slain Paundraka 
and the king of Kasi, with all their followers, 
Sauri returned to Dvadrak4, where he lived in 
the enjoyment of heavenly delights. 


afeat: ufad auat at anferad: Wt 

wa: fatafeene tacrafarera: 2c 
Weal F AYA Vet MAT Yara: | 
Gufert aera VISTT 128 It 
stfargeh TEAS AMAT VISTI 

at goat war tf warar FART 3 ott 
a ad wary Hen fryeqdara A 
AYURASY PUA ALATA! 3 8 


When the inhabitants of Kasi saw the head 
of their king shot into their, city, they were 
much astonished, and wondered how it could 
have happened, and by whom the deed could 
have been done. Having ascertained that the 
king had been killed by Krsna, the son of the 
monarch of Kasi* together with the priest of 
the family, propitiated Sankara; and that deity, 
well pleased to be adored in the sacred place 
Avimukta, desired the prince to demand a 
boon: on which he prayed, and said, "O lord, 
mighty god, through thy favour let thy mystic 
spirit arise to destroy Krsna, the murderer of 
my father.” 


UU Jaa 
Ua aia Seo 
Rae VAN TeAarefeanyrti 3 2H 
AAT SATA UA Tae AH eM eae 
aor aoe after pear grad salt 13 311 
WHAT TATA FA 
aal PROS Wat PT MTTSATI 3 il 
SIYNTAGAATANTE FIAT | 
SOSA ASTHPAATTAT AUT 134 UI 
wife peat atasarcnsercrary| 
GHA ENY BUSTA CHAT 3 & tl 
eT STATA ATTA TTTOTT 
PUUAGAT TITY fap YaTT 1130 
URNA Hea AeA Taw 
Ta ART AM TATA ATTA 3 CU 
Hea anor wafer wraaan 
famperantteamatan Gra 113 <1 


“It shall be so,” answered Sankara: and 
from out of the southern fire upsprang a vast 
and formidable female,” like flame out of fire, 
blazing with ruddy light, and with fiery 
radiance streaming amidst her hair. Angrily 
she called upon Krsna, and departed to 
Dvaraké; where the people, beholding her, 
were struck with dismay, and fled for 
protection to Madhusiidana, the refuge of all 


BOOK V, CHAP. 34 


509 





worlds. The wielder of the discus knowing that 
the fiend had been produced by the son of the 
king of Kasi, through his adoration of the deity 
whose emblem is a bull, and being engaged in 
sportive amusements, and playing at dice, said 
to the discus, “Kill this fierce creature, whose 
tresses are of plaited flame.” Accordingly 
Sudarsana, the discus of Visnu, immediately 
attacked the fiend, fearfully enwreached with 
fire, and wearing tresses of plaitcd name. 
Terrified at the might of Sudarsana, the 
creation of Mahesvara awaited not his attack, 
but fled with speed, pursued by him with equal 
velocity, until she reached Varanasi, repelled 
by the superior might of the discus of Visnu. 


aa: Hiigaret YT TAMA aa Aer 
WIAA THAME Ta voit 
VATA Sea TLACTATAT 
PUPMANAT A TAT STOTT FET U1 
RIAU AAAI ATA| 
sprees at ster geo ys ei 
TATA ATAT- Ys- MTA 

Cale Tatas Maes at TN ssn 


STATO TATA 
dah waptetfe faanieareal SUT svi 


Stat sitfaeygerat uses defeat: SeaTT: I 


The army of Kasi, and the host of the 
demigods attendant upon Siva, armed with all 
kinds of weapons, then sallied out to oppose 
the discus ; but, skilled in the use of arms, he 
consumed the whole of the forces by his 
radiance, and then set fire to the city, in which 
the magic power of Siva had concealed 
herself.’ Thus was Varanasi burnt, with all its 
princes and their followers, inhabitants, 
elephants. horses, and men, treasures’ and 
granaries, houses, palaces, and markets. The 
whole of a city, that was inaccessible to the 
gods, was thus wrapped in flames by the 
discus of Hari, and was totally destroyed. The 
discus then, with unmitigated wrath, and 
blazing fiercely, and far from satisfied with 


the accomplishment of so easy a task, returned 
to the hand of Visnu.’ 


NOTES 


1 From being, the commentator says king of 
Pundra, The Bhagavata calls him chief of the Karis 
as; the Padma. king of Kasi; but the Bhagavata, as 
well as our text, makes the king of Kasi his friend 
and ally. 

2 According to the Padma Purana, he propitiates 
Siva, and obtains from him the insignia which 
constitute a Vasudeva. The different authorities for 
this legend all use the term Vasudeva in the sense 
to a title. 

3 The Hari V. and Padma Purana send 
faundraka to Dvaraké. According to the latter, 
Narada incites Paundraka to the aggression, telling 
him, he cannot be a Vasudeva till he has overcome 
Krsna: he goes, and is killed. The former work, as 
usual, enters into particulars of its own invention. 
Krsna is absent on a visit to Siva at Kailaga, and 
during his absence Paundraka, assisted by 
Ekalavya, king of the Nisadas, makes a night attack 
upon Dvaraka. They are resisted by the Yadavas 
under Satyaki and Balarama, by the former of 
whom Paundraka is repeatedly overthrown, and all 
but slain : he requires so much killing, however, 
that he is likely to obtain the victory, when Krsna 
comes to the aid of his kinsmen, and after a 
protracted encounter, described in language 
employed a hundred times before, kills his 
competitor. The whole of the sections called the 
Kailasa Yatra. or Krsna's journey to Kailasa. must 
have been wanting in the copy used by M. 
Langlois. as they are not included in his translation. 
The chapters of the Hari V. according to his 
enumeration of them are 261: my copy has 316. 

4. The Bhagavata names him Sudaksina : 
Padma, Dandapani. 

5. A personified Krtyé. a magical creation. The 
Padma has the same. The Bhagavata makes the 
product of the sacrificial fire a male and sends him 
to Dvaraké, accompained by a host of Bhitas, 
Siva's attendant goblins: 

6. According to the Bhagavata. the magical, 
being himself destroys Sudaksina and his priest; but 
Sudarsana consumes the people and the city. The 
Padma ascribes the destruction of the king and all 
his city to the discus. The Hari V. closes its 


the 


510 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





narrative with the death of Paundraka, and makes 
no mention of the destruction of Benares. The 
circumstance is alluded to in a preceding section (S 
159) by Narada, when detailing the exploits of Krs 
na. 

7 In this legend, again, we have a contest 
between the followers of Visnu and Siva intimated, 
as, besides the assistance given by the fatter to 
Paundraka. Benares--Vardnasi or Atimukta—has 
been all time, as it 1s at present, the high place of 
the Siva worship. There is also an indication of a 
Vaisnava schism, in the competition between 
Paundra and Krsna for the title of Vasudeva, and 
the insignia of his divinity. 

Ke 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





510 
CHAPTER 35 
Ustasnseared: 

(Hurga-yraey faare: 1) 

WAT sara 


Ta Uae TaIUTAT IAA: | 

std Wiad Ter! TATASTAASr a gi 

SATRUOTT TAT ATTA 

A HAA AeMNd! AeA Haar Act Vl 

Maitreya said—I have a great desire to hear, 
excellent Brahman, some further account of 
the exploits of Balarama. You have related to 
me his dragging the Yamuna, and other 
mighty deeds, but you can tell me, venerable 
sir, some other of nis acts. 
TUM Jara 

Aa! gaat ant ge TOE HATA 

SAAATAAATT SAO ITOH TATH 3 Ut 

-" ane ; 

Teearary Ae: Veal Serer TA: tt Wt 

ad: HSI Aetatat: wut: ealatea: 

qe-soneasa seagate FTN & UI 


ParadSara said— Attend, Maitreya, to the 
achievements performed by Rama, who is the 
eternal, illimitable Sesa. the upholder of the 


earth. At the choise of a husband by the 
daughter of Duryodhana, the princess was 
carried off by the hero Samba. the son of 
Jambavati. Being pursued by Duryodhana, 
Karna. Bhishma. Drona, and other celebrated 
chiefs, who were incensed at his audacity, he 
was defeated, and taken prisoner. 


aagen Urea: BS Bet Galena 
Waa! wpe wat fred 8 Ve Wei 
ar fraral ae: wre HaeTeTEe TATA! 
Teal ot Agee arerear fe SRA VU 


When the Yadavas heard of the occurrence, 
their wrath was kindled against Duryodhana 
and his associates, and they prepared to take 
up arms against them; but Baladeva, in accents 
interrupted by the effects of ebriety. forbade 
them. and said, “I will go alone to the sons of 
Kuru; they will liberate Simba at my request. 


WUT SATA 
Aaa TWAT AT APTATSAA 
aravaaneasye + faagr a ATTIC 
SAAT FUT SATA : | 
TEATS WATT WAST 8 UI 
Tater fafraq ad aarerte aarti 
SMMITYINT: PIAA FAFSA 20 It 


ParadSara said— Accordingly he went to the 
elephant-styled city (Hastinapura).but took up 
his abode in a grove without the town. which 
he did not enter. When Duryodhana and the 
rest heard that he had arrived there they sent 
him a cow, a present of fruits and flowers, and 
water. Bala received the offering in the 
customary form, and said to the Kauravas, 
"Ugrasena commands you to set Samba at 
liberty.” 

AAA TSA: Year siergioaat fist 

HUSA HASTA 2 2A 

age alta: we argeinrenasy Bae: | 
SME Vala VAaeT WHTITA 22 Il 
Wat! faraaaat sesh aa: 


BOOK V, CHAP. 35 


S11 





Bat HVHelaAMt Wea: H: Werf 1231 
STaAsit wena altar wereafa 

deci Wgtaasrarafastrard: 1 ev it 
ages Ta! Wed yaa 
faMeATay A Waa ATA PITAL 24 I 


When Duryodhana, Kana, Bhisma, Drona, 
and the others, heard this, they were very 
angry; and Bahlika and other friends of the 
Kauravas, who looked upon the Yadu race as 
not entitled to regal dignity, said to the wielder 
of the club. “What is this, Balabhadra, that you 
have uttered? What Yddava shall give orders 
to the chicfs of the family of Kuru ? If 
Ugrasena issucs his mandates to the Kauravas, 
then we must take away the white umbrella 
that he has usurped, and which is fit only for 
kings. Depart therefore. Balaréma; you are 
entitled to our respect; but Samba has been 
guilty of improper conduct, and we will not 
liberate him either at Ugrasena's commands or 
yours. 


WOT HATHA HH TTA | 

TATA AT Hal HAAN TAA YeTT 11 VG A 
TAMIA Gat AAAS : 

cal Sat Maat Atte Wheat ATarct fears ee It 
senha want asa aet! Frafea: | 


Walden Hest FerHeNfaaq Ve 1! 


The homage that is due to us, their 
superiors, by the Kukkura and Andhaka tribes, 
may not be paid by them; but who ever heard 
of a command issued by a servant to his 
master? Elcvation to an equal seat has 
rendered you arrogant. We have committed a 
great mistake in neglecting, through our 
friendship for you, the policy (that teaches the 
danger of treating the abject with deference). 
Our sending you to-day a respectful present 
was an intimation of (personal) regard, which 
it was neither fit for our race to have proffered, 
nor for your's to have expected.” 


WU Jara 


SHEA Hla: VA A YS Be: Yai 

arafearqui fafagpiraeaa 2e 

aa: AMT aeoaahayaaaey 

TUT WITS AGA AIA A SAMPA: Wolk 

cet faerftar geet orfeoterenareter: | 

STEHSATART TAT FART: Mee FLL 2 il 

B sarenirarmant yorerplecrrt: | 

Bel ASTMASTAARTGT STATA 2 2 

HAM Waa feet ATA 

SATS J At AASEMT ARAL 23 1 

Mat WS RAT WE sa: BeaIA: | 

eee BAA ATTA: PraMATT A VS 

fgets gece zara 

UATATU: OTA TAA: M4 I 

fanit wer yenat aisaat + wrote: | 

AAR A STA: T FAT VE I 

oral Farag? qear areata ager 

wot sated gore sitet aaa 1 21 

gar geri aftsarara aI 

armed wer sera VAST <I 

ast BAIA RAT APTI 

aaa Vas Actes Aa: FAI 

SATA TST HAN STAG 1 PII 

swat aarit art: Het: Tel 

ATTAIN Vit SATIS Alaa: I 

TTA UTA AMT ALTATSAT 113 011 

Having thus spoken, the Kuru chiefs, 

unanimously refusing to set the son.of Hari at 
large, immediately returned into the city. Bala, 
rolling about with intoxication, and the wrath 
which thcir contemptuous language had 
excited, struck the ground furiously with his 
heel, so that it burst to pieces with a loud 
sound that reverberated through the regions of 
space. His eyes reddened with rage, and his 


brow was curved with frowns, as_ he 
exclaimed, "What arrogance is this, in such 


512 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





vile and pithless creatures! The sovereignty of they were much alarmed, and called loudly on 
the Kauravas, as well as our own, is the work Rama, saying, "Rama, Rama ! hold, hold ! 
of fate, whose decree it also is that they now suppress your wrath ! have mercy upon us! 
disrespect or disobey the commands of Here is Samba, and his wife also, delivered up 
Ugrasena. Indra may of right give his orders to to you. Forgive our sins. committed in 


the gods; and Ugrasena exercises equal 


ignorance of thy wondrous power.” 


authority with the lord to Sachi. Fie upon the UU ava 


pride that boasts a throne, the leavings of a 
hundred mortals! Is not he the sovereign of the 
earth, the wives of whose servants adorn them- 
selves with the blossoms of the Parijata tree? 
Ugrasena shall be the undisputed king of 
kings; for | will not return to his capital until I 
have rid the world wholly of the sons of Kuru. 
I will destroy Karna, Duryodhana, Drona, 
Bhishma. Bahlika, Dusdsana. Bhirisravas, 
Somadatta, Salya, Bhima, Arjuna, YOdhisht 
hica, the twins, and all the other vile 
descendants of Kuru, with their horses, 
elephants, and chariots. I will rescue the hero 
Samba from captivity, and carry him, along 
wirh his wife, to Dvaraka, where I shall again 
behold Ugrasena and the rest of my kin. Or, 
authorized by the king of the gods to remove 
the burdens of the earth. I will take this capital 
of the Kauravas, with all the sons of Kuru, and 
cast the city of the elephant into the 
Bhagirathi.” 


WIM Sata 

SARA HeerHal: HITE Torq 
Matan fares aad TTT: 113 I 
arafita a dee vat S eerTgTy 
Sear Haye: Waa: 13 VI 
wet! Wa Werarel! acaat een aan 
sudigaat ara: welts Waeraya 3 3 Il 
We Mra: Wasttawa Fratfaat ae 
MAMAMATATTT STATA TAT 3 XII 


So saying, the wielder of the club, Baldeva, 
his eyes red with rage, plunged the blade of his 
ploughshare downwards, beneath the ramparts 
of the city, and drew them towards him. When 
the Kauravas beheld Hastinapura tottering, 


cat Frarrarary: Vest Tea 
Fema arrrget ata Sasa 34 
srer-gior-_areeat wor aaat FTA 
AAAI MES TA AAA AT 3 EI 
erage Maat AL Ye feat 
UT Maley WT TATATCTTT: 11 3 9 
TAY BAT: Ve AIGST ee Hel 


VHA SSAA AAPA 3 SI 

Sha sifeeaygeey waraigt waahagt: STATA: I 

Accordingly, issuing hurriedly from the 
city, the Kauravas delivered Samba and his 
bride to the mighty Balarama, who, bowing to 
Bhisma, Drona, and Kripa, who addressed him 
in conciliatory language, said, "I am satisfied 
;" and so desisted. The city bears the marks of 
the shock it received, even to the present 
day—such was the might of Rama-—proving 
both his strength and prowess. The Kauravas 
then offering homage to Samba and to Bala, 
dismissed the former with his wife and a bridal 
portion.’ 


NOTES 


1 This adventure is related in the Bhagavata, and 
very briefly noticed in the Hari VamSa; but I have 
not found any mention of it in the Mahabharata. It 
may have been suggested originally by Hastinapura 
having sustained some injury either from an 
earthquake or from the encroachments of the river, 
which, as is recorded, compelled the removal of the 
capital to Kausambi (Bk. IV. Ch. XX.) 

kK 


BOOK V, CHAP. 36 


513 





CHAPTER 36 
CAE IRL OID B 
(fefercart:) 


TUM Sata 

Waa! sedi wea aera aerenfers: | 

at TeaaaNTdare setae FEST 

BTS INTE COR ACRIC HCE 

Tanase fafa At APTN I 

yas wear A wa Te wal 

Ae BAS HON aeratara aa 3 

ae aaeamt Tarcaqaany| 

aafaedad Hay Wes FAT XI 

dat facearmra aararaen: | 

fate wrenatel et ah a Shear 

Cele A SAMI YETTA a 

qatar udarttantraty arora § i 

Verqeneyq aay Wirarafael ae 

PVA: AVIA ATT 9 II 

a faanitasterercissrad fet 

OIC DRIES ERIE ICM CCC UCIC mIPAL 

HEM Weed Frat WTA: | 

BST wANTaAAE: WaUahs AAT 8H 

aa fargd Wea SICA TATA 

fitararancant Taig Ys -Fary ton 

Hear also, Maitreya, another exploit 

performed by the mighty Balarama. The great 
Asura, the foe of the friends of the gods, 
Naraka, had a friend of exceeding prowess in 
the monkey named Dvivida, who was 
animated by implacable hostility against the 
deities, and vowed to revenge on the whole of 
them the destruction of Naraka by Krsna, at 
the instigation of the king of the celestials, by 
preventing sacrifices, and effecting the 
annihilation of the mortal sphere. Blinded by 


ignorance, he accordingly interrupted all 
religious rites, subverted all righteous 


observances, and occasioned the death of 
living beings: he set fire to the forests, to 
villages and to towns: sometimes he 
overwhelmed cities and hamlets with falling 
rocks; or lifting up mountains in the waters, he 
cast them into the ocean: then taking his place 
amidst the deep, he agitated the waves, until 
the foaming sea rose above its confines, and 
swept away the villages and cities situated 
upon its shores. Dvivida also, who could 
assume what shape he would, enlarged his 
bulk to an immense size, and rolling and 
tumbling and trimping amidst the corn fields, 
he crushed and spoiled the harvests. The 
whole world, disordered by this iniquitous 
monkey, was deprived of sacred study and 
religious rites, and was greatly afflicted. 

wandl ladies wat ot were: | 

Tact a Wen wars ates: 11 28H 

suite faeraearatferret: | 

YT Agaws: HAT SA WAT! 22M 

ad: @ aMUsae Yetear Pont zerqi 

Teas Tae WySE fasarqi 311 

wa Afsat arat warns ast: 

Uru arenieeraer F AAT evil 

At: ATTA AAT FAST: | 

aanfa wAaga aan facie 24 1 

Ad: AAA Get TIME FAST TAT 

asta stefgreat sitet sre wre 88 I 

fade uw ai feet Wace BETTI | 

fate MAIS: Ui UOT ALA! VOI 

AUT ART CAST: | 

SNA TNO AAT SAI VC UI 

aat aert arts fear afer anise: 

ware sete fefae: afrorsttfaa: ee 

Waar Tata Ht: yer 

Raa! yen afwasiura fe afsaqi 2 ol 


On one occasion Halayudha was drinking 
in the groves of Raivata, along with the 
illustrious Revati and other beautiful females; 


5i4 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





and the distinguished Yadu, in whose praises 
songs were sung, and who was preminent 
amidst graceful and  sportive women, 
resembled Kuvera, god of riches, in his palace. 
Whilst thus engaged, the monkey Dvivida 
came there, and stealing the ploughshare and 
the club of Baladeva, grinned at and mocked 
him, and laughed at the women, and threw 
over and broke the cups filled with wine. 
Balarama, becoming angry at this, threatened 
the monkey; but the latter disregarded his 
menaces, and made a chattering noise: on 
which Bala, starting up, seized his club in 
wrath; and the monkey laid hold of a large 
rock, which be hurled at the hero. Bala casting 
his club at it, as it neared him, broke it into a 
thousand fragments, which, together with the 
club, fell upon the ground. Beholding the club 
prostrate, the monkey sprang over it, and 
struck the Yadava violently on the breast with 
his paws, Bala replied with a blow of his fist 
upon the forehead of Dvivida, which felled 
him, vomiting blood. and lifeless, to the earth. 
The crest of the mountain on which he fell was 
splintered into a hundred pieces by the weight 
of his body, as if the thunderer had shivered it 
with his thunderbolt. 


wagis aay tar waearate fata: 

WHA AINAT Weary VSL FAT 2 Vi 
art epanfen seruareanfton 

wifererge ate! feparet arcana) 2 2) 
seyaeat feanrengdar EBT: MRI 23 


The gods threw down a shower of flowers 
upon Rama, and approached him, and praised 
him for the glorious feat he had performed. 
“Well has the world been freed,” said they, “ 
by your prowess. O hero, of this vile ape, who 
was the ally of the enemy of the gods.” Then 
they and their attendant spirits returned well 
pleased to heaven. 


UU Sarat 
Wfarreranht aeacaer aia: | 
ayaa o HTT ALON: 1 21 


gfe stfaeagaer varnish wefay: sree: i 

Many such inimitable deeds were wrought 
by the illustrious Baladeva, the impersonation 
of Sega, the supporter of the earth.’ 
NOTES 

1 This exploit of Balarama is also similarly, but. 
more vulgarly, related in the Bhagavata. It is simply 
laid in the Hari Vamsa. and erroneously. that 
Menda and Dvivida were conquered by Krsna. 

kkk 


514 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





CHAPTER 37 
weafarenseare: 
(Hat wre: Agden: wad: 
AAT AR) 
UU Jara | 
ud dma Hot aidan 
an eBferitorat wa Tet: Heat eh 
fads a war Het ae fag: 
STATATATT BAL: MATA faut 
Ha Wad yar season] JAI 
wrens faMUNgIaEtar, PETA 3 
THR ET HOTA AT ATTA: | 
ait famed ward wfaeerarar vi 
In this manner did Krsna. assisted by 
Baladeva, destroy demons and iniquitous 
monarchs, for the good of the earth; and along 
with Phalguna' also did he relieve earth of her 
load, by the death of innumerable hosts. 
Having thus lightened the burdens of the earth, 
and slain many unrighteous princes, he 
exterminated, by the pretext of an imprecation 
denounced by Braéhmanas. his own YAdava 
race. Then quitting Dvaraka, and relinquishing 


his mortal being. the self-born reentered. with 
all his emanations, his own sphere of Visnu.’ 


AAT sare 
a fargrqerat UA Tagiet SATA 
SIG WAG Geyer WATT UG 


BOOK V, CHAP. 37 


515 





Maitreya said-Tell me how Jandrddana 
effected the destruction of his own race under 
the plea of Brahmanical imprecation, and in 
what manner he relinquished his mortal body.” 
UWIt Sard 

fanfare sual Aesr Weryhy: | 
fousreds wetctet eet AGHA: | GI 
are Meare wifaarewreaniear: | 
Wra araadtys wefan Fert FM 9 
WAAAY: oa: AT 

sa a yaar ay: fe wafaeate ci 

ParadSara said~ At the holy place 
Pindaraka,’ Visvamitra, Kanva. and the great 
sage Narada. were observed by some boys of 
the Yadu tribe. Giddy with youth. and 
influenced by predestined results, they dressed 
and adorned Samba, the son of Jambavati as a 
damsel, and conducting hcr to the sages, they 
addressed them with the usual marks of 
reverence, and said. “What child this femalc, 
the wife of Babhru. who is anxious to have a 
son. give birth to ?” The sages, who were 
possessed of divine wisdom, were very angry 
to find themselves thus tricked by the boys. 


and said. “She will bring forth a club, that 
shall crush the whole of the Yadava race.” 


WIV Sara 
feoraagared fareren: area: 
wa: after: wgyeet safes 
farHpeaael Beart wares i 
SAM: HAN STAT PATA! 
TIAA Tact Bet MATT MUA! Qo it 
SECU COLE ULE LCG 
Wa A UTHE: werredteteetn 220 
aera cleat afttreracfia 
wus Wuifag vrata F arTAla e211 
aearafal fad weal wate afafe: 
Ua TA SEN TEMS TAT 231 
faarararraiste wary ATE: | 


tered fatter aq waiter ex 


The boys. thus spoken to by the sage, went 
and related all that had occurred to Ugrasena; 
and, as foretold, a club was produced from, the 
belly of Samba. Ugrasena had the club, which 
was of iron. ground to dust, and thrown into 
the sea, but the particles of dust there became 
rushes.” There was one part of the iron club 
which was like the bladc of a lance, and which 
the Andhakas could not break: this, when 
thrown into the sea, was swallowed by a fish; 
the fish was caught, the iron spike was 
extracted from its belly, and was taken by a 
hunter named Jara. The all-wise and glorious 
Madhusiidana did not think fit to counteract 
what had been predetermined by fate. 


ay wed ga: woraME Aya 
Wears FA: wheat wT At: 1 gut 
Teathy-aeentert-Se- AAS: Tet 
faarratt weaaHeaes seat WAT 2g 1 
Aaa UTA qatar PAA 
Taaaosa fraet: MeraeA: 1 V9 
edu fagat dear yar arcisaanftar: 

aM wanfereg wag fafest FA VS 
aedtt Tarr aaoTAfe VTA 

SCM Weal tant Maat Ale Wea Ve 
tafe Wenarta cereal 

Ce CAAT ATH OTAT TTT START: 11 2 0 1 


Then there came to Kesava, when he was 
private and alone, a messenger from the gods, 
who addressed him with reverence, and said, 
“I am sent to you. O lord, by the deities, and 
do you hear what Indra, together with the 
Visvas, Maruts, Adityas, Sddhyas, and Rudras, 
respectfully represents. "More than a hundred 
years have elapsed since you, in favour to the 
gods, has descended upon earth, for the 
purpose of relieving it of its load. The demons 
have been slain, and the burden of earth has 
been removed: now let the immortals once 
again behold their monarch in heaven. A 
period exceeding a century has passed: now, if 


516 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





it be thy pleasure, return to Svarga. This is the 
solicitation of the celestials. But should such 
not be thy will. then remain here as long as if 
may be desirable to thy dependants."° 


AMAyara 
RIMM Ft AarIAae ATA 
WET Wet FS a MTA AAT ates 11 2 gM 
yar Aenfe wise weathafed:| 
Tae HUAAY DATA WaT: 11 2 2A 
GAT TRATES ATTA 
arearqraey arenty afearereaqu 2 3 
ATACEYRINT AZUUTARTTATT 
We Waker wre Sago AAT Yt Wil 
SUH ASA Fea asa: 
fara: Harish ger areeiraa 24 1 


aet Grenada 
TATA TT THE APL 1241 


To this Krsna replied, “All that you have 
said I am well aware of the destruction of the 
Yadavas by me has commenced. The burdens 
of the earth are not removed until the Yadavas 
are extirpated. I will effect this also in my 
descent, and quickly; for it shall come to pass 
in seven nights. When I have restored the Jand 
of Dvarakd to thc ocean, and annihilated the 
race of Yadu, I will proceed to the mansions of 
the immortals. Apprise the gods, that, having 
abandoned my human body, and accompanied 
by Sankarsana, I will then return to them. The 
tyrants that oppressed the earth, Jarasandha 
and the rest, have been killed; and a youth, 
even of thc race of Yadu, is, no less than they, 
an encumbrance. When therefore I have taken 
away this great weight upon earth, I will return 
to protect the sphere of the celestials. Say this 
to them.” 


WUT SATA 
SYM AYLAT Cag: WoT AH 
Aaa fear teat tates at Vo 
MTA AAA eerily 


aet erceryeat ferargrrea feanfrerq 2 211 

AL FRAT Staats VPA AaTSOT| 

Tela aaa WATS aT AT fT VSN 

Pardsgara continued— The messenger of the 
gods. having received this reply, bowed, and 
took his heavenly course to the king of the 
gods. The mighty Krsna now beheld signs and 
portents both in earth and _ heaven, 
prognosticating, day and night, the ruin of 
Dvaraka.’ Showing these to the Yadavas, he 
said, "See; behold these fearful phenomena : 
let us hasten to Prabhasa, to avert these 
omens.” 


GUI Sata 


Wagrh J POT WANA: | 

Remirrad: we wforreagar ee 3 oll 

WaT GAA HA AaATT BAMA! 

Wat Hehe ad wary deter 

arerarear Fiftreantr qereanreqa era 3 201 

When he had thus spoken to the eminent 

Yadava, the illustrious Uddhava saluted and 
said to him, “Tell me, O lord, what it is proper 
that I should do, for it seems to me that you 
will destroy all this race: the signs that are 
manifest declare nothing less than the 
annihilation of'the tribe.” Then Krsna replied 
to him, 


siraryzarea 

Tes Ta eRe MN AAA ATA | 

sata get meareradai 3 21 

TEATRO Teale 

WaT Wararet at fargrarcaran 3 311 

ar vant uftienty sade ot Her 

SHS Wat Arat WAR: wae 13 V1 

Krsna said— “Do you go by a celesial route 

which my favour shall provide you, to the holy 
place Badarikasrama, in the Gandhamadana 
mountain, the shrine of Naranarayana; and on 


that spot, sanctified by them, you. by 
meditating on me, shall obtain perfection 


BOOK V, CHAP. 37 


517 





through my favour. When the race of Yadu 
shall have perished, I shall proceed to heaven; 
and the ocean shall inundate Dvaraka, when I 
have quitted it." 


TU Sarg 
sem: foros srr qerea: | 
AAU HPA AT TAT: tl 3 4 I 
Aa Wea: As WATS VP 
WATT WAZ: TS HONT- TATA Ea 3G I 
WT AY: MAA: TATA HTT: | 
UPRA QUI argeararfem: 113911 
foaat aa a aat dator wT! 
SAAT AN BCT: TAA! FCI 
Wey: WENT FT WeacaaeMe Har: 
aUTeTALT WY: WaTAATHATAANTI 3 Fl 


ParaSara continued— Accordingly Uddhava, 
thus instructed by KeSgava, saluted him with 
veneration, and departed to the shrine of 
Naranarayana.® Then the Yaddavas ascended 
their rapid cars, and drove to Prabhasa,’ along 
with Krsna, Rama, and the rest of their 
chiefs.'° They bathed there, and, excited by 
Vasudeva, the Kukkuras and Andhakas 
indulged in liquor. As they drank, the 
destructive flame of dissension was kindled 
amongst them by mutual collision, and fed 
with the fuel of abuse. Infuriated by the divine 
influence, they fell upon one another with 
missile weapons, and when those were 
expended, they had recourse to the rushes 
growing nigh. 


Ue F Vela Tey MATT 

AA UTE HEY: AH FETS ¥ oll 
WA-WraIya: Hraats Aas: | 
sfregieasra vyfagyta a ¥ 2 
areata Urea Tapa fest 
wraratahraret Frag: WITTY 2 
frarcarara eftaieatat a aaeraq 
Gard AA wrt Ft Freq: WATT 3 


POSH siaredarercangeAraa 

are ashe yaet fetes waren ¥ vi 

Ba Vt FV AAA: | 

TT USANA AMA A UAT 4 Il 

cagoranert Salsat ata wer: 

Usaal SeHeNy TarsaferaaAl v II 

wh AT Wal MIF Fut wgisfata aI 

Tat Be Hear WMATA ¥'9 

TO ama aie weaned: | 

a HOT USTs SHH WATT vc 

VMAATU at Wet Serger 

Saud Wares Prenat WTA 8 

PRT FT TST TA PAA: | 

waaTauta fag: CAAA RATT HG oI 

TASAMTATS Tal Hes: Wa Aah 

faa a aad Ota: TATRA 1G en 

The rushes in their hands became like 
thunderbolt!, and they struck one another with 
their fatal blows. Pradyumna, Sdmba, 
Kritavarman, Sdtyaki, Aniruddha, Prithu, 
Viprithu, Chatuvarman, Charuka, Akriira, and 
many others, struck one another with the 
rushes, which had assumed the hardness of 
thunderbolts.''’ Kesgava interposed to prevent 
them, but they thought that he was taking part 
with each severally, and continued the 
conflict. Krsna then enraged took up a handful 
of rushes to destroy them, and the rushes 
became a Club of iron, and with this he slew 
many of the murderous Yddavas; whilst 
others, fighting fiercely, put an end to one 
another. The chariot of the holder of the 
discus, named Jaitra, was quickly carried off 
by the swift steeds, and swept away by the sea, 
in the sight of Daruka the charioteer. The 
discus, the club, the bow, the quiver, the shell, 
and the sword of KeSsava, having 
circumambulated their lord, flew along the 
path of the sun. In a short time there was not a 
single Yadava left alive, except the mighty Krs 
na and Daruka.'*" Going towards Rama, who 


518 


was sitting at the root of a tree. they beheld a 
large serpent coming out of his mouth. Having 
issued from his mouth, the mighty snake pro- 
ceeded towards the ocean, hymned by saints 
and by other great serpents. Bringing an 
offering of respect. Ocean came to meet hi:n; 
and then the majestic being, adored by 
attendant snakes, entered into the waters of the 
deep. 

aaa aera Fratut ered wre tyra: 

Se Ud AMT TYAN: Ih 2A 

Frater aeget Aaa WaT arATZI 

ary ferarenad ufteaet aeraey 14 31 

Beholding the departure of the spirit of 
Balabhadra. Kesava said to Daruka, “All this 
is to be related by you to Vasudeva and 
Ugrasena. Go and inform them of the 
departure of Balabhadra, and the destruction 
of the Yddavas; also that 1 shall engage in 
religious meditation, and quit this body. 


aa BATA: WaT: | 
aan ant wat ays: wrafrerfan 4 x 
qearaaay: Tay wiles MEANT: | 

q Wa grand Freard aa Usa & GI 
aa UE Wael Ue Ala W ala: 


Tear o yfe alerangst Sea & It 
WHAM WAM VASA AAA: | 


SRG Glee SAAT Tar SAT 
Weta Ay ABT TETRA AeA 4 ott 


Apprise Ahuka and all the inhabitants of 
Dvaraka,"* that the sea will inundate the town: 
be ready therefore in expectation of the 
coming of Arjuna. and when he quits Dvaraka, 
no longer abide there, but go whither so ever 
that descendant of Kuru shall repair. Do you 
also go to the son of Kuru, and tell him, that it 
is my request that he will grant what 
protection he can to‘all my family. Then 
depart with Arjuna and all the people of 
Dvaravati, and let Vajra be installed sovereign 
over the tribe of Yadu.” 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 
TUE Sara 
STM AEH: HOt wort YA: YA: 


Wes ARM: Hew wae saa y ct 
A Weal AM Us Bara AANA! 


sues HeTggaa as TA FTANY VI 


Daruka, being thus instructed, prostrated 
himself again and again before Krsna, and 
walked round him repeatedly, and then 
departed as he had been desired; and having 
conducted Arjuna to Dvaravati, the intelligent 
servant of Krsna established Vajra as king. 


amamty Meret areata WTI 

TAN WANT AayAAMNTATI & 0 11 

ware ferret gale agarea zl 

ATG MISHA We PAT AGT BATE VM 

The divine Govinda then, having 
concentrated in himself that supreme spirit: 
which is one with Vasudeva. was identified 
with all beings.'* Respecting the words of the 
Brahman, the imprecation of Durvasas,’” the 


illustrious Krsna sat engaged in thought, 
resting his foot upon his knee. 


Saal OT AWA Ft el aT a: 


YAATAN TCS MARAT AT HI & 2 
aa ued ranmaewwcarend: | 

det facaea ata arator fea § 3 UI 
TAT SQM TA Ugaigat AH 
wforaeare wat wate Ya: YANG vi 
sa Haas Aer efrorygan 
ATTA See AT STAC TAN EG 


Then came there a hunter, named Jara’® 
whose arrow was tipped with a blade made of 
the piece of iron of the club, which had not 
been reduced to powder; and beholding from a 
distance the foot of Krsna, he mistook it for 
part of a deer, and shooting his arrow, lodged 
it in the sole.'’ Approaching his mark, he saw 
the four-armed king, and falling at his feet, 
repeatedly besought his forgiveness, 


BOOK V, CHAP. 37 


exclaiming, "I have done this deed 
unwittingly, thinking I was aiming at the deer! 
Have pity upon me, who am consumed by my 
crime; for you are to consume me!" 


UUM Sata 
wae ware + Asha saqvafa 
Teas TH MATT AT Tat BUTEA & GUI 
ICRI MEGA C oc ceed 
Beet Wert Lath Serene: 1G 9 
Te Aer A Wray Matsa 


TANyASSTAs hey ATHCATASTHT G 6 UI 

OO ERE RRC ONIEC IIT 

aa Uae sent fafaear af eH 

ofa sit famypguot usaigt aatag: seaTa:I 

Bhagavat replied, "Fear not you in the 
least." Go, hunter, through my favour, to 
heaven the abode of the gods. As soon as he 
held thus spoken, a celestial car appeared, and 
the hunter, ascending it, forthwith proceeded 
to heaven. Then the illustrious Krsna having 
united himself with his own pure spiritual, 
inexhaustible, inconceivable, unborn, 
undecaying, imperishable, and universal spirit, 
which is one With Vasudeva, abandoned his 
mortal body and the condition of the threefold 
qualities.'* 


NOTES 


1, A name of Arjuna, the great friend of Krsna, 
to whom the latter served as charioteer in the war 
between the Pandus and Kurus. 

2. With Balarama, Pradyumna, Aniruddha, and 
the rest. 

3. The legend of the destruction of the Yadava 
race, and the death of Krsna, appears probably in its 
Mausala Parva of the Mahabharata. It forms the 
narrative portion of the eleventh book of the 
Bhagavata, having been previously briefly adverted 
to in the first and third books; and it is summarily 
told in the Uttara Khanda of the Padma Purana. 

4. The village of Pindaraka, still held in 
veneration, 1s situated in Gujarat, about twenty 
miles from the north-west extremity of the 
Peninsula, Hamilton. II 664. 


519 


5. The term is Eraka (a1), which is explained in 
some medical lexicons, ‘a kind of grass.’ The 
commentator also calls it a kind of grass : and in 
the text of the Mahabharata the term subsequently 
used, and as synonymous with it. is Tra (9), 
‘grass.’ The Mahabharata, describing the affray 
which follows, mentions that the grass or rushes. on 
being plucked by Krsna and the Y4adavas, turn to 
clubs. The text, and that of the Bhagavata, here say, 
that the powdered particle, floating on the sea, 
became rushes : or the latter may imply, that they 
fastened upon grass or weeds. The commentator, 
however, explains that the particles of iron being 
borne to land, they were so transformed. The 
Mahabharata says nothing of the piece which could 
not be pounded, and this seems to be an 
embellishment either of our text or the Bhagavata, 
The Mahabharata, however, adds another 
precaution, which the two others have left 
unnoticed. Ugrasena causes a proclamation to be 
made, that none of the inhabitants of Dvaraka shall 
thenceforth drink wine, on pain of being impaled 
alive; and the people for some time observe the 
prohibition. 

6. Nothing of this kind occurs in_ the 
Mahabharata our text therefore offers an 
embellishment. The Bhagavata, again improves 
upon the text; for, not content with a messenger, it 
makes Brahma with the Prajapatis, Siva with the 
Bhitas, Indra with the other divinities, all come in 
person : indicating evidently a later date, as plainly 
as the addition of the text shows it to be subsequent 
to the date of the legend in the Mahabharata. 

7. The Mahabharata, which delights in 
describing portents and signs, does not fail to detail 
them here. A dreadful figure, death personified, 
haunts every house, coming and going no one 
knows how, and being invulnerable to the weapons 
by which he is assailed. Strong hurricanes blow; 
large rats multiply, and infest the roads and houses, 
and attack persons in their sleep; Sdrikas, or 
starlings, utter inauspicious screams in their cages; 
storks imitate the hooting of owls, and goats the 
howling of jackals; cows bring-forth foals, and 
camels mules ; food, in the moment of being eaten, 
is filled with worms; fire burns with discoloured 
flames: and at sunset and sunrise the air 1s traversed 
by headless and hideous spirits. There is more to 
the same effect, which neither our text nor the 


520 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





Bhagavata has ventured to detail. The whole 
passage has been published in Maurice's Ancient 
History of Hindustan. 11. 463; translated apparently 
by the late Sir Charles Wilkins. The names have 
been much disfigured either by the ‘copyist or 
compositor. 

8. In the Mahabharata it is said merely that 
Uddhava, who was versed in Yoga, foreseeing the 
destruction of the Yadavas, went away : that is, 
according to the commentator, he practised 
penance, and went to heaven: 31H arrareara wets 
The Bhagavata, taking the hint makes much more 
of it than our text, and expands it into a long course 
of instruction given by Krsna to Uddhava, 
occupying 150 leaves. 

9. See Bk. V. Ch. XXI. n. 3. By sending the 
Yadavas to Prabhasa, the commentator asserts, Krs 
na prevented purposely the Yadavas from obtaining 
Mukti. ‘final liberation,’ which would have been the 
consequence of dying at Dvaraka4. Death at 
Prabh4sa conferred only Indra's heaven. 

10. The Mahabharata describes them as going 
forth with horses, elephants, and car, and their 
women and abundance of good cheer, and varieties 
of wine and meat: a@ Arias WRAL ASAHI: | 

11. The Bhagavata, like the text, adverts only in 
this general manner to the conflict; but the 
Mahabharata gives the particulars Yuyudhana 
reproaches Krtavarman with having aided 
Asvatthaman in his night attack on the Pandu camp, 
and killing warriors in their sleep. Pradynmna joins 
in the abuse. Krtavarman retorts. Krsna looks at 
him angrily. Satyaki repeats the story of the 
Syamantaka gem, by which he accuses Krtavarman 
of being an accomplice in the murder of Satrajit 
(Bk. IV. Ch. XIII). Satyabhama, the daughter of the 
latter, then mixes in the quarrel, and incites Krsna 
to avenge her : but Satyaki anticipates him, and 
murders Krtavarman. Saineya and the Bhojas attack 
Satyaki; the Andhakas defend him : and the affray 
becomes general. Krsna attempts to part the 
combatants, until Pradyumna 1s killed; and then 
taking up a handful of rushes, which become an 
iron club, he kills indiscriminately all that come in 
his way. The conflict continues until the greater 
part of the combatants have fallen, including all Krs 
na's sons, and he then in wrath sweeps off all the 
survivors, except Babhru and D4éruka with his 
discus. 


12. The Mahabharata, as observed at the end of 
the last note, adds Babhru, but it presently gets rid 
of him, Krsna sends him to take care of the old 
people, the women, and children, in Dvaraka, 
whilst Daruka goes to bring Arjnna to their aid: but 
as he goes along, overcome with grief for the loss 
of his kindred, and approaching separation from 
Krsna, he is killed by a club that is cast from a 
snare or trap set by a hunter. Krsna then goes to 
Dvaraka, and desires Vasudeva to await the coming 
of Arjuna, after which he returns to Rama, and sees 
the phenomenon described in the text; the serpent 
being Sesa, of whom Balarima was the incarnation. 
The Bhagavata does not mention this incident, 
merely observing that Rama, by the power of Yoga, 
returencd into himself ; that is, into Visnu. 

13. The women, the elders, and the children, 
amongst whom, as we shall presently see, was 
Vajra, the son of Aniruddha, who was established 
as chief of the Yadavas at Indraprastha, and who 
therefore escaped the destruction which 
overwhelmed their kinsmen, the Vrsnis. Kukkuras, 
and Andhakas, of Dvaraka. This was a fortunate 
reservation for the tribes which in various parts of 
India, both on the Ganges and in the Dakhin, 
profess to derive their origin from the Yadavas. 

14. The process is explained by the commentator 
: "By the force of Dhyana or abstraction. Krsna 
satisfies himself that he is Brahma (aé@arefifa ‘arean), 
or universal spirit: and is next convinced that he 1s 
therefore all things (@aycqraaeha); by which his 
individuality ceases. 

15 The story is told in the Mahabharata. 
Durvaésas was on one _ occasion hospitably 
entertained by Krsna, but the latter omitted to wipe 
away the fragments of the meal which had fallen on 
the foot of the irascible sane, who thereupon 
foretold that Krsna should be killed as in the text. 

16 This is an allegorical personage, however, for 
Jara signifies ‘infirmity,’ ‘old age,’ ‘decay.’ 

17 The Bhagavata explains how this part of the 
foot became exposed. Krsna had assumed one of 
the posturea in which abstraction is practised : he 
had laid his left leg across his right thigh, by which 
the sole of the foot was turned outwards. 

18 He became Nirguna, ‘devoid of all qualities.’ 


kK 


BOOK V, CHAP. 38 


CHAPTER 38 
STB TAMISEATA: 


(arearaneeafaticnnt:, witfarat weenie: , 

WUuSsart ATHAR) 
WAIN SATA 

SN waraer FarTaHeay| 

TEA STATA TUTAAT HAT VII 

art afar: afar afeavitegarg 4:1 

Saye sted fafagen gay 121 

Yadt da wer tennigerya aT 

fader safer afe aagrereritererq 3 11 

BAY TERT Wag yA: | 

daar Ofeont aa fafagnfiacay i vit 

AaSUA: Weert sear vat enfafer 

ayaa wt ad veleat aaa AI II 

Bran ahead: FWIET: WAM: | 

ag was area: Treraserhaati & I 

war qeamnt Fura uciea wy 

Tat are Bae UPTAT UTE: 9 II 

afer fer eftaiet fed are die 

afemaradiatisa crearat sett afer tcl 

CHAM At Bai wars Tereta:| 

UeCaYS WH ASAT ATTA SI 

TGA Tareas weraha: | 

Fret afafeaers wary Seat TAs Voll 

aadta Wel oa TAOIST 

faupatetarardt FEAT UIT WATT 88H 


Arjuna having found the bodies of Krsna 
and of Rama, performed for them, and the rest 
of the slain, the obsequial rites. The eight 
queens of Krsna, who have been named, with 
Rukmini at their head, embraced the body of 
Hari, and entered the funeral fire'. Revati also 
embracing the corpse of Rama, entered the 
blazing pile, which was cool to her, happy in 
contact with her lord. Hearing these events, 


$21 


Ugrasena and Anakadundubhi, with Devaki 
and Rohini, committed themselves to the 
flames*. The last ceremonies were performed 
for all these by Arjuna, who then made all the 
people leave the city, and took Vajra with him. 
The son of Kunti conducted the thousands of 
the wives of Krsna, with Vajra, and all the 
people, from Dvdraké, with tenderness and 
care, and travelled slowly away. The 
Sudharman palace and the Parijata tree, which 
had been brought to earth by Krsna, both 
proceeded to heaven; and on the same day that 
Hari departed from the earth the powerful 
dark-bodied Kali age descended’. The ocean 
rose, and submerged the whole of Dvaraka 
except alone the dwelling of the deity of the 
race of Yadu. The sea has not yet been able to 
wash that temple away, and there KeSava 
constantly abides, even in the present day. 
Whoever visits that holy shrine, the place 
where Krsna pursued his sports, is liberated 
from all his sins‘. 


Unt: Ware ey areata 

TaN AS AA WAT OTT 221 
aa cit: Waa Peta: | 

apat feaat Arerarr: wees afar 23 1 
aerey UTTHAON cere: | 

SMT WAAAY: AAMAS AAT: Il VII 
STINGS Gat Girt Freda 
TART erreRaat ATTN V4 I 
BAT MIAATRSY WIT-AVT-TATIA| 
aay + sah wet ararenfaarqi 26 ti 
2 3 ashigramr years Yerifa:| 
aabraraaratt fa at arghiread: 1 e9 
adt aerator qeat eirweaThAT: | 
Veariswaaad & wt Fete V6 UI 
aa Farr alta: wena sata 
Frareanernign afe 7 WI AAPA 281 
HAMS THAT TYG TAT TA 


asa Aiea farparafrey 20 tI 


522 


aaisyat aqfect mrogtanart afer 

SMUT MAT F PIE A AeA 2 zl 
TA Gat Heaptal Tayheaaet YA: 
TAS Taree Faracaars esas: 11 2 VI 
wera & ag wet afrearnfia: | 

waS FU MATA MTS 2 3H 
afar Asara Set: MATaASHT ats AY: 
aT: WE MUTT Taare VXI 
skrad arta: Forte fF aay 
SUM WAgIa: THT TRY AAT V4 
Frat: WUT AAT THAT: | 
SPAT IHAIT: HMA Waray: 11 2 EU 
aa: MY SHVlY TP HAT ASA: | 

WIT Sa UT WEN FETT V9! 
Narala Wee GUTTIHATAT: | 


WMYTET FHI: Wea AA ATA Vell 


The son of Prtha, Arjuna, halted the people 
he had brought from Dvarak4 in the Paficanada 
country’, in a rich and fertile spot; but the 
desires of the robbers (of the neighbourhood) 
were excited, when they observed so many 
widowed females, also such great riches, in 
the possession of Arjuna alone. Inflamed by 
their cupidity, they assembled the villainous 
Abhira’, and said to them, “Here is this 
Arjuna, immensely rich, and having numerous 
women, whose husbands have been slain, 
passing confidently amongst us; a disgrace to 
all brave men. His pride is raised by the death 
of Bhisma, Drona, Jayadratha, Karna, and 
others, whom he has slain: he does not know 
the prowess of simple villagers. Up, up; take 
you long thick staves: this stupid fellow 
despises us. Why should we not lift up our 
arms?” So saying, they rushed, armed with 
cudgels and clods of earth, upon the people, 
who were without their lord. Arjuna 
encountered them, and said to them in 
derision, “Retire, wretches, ignorant of what is 
right, unless you are desirous of dying.” But 
they disregarded his menaces, and seized his 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


treasures and his women, the wives of Visvaks 
ena. Thereupon Arjuna began to brace his 
heavenly bow Gandiva, irresistible in battle; 
but it was in vain; for, in spite of all his efforts 
to tighten it, it continued flaccid: neither could 
he call to recollection the incantations of the 
superhuman weapons. Losing all patience, he 
launched, as best he might, his shafts upon the 
enemy; but those shot from Gandiva merely 
scratched the skin. The arrows given him by 
Agni to carry certain destruction now were 
themselves destroyed, and were fatal to Arjuna 
in his contest with herdsmen. He endeavoured 
to recall the might to Krsna; animated by 
which, his numerous arrows had overthrown 
mighty kings; but he tried in vain, for now 
they were put aside by the peasants, or they 
flew at random, wide of their aim. His arrows 
being expended, he beat the banditti with the 
hom of his bow; but they only laughed at his 
blows: and the barbarians, in the sight of 
Arjuna, carried off all the women of the Vrsni 
and Andhaka tribes, and went their way’. 


aa: Yg:fant fray ae aehiia gery 
Stel Maa AT feats far SUE Sui 
ASTM AAT BT BATA: | 
BaNHIs AC SAMA AA AAT Z oN 
sreisfracata faar da were 
aearagensta serait SAAT 13 vil 
ah ag a4 Oe: wart aq iste gs: 
qua far at Wd VATANATAN 3 Vl 
aaa dire sine ag gaT 

faa Ft AeNAcSrase HMA 3 3 1 
yet ae Fat ys YO 
CAN TT Ws AA MEATS 3 ¥ II 

a cee at Sd GIR SPAT 
AAU WENT aTANATATeaTH 3 & 

a Sean wunaantan gif 
SAT Ue FaeTT: HTT ST: 11 3 G Il 
AASTT WAM Her 
SME GT aT THMOTASTA AAA 1 ZOll 


BOOK V, CHAP. 38 


523 





arattenreat at a area fara: | 
amrercaitferal wat data fara 3 cil 
qeswera fase went feast wary 

fae a Honfantt CAT AAA 3 811 
afer arret Wreated TASS 
qpaaedt ate Fst: Ree Yo I 
SBI TENA aT weray:wiferasfs an 
Tantarta fares zat afer feta x en 


Then Jisnu was sorely distressed, and 
lamented bitterly , exclaiming, “Alas! alas! I 
am deserted by my lord!” and he wept: and in 
that instant the bow and heavenly arms, his car 
and steeds, perished entirely, like a donation to 
an unlearned Brahman. “Resistless,” said he, 
“are the decress of fate, by whom feebleness 
has been inflicted upon me, deprived of my 
illustrious friend, and victory given to the 
base. These two arms are mine; mine is this 
fist; this is my place; I am Arjuna: but without 
that righteous aid all these are pityless. The 
valour of Arjuna, the strength of Bhima, was 
all his work; and without him I am overcome 
by peasants: it cannot be from any other 
cause.” So saying, Arjuna went to the city of 
Mathura and there installed and Yddava 
prince, Vajra, as its king. There he beheld 
Vyasa, who was living in a wood, and he 
approached the sage, and saluted him 
respectfully. The Muni surveyed him for some 
time, as he lay prostrate at his feet, and said to 
him, “How is it that I see you thus shorn of 
your lustre? Have you been guilty of illicit 
intercourse with women, or of the death of 
Brahman? Or have you suffered some 
grievous disappointment? that you are so 
dejected. Have your prayers for progeny, or 
other goods gifts, proved fruitless? Or have 
you indulged improper passions? that your 
lustre is so dim. Or are you one that devours 
the meal he has given to the Brahmans? Say, 


upon you, Arjuna? that you look thus 
miserable. Have you been touched by the 
water of a fingernail? or has the water of a 
water-jar sprinkled you? or, what is most 
probably the case, have you been beaten by 
your inferiors in battle?” 


aa: wet fara seat sorafate 

WHAT AMATI ATATARATTAAA I & 21 
Stayt Tare 

Ueaet Wa Te Aca ATT 

At APSA UA: BIST UIST Tat BTS 3 

sara ved feararqalfientrom 

St aa YA VA WAGON Sa YI 

TAO WAGs MSA AMT AA! 

AAT GMAT Yet A: FERAL V4 II 

Talay shras; Weagahd: | 

TAIT A WSR AST AA IS GI 

TOROS AEN SAAS: | 

apa Freean: a PORTA FAT VN 

Fraf-aa-gastint wera Aten ; 

feenta ara Fatsé fare vee aT scl 

Tangara vearehact yremnfarz 

faar dare Geers airorercer Feta ¥ 811 

Arjuna, having sighed deeply, related to 
Vyasa all the circumstances of his 
discomfiture, and continued : “Hari, who was 
our strength, our might, our heroism, our 
prowess, our prosperity, our brightness, has 
left us, and departed. Deprived of him, our 
friend, illustrious, and ever kindly speaking, 
we have become as feeble as if made of straw. 
Purusottama, who was the living vigour of my 
weapons, my arrows and my bow, is gone. As 
long as we looked upon him, fortune, fame, 
wealth, dignity never abandoned us: but 


Govinda is gone from amongst us. That Krsna 
has quitted earth, through whose power Bhis 


Arjuna, have you seized upon the substance of ma, Drona, the king do Anga, Duryodhana, 


the poor? Has the wind of winnowing basket 
lighted upon you? or has an evil eye gazed 


and the rest, were consumed. Not I alone, but 
Earth, has grown old, miserable and lustreless, 


324 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





in the absence of the holder of the discus. Krs 
na, through devotion to whom Bhisma and 
other mighty men perished like moths in the 
flame of my valour, is gone; and I am now 
overcome by cowherds. 

most fay cag wnt Teqara: | 

Trt ay faite Serf Y 0 

aaa AAA TENA 

GAA WA Ae TVA TSTTa: 4 Rit 

MAAN: HOT HONTATTAT | 

ei aferemt: afte get AAG 2H 

Pistteara 7 fet astiani weary 

qT Taarugiant Fetetster fran s 30 

The bow Géandiva, that was famed 
throughout the three worlds, has been foiled, 
since he has departed, by the sticks of 
peasants: the myriads of women over whom I 
was lord have been carried off from me by 
thieves, armed but with cudgels: the whole 
household of Krsna, O Krsna’, has been 
forcibly carried away by peasants, who with 
their staves have put my strength to shame. 
That I am shorn of my lustre I do not marvel: 
it is wonderful that I live. Surely, grandsire, I 
alone am so shameless as to survive the stain 
of indignity inflicted by the vile.” 


SAT Tare 
ae & digat ue a a enfaguefen 
arate way sareret TAT SSTT I Gv 
TAN MAT YAATMTAATS A YTS 
HIST CS FIAT AT RTA SETTN G & 1 
Ta: VAS fra: WHat a agen 
Sat ARM: UMAR: WAT AUT GI 
TS: Bel Grert Wraleatar Way) 
HATH AS Va WAT WAAAY & Il 
UNS POTTS TAT TAHA! 
UTAATCHAAAAA: A ASNT UGS 
UTA MT Uat Carat Aas FT 
ASUITAAA TSA HIT SATE GU 


aa Prenat aretagren yal eat: 
quan Wa Fa WeanTaEATI g ON 
7 fatseaq ater aftatet wat: 

Vyasa replied to Arjuna, and said, “Think 
no more, my son, of your disgrace: it does not 
become you to grieve. Know that time subjects 
all beings to similar vicissitude. Time effects 
the production and dissolution of all creatures. 
All that exists is founded on time. Know this, 
Arjuna, and retain your fortitude. Rivers, seas, 
mountains, the whole earth, gods, men, 
animals, trees, insects, are all created, and all 
will be destroyed by time. Knowing that all 
that is, is the effect of time; be tranquillized. 
These mighty works of Krsna, whatever they 
have been performed to relieve earth of its 
burdens: for this he has come down. Earth, 
oppressed by her load, has had recourse to the 
assembly of the immortals; and Jandrddna, 
who is one with time, has descended on that 
account. This object has been now 
accomplished: all the kings of the earth are 
slain; the race of Vrsni and Andhaka is 
destroyed: no more remained for him to 
accomplish. 


Stat Wa: A MTA HaHA ATA & V1 
gfe at moaeae taca: feat Rafe 
BAST AAAS Arert fe Baa AN G21 
wea we A MANTA Bl: WTA 
Tate ATHY FRAO UMA 311 
TAHA SAT MTT-ROT-HUT TS TIT: | 
Vagrareaea: fa Twat 7 Ag vil 
famine gat vat wT: | 

AAMT HAN SPAS AGANA: NEY 
a taseaerihfor wnfaye sree 
HU MAYA ATeT APA STA: 1G GU 
TAAUS TF BIT VEAYSYMATEA: | 

ware wag ferment Shyreareren feet: 11 § 9 
G: ALAM WNP Fares Waarary 
amiss wad: BH: MAT WNIT Go 
Wea ways Fieienfsayay 


BOOK V, CHAP. 38 


waa aq Alta ae Tenitary FAA 6 eH 

qeter eeqfrater waa: wiiferat fara: 

qe Ga HAA AAA Vo lt 

Therefore has the lord departed whither he 
pleased, his ends being all fulfilled. At the 
period of creation the god of gods creates; in 
that duration he preserves; and at the end of all 
is mighty to annihilate. Now all is done. 
Therefore, Arjuna, be not afflicted by the 
defeat: the prowess of mortals is the gift of 
time. Bhisma, Karna and other kings, have 
been slain by you alone; this was the work of 
time; and why, therefore, should not your 
discomfiture, by those less than you are, 
occur? In like manner as through your 
devotion to Visnu these were overthrown by 
you, so at last has your defeat by miserable 
thieves been wrought by time. That divinity, 
assuming various bodies, preserves the world; 
and in the end the lord of creatures destroys it. 
In the birth of thy fortunes Janarddana was thy 
friend; in their decline, they enemies have 
been favoured by Kesava. Who would have 
believed that you should slay all the 
descendants of Kuru, and kindred of Ganga? 
Who would have believed that peasants should 
triumph over you? Be assured, son of Pritha, 
that it is but the sport of the universal Hari that 
the Kauravas have been destroyed by you, and 
that you have been defeated by herdsmen 
With respect to the women whom you lament, 
and who have been carried off by the thieves, 
hear from me an ancient story, which will 
explain why this has liappened. 


Teas: WT faat Seared rad 

Set ATO Ue YOY Tal AATATN 9 2 
frtergragy Ways weleaa: | 

Ya TA WaT Saye AST: 9 VN 
TAMARA PARIS WAT: | 
TIS AST Wee Tusa 9311 
BUSA Ufetety Menmeat APA 
FATA WON: TATATENT: 119 4 
GM GM WAASH PRAT TAT TAM 


525 


Talent: aranis afte at fT 4 I 

“In former times a Brahmana, named 
Astévakra®, was pursuing his religious 
penances, standing in water, and meditating on 
the eternal spirit, for many years. In 
consequences of the overthrow of the Asuras, 
there was a great festival on the summit of 
Meru: on their way to which, Rambha, 
Tilottama, and hundreds and thousands of 
beautiful nymphs, saw the ascetic Astavakra, 
and they praised and hymned him for his 
devotions. They bowed down before him, and 
eulogized him, as he was immersed up to his 
throat in water, his hair twisted in a braid. So 
they sang in honour of him whatever they 
thought would be most agreeable to that most 
eminent of Brahmanas. 


spa TaN 
Waasé wer wadiat afew 
AMAA Ga WETMaA oT 9 & II 
Tafa Seaatsuanras gar 
Waa weaved farrorafata fem won 


srreagey far wat rary afel 
dfeasra: uf wre far Year cit 


Astavakra at last said to them, ‘I am well 
pleased with you, illustrious damsels; 
whatever you wish for, ask of me, and I will 
give it you, however, difficult it may be of 
attainment.’ Then all those nymphs, Rambhé, 
Tilottama, and others, recorded in the Vedas, 
replied, ‘It is enough for us that you are 
pleased; what need we aught else, venerable 
Brahman?’ But some amongst them said, ‘If, 
exalted sir, you are indeed pleased with us, 
then grant us a husband, the best of men, and 
sovereign of the Brahmans.’ 


ala Std 


Wa Naya SAAN AAA: | 
CEA AO FRAG THAN 9 <1! 

dt Bal WAM Brat era: Bpgeisvad 
at! BIRT AR: ATMS HEPA 6 ol 


526 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





Aare fared At Aa STATA | 

TAA: Heat AVANTT YIT TT as WM 

TTT TA ea a eR 

TESTE: Wal TSA AAETT SV 

sqyaiamand yfrentt: wafer: | 

WA: Ylaets J wre yar wer 2 31 

Ud Ta WA: MMEwTaH Hay 

WAT WET AT SITS AAT AMPA 16 wil 

TAM TT ica: Yatseatste fe wosal 

aathaetad Ws ATTEN C4 I 

Tae Bateacaras At Haar 

aot Aare ate rere VATA ¢ GI 

‘So be it,’ replied Astavakra, and 

thereupon came up from the waters. When the 
nymphs beheld him coming out of the water, 
and saw that he was very ugly, and crooked in 
eight places, they could not restrain their 
merriment, but laughed aloud. The Muni was 
very angry, and cursed them, and said, ‘Since 
you have been so impertinent as to laugh at 
my deformity, I denounce upon you this 
imprecation : through the grace I have shown 


unto you, you shall obtain the first of males for 
your husband; but in consequence of my curse, 


you shall afterwards fall into the hands of > 


thieves.’ When the nymphs heard this uttered 
by the Muni, they endeavoured to appease 
him; and they so far succeeded, that he 
announced to them they should finally return 
to the sphere of the gods. It is in consequence, 
then, of the curse of the Muni Astavakra that 
these females, who were at first the wives of 
KeSava, have now fallen into the hands of the 
barbarians; and there is no occasion, Arjuna, 
for you to regret it in the least. All this 
destruction has been effected by the lord of all; 
and your end is also nigh at hand, since he has 
withdrawn from you _ strength, splendour, 
valour, and pre-eminence. 


wre Frat Wey: Tae aaa: | 
fararMaarsy WaT: VHA AAC 


fagre A 9: Wes T STINT A 

aarvaayt Vet frerd: Bet ASST SI 

TANT TAS Weary WAT: Tel 

Uhenahaet dat watet ATA SANE SH 

aa mes arene fraeaqarat Aa 

Tal waht: Be wear Aha Fat Heil g oll 

Death is the doom of every one who is 
born; fall is the end of exaltation: union 
terminates in separation: and growth tends but 
to decay. Knowing all this, wise men are 
susceptible of neither grief nor joy; and those 
who learn their ways are even as they are 
(equally free from pleasure or pain). Do you 
therefore, most excellent prince, understand 
this truth and, along with your brothers, 
relinquish every thing, and repair to the holy 
forest. Go now, and say from me _ to 
Yudhisthira, that he to-morrow, with his 
brethren, tread the pach of heroes.” 
QI sald 

SARIS Usa TAA TATA: | 

ee dards afadt erste: 118 ei 

AMaaTy a ad qearraihay 

tee Woe Hea AT: Wosygar SATs VI 

Thus instructed by Vyasa Arjuna went and 
related to the other sons of Prtha all that he 
had seen, and experienced, and had heard. 
When he had communicated to them the 
message of Vy4sa, the sons of Pandu placed 
Pariksit on the throne, and went to the forest. 

sea aa Tae faertor wanfery 

MT ASIA aTYeaeT AGTH <3 

Sia sifawypgeey waaigh SrBiayt: SreaTa: | 

I have thus narrated to you, Maitreya, in 
detail, the action of Vasudeva, when he was 
born in the race of Yadu. 

kk 

NOTES 

1. The Mahabharata takes the wives of Krsna 
first to Indraprastha, and there Rukmini and four 


others burn; but Satyabhama and others become 
ascetics, going to perform Tapasy4 in the forest. 


BOOK V, CHAP. 38 


527 





2. It is merely said in the Mahabharata that 
Vasudeva expired; on which four of his wives burnt 
themselves. 

3. The Kali age commenced from the death of 
Krsna, according to the usual notions; but it is 
commonly supposed to commence a little later, or 
with the reign of Pariksit. 

4. The Bhagavata agrees with the text in 
excepting the temple of Dvdraka, and asserting that 
it still remains, in direct contradiction of the 
Mahabharata, which declares that the sea did not 
spare any part whatever. It is clear, therefore, that 
when the latter was compiled the temple was not 
standing, and that it was erected between the date 
of the compilation and that of the two Puranas. The 
present shrine, which is held in great repute, stands 
at the extremity of the peninsula of Guzerat. It is 
still an object of pilgrimage; it was so in the reign 
of Akbar (Ayin Akbari); and has been so, on doubt, 
from a remote period. The image formerly 
worshipped there was carried off 600 years ago, 
and this was most probably subsequent to the date 
of both the Puranas; for the idol was a form of Krs 
na, called Rana chor, a popular divinity, unknown 
in the Pauranik pantheon. Another image was 
substituted in place of that which was taken away. 
Notwithstanding the testimony of our text. and that 


of the Bhagavata, the originality of the temple is 
disputed, and a place thirty miles south from 
Porbandar is said to be the spot where Dvarak4 was 
swallowed up by the ocean. Hamilton, from 
Macmurdo, &c. 1.662. _ 

5. The country of the five rivers. the Punjab: 
rather an out of the way route from Dvarka to 
Delhi. 

6. Abhiras mean ‘herds’, and they are afterwards 
called by Arjuna, Gopdlas, “Herdsmen’. The 
pastoral. tribes of the west of India, and particularly 
those of Afghanistan, almost always combine the 
character of freebooter with that of shepherd. ° 

7. The Principal wives of Krsna, however, 
according to the Mahabharata, escaped. The 
occurrence is described there much in the same 
way, but more briefly. It is not detailed in the 
Bhagavata. 

8. A name of Vydsa. 

9. The story of Ashtavakra is related in the 
Mahabharata. He was the son of Kahora, who 
neglecting his wife, was rebuked for it by his yet 
unborn son. The father angrily cursed him, that he 
should be born bent in every part; and he was 
accordingly brought forth crooked (vakra) in eight 
limbs (ashta). He became nevertheless a celebrated 
sage. See also Hindu Theatre, 1.293, note. 


END OF THE FIFTH BOOK 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 
BOOK VI 
asia: 





CHAPTER I 


WAIST: 


(afeerd Franny) 
aaa sara 
SRT Waal way waa: 
agate fatto wean eh 
Hefreasrag al waraTaEhery 
TEMA HEMT MT ASTI 21 


Maitreya said— You have narrated to me, 
illustrious sage, the creation of the world, the 
genealogies of the patriarchs, the duration of 
the Manvantaras, and the dynastics of princes, 
in detail. 1 am now desirous to hear from you 
an account of the dissolution of the world, the 
season of total destruction, and that which 
occurs at the expiration of the Kalpa’. 


WUT Sata 
Waa Haat At PeTaguaett: | 
Heurd Wed Vast Keral TIAd AIM 311 
stetad firpirg areralseateateatenara 
waplaea J Tet & fires vi 
ad Fat aes afeeta wala 
featdtaeag We BesTTTSTA 4 I 
UgaMVaanior MEM TTT) 
Set HAG Yaar Ward aa Berg g 11 
steal HAG Git Teron fad aa: 
frat adercaard a set FAI 


ParaSara said— Hear from me, Maitreya, 
exactly the circumstances of the end of all 
things, and the dissolution that occurs either at 
the expiration of a Kalpa, or that which takes 
place at the close of the life of Brahma. A 


month of mortals is a day and night of the 
progenitors: a year of mortals is a day and 
night of the gods. Twice a thousand aggregates 
of the four ages is a day and night of Brahma’. 
The four ages are the Krta, Treté, Dvapara, 
and Kali; comprehending together twelve 
thousand years of the gods. There are infinite 
successions of these four ages, of a similar 
description, the first of which 1s always called 
the Krta, and the last the Kali. In the first, the 
Krta, is that age which is created by Brahmé; 
in the last, which is the Kali age, a dissolution 
of the world occurs. 


AAT SarT 


wel: Tae aay free asa 
qmaqeramtay atery fearcraestai ¢ i 


Maitreya said— Venerable sir, you are able 
to give me a description of the nature of the 
Kali age, in which four-footed virtue’ suffers 
total extinction. 


WU sala 

wel: Ted We qevary weirs 

afaatea Aaa Add ATTA 8 I 

Parasara replied~ Hear, Maitreya, an 
account of the nature of the Kali age, 


respecting which you have inquired, and 
which is now close at hand. 


antisnrantadt waft ae Fo 

T WT-Y-AAAAaAMASFAAM I Qo I 
faaret + wet aeat + ferer-qeaheata: | 
qT aMUREnA Va alacant: WA Vel 
Ga WA Hel Weal Get WAM: Heit 
way Wa quay APT: HASTA 2211 
a aa a fienfadtia: weit 


BOOK VI, CHAP. 1 


529 





at ta ta wraferafmar wet 231 
wana Het wret west agers fe 
cada Het Wal: aa: GAT AAA: 1 Ovi 
srarararal fartanternt act 

GH GTA T ST Hl V4 Ut 

fact ufae Yar wedge: weit 


The observance of caste, order, and 
institutes will not prevail in the Kali age, nor 
will that of the ceremonial enjoined by the 
Sama, Rk, and Yajur Vedas. Marriages in this 
age will not be conformable to the ritual, nor 
will the rules that connect the spiritual 
preceptor and his disciple be in force. The 
laws that regulate the conduct of husband and 
wife will be disregarded, and oblations to the 
gods with fire no longer be offered. In 
whatever family he may be born, a powerful 
and rich man will be held entitled to espouse 
maidens of every tribe. A regenerate man will 
be initiated in any way whatever and such acts 
of penance as may be pcrformed will be 
unattended by any results‘. Every text will be 
scripture that people choose to think so*: alk 
gods will be gods to them that worship them; 
and all orders of life will be common alike to 
all persons. In the Kali age, fasting austerity, 
liberality, practised according to the pleasure 
of those by whom they are observed, will 
constitute righteousness. Pride of wealth will 
be inspired by very insignificant possessions. 


wit wagesta sylta vfeeafe vs ti 


Yaurafarcenal aed aie art ae 

ment fearat wfacata dar Beets AT Vor 
Unease watt fewest aan fara: 

afar fasta set faaarta arrange 


Pride of beauty will be prompted by (on 
other personal charm than fine) hair. Gold, 
jcwels, diamonds, clothes, will all have 
perished, and then hair will be the only 
ornament with which women can decorate 
themselves. Wivcs will desert their husbands, 
when they lose thcir property; and they only 


who are wealthy will be considered by women 
as their lords. 


ay ay zara aget WM carat wer FUT 
Tantaeaeg: Wa wal AR ETET 22 I 
TErU FAAKIA FAA MW AA Ale: | 
sagan fasta weit WA 2011 
fra: ett afaeata waiver afer: | 
AAT AAT THT TYRTTA: tl 2 Vil 


He who gives away much money will be 
master of men; and family descent will no 
longer be a title of supremacy. Accumulated 
treasures will be expended on (ostentatious) 
dwellings. The minds of men will be wholly 
occupied in acquiring wealth; and wealth will 
be spent solely on selfish gratifications. 
Women will follow their inclinations, and be 
ever fond of pleasure. Men will fix their 
desires upon riches, even though dishonestly 
acquired. 


snahaish year waters 7 Aa: 

WirErannare after der fern 2 

wart urea wf fasg & ath 

elmerreararer wife wre et AAT 23 I 

STGMSHANTAT: WaT: TAHA: | 

wfaert Tel Wal WaTaHswa | 2X 

HAUONHAMEAATTA SA AAT: | 

srert Urafaeafr Aer seenfeg :faat: 1 24 UI 

No man will part with the smallest fraction 
of the smallest coin*®, though entreated by a 
friend. Men of all degrees will conceit 
themselves to be equal with Brahmans. Cows 
will be held in esteem only as they supply 
milk’. The people will be almost always in 
dread of dearth, and apprehensive of scarcity; 
and will hence ever be watching thc 
appearances of the sky: they will all live, likc 
anchorets, upon leaves and roots and fruit, and 


put a period to their lives through fear of 
famine and want. 


aftarta wad cal sergeant: | 
WT STRAT SAAAT AST: SHRATN 2G Hl 


530 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





SAMA Tea aT ATT 

afar aeit met a a frxtanarq 2911 

ATM SACS AQAA: | 

agranrcauray faa wet fra: 2c 

SrMAg Wma fer: Hugat fer: | 

PAN TOGO ATA: 1 28 

SANIT: Yor Ver earcatsian: 

weargenfaoey were wet Fert: 113 ot 

Swen sEvieyg Hares: Wad Were 

HAG VAI FY HOTA: | 3 VM 

aarert afeata azasy aereat:. 

TERI A BIT A SAA TAPAA 3 UA 

Sa ATT TATE: 

Rraraente Frakes aera TA: 11 3 3 I 

aaa BA: YER Ufa: | 

aitan sata Wet | Het FAN 3 vl 

In truth there will never be abundance in 
the Kali age, and men will never enjoy 
pleasure and happiness. They will take their 
food without previous ablution, and without 
worshipping fire, gods, or offering obsequial 
libations to their progenitors. The women will 
be fickle, short of stature, gluttonous: they will 
have many children, and little means: 
scratching their heads with both hands, they 
will pay no attention to the commands of their 
husbands or parents: they will be selfish, 
abject, and slatternly: they will be scolds and 
liars: they will be indecent and immoral! in 
their conduct, and will ever attach themsclves 
to dissolute men. Youths, although 
disregarding the rules of studentship, will 
study the Vedas. Householders will neither 
sacrifice nor practise becoming liberality. 
Anchorets will subsist upon food accepted 
from rustics; and mendicants will be 
influenced by regard for friends and 
associates*, Princes, instead of protecting will 
plunder their subjects; and, under the pretext 
of levying customs, will rob merchants of their 
property. 


Rt User: WT Ta sae 

zl WHIT: Wa: HA YR: Heit TUBA 
ava: afeainane wana Foat aq 
WRG wareaher sreaarasiferr: tt 3 Gu 


HATA VST MASTS: | 

Wasa: SRA Hak: 113 9 1 

In the Kali age every one who has cars and 
elephants and steeds will be a Raja’: every one 
who is feeble will be a slave. Vaisyas will 
abandon agriculture and commerce, and gain a 
livelihood by servitude or the exercise of 
mechanical arts. Sidras, seeking a subsistence 
by begging, and assuming, the outward marks 
of religious mendicants, will become the 
impure followers of impious and _ heretical 
doctrines”. 


Siaaitetrettatree SAT: | 
WATHHEAENY SV ATT SFA 11 3 
Jaquet west a wVuSTay aay FA 
AUTEM CAAT CAPTATAH ATT 3 8 Ul 
syeafated at TAA st TT: 

wy TNT arergeguracafa ¥ ot 


Oppressed by famine and taxation, men 
will desert their native lands, and go to those 
countries which are fit for coarser grains.'! The 
path of the Vedas being obliterated, and men 
having deviated into heresy, iniquity will 
flourish, and the duration of life will therefore 
decrease. In consequence of horrible penances 
not enjoined by scripture, and of the vices of 
the rulers, children will die in their infancy. 


viet afar aft: wrremeanitan 
TABSVAA UT AFA AIM BEAN V1 
Ufone vfaat wer aragrantera: | 
vifsiafa a are wet aif faorfaqn x 21 
SUI GMAT FST BUT: Heit 

aaet farquatat Areeet AAT IY 3 Ul 
wer sar fe musafgtae cea 

at aar serghatryyar freeway: ¥ vi 


BOOK VI, CHAP. I 


531 





Women will bear children at the age of 
five, six, or seven years; and men beget them 
when they are eight, nine, or ten. A man will 
be grey when he is twelve; and no one will 
exceed twenty years of life.'"? Men will possess 
little sense, vigour, or virtue, and will 
therefore perish in a very brief period. In 
proportion as heresy extends, so, Maitreya, 
shall the progress of the Kali age be estimated 
by the wise. 


UR Aat Vat Arcee qAT OTT 
Waa Tat AGA OTA 
qed wart were afte: wd it 
Ul Fal A MAMTA: Tea: | 
SRI TERA FA HTS WG I 
a wiftdearey ureosy wer tet: 
HAA MAA feraeartt: tt v9 


In proportion as the number of the pious, 
who adhere to the lessons of the Vedas, 
diminishes—as the eff6rts of individuals who 
cultivate virtue relax— as the first of males 
becomes no longer the object of sacrifices— as 
respect for the teachers of the Vedas declines— 
and as regard is acknowledged for the dis- 
eminators of heresy— so may wise men note 
the augmented influence of the Kali age." 

wet serafe fant weataeryTy| 
arifaeara Ta waUSlaAT ATS CH 
fax ae: fe fandd: fa vieargernn 
Sea fam aeaier WUSeAT ATS SII 
WeMmgge: wet: wet Tere Ta | 
et aureTartae far wea sell FANG of 
MUTANT Sea STMT Wel sNT: 
Wears ant wfawatat Het BANG eI 
SOMTATOT IAT AMAT TAT TAI 
wfaeaa eit We SAS & UU 


In the Kali age, Maitreya, men, corrupted 
by unbelievers, will refrain from adoring Vis 
nu, the lord of sacrifice, the creator and lord of 
all; and will say, “Of what authority are the 


Vedas? what are gods or Brahmans? what 
need is there of purification with water?” Then 
will the clouds yield scanty rain: then will the 
corn be light in ear, and the grain will be poor, 
and of little sap: garments will be mostly made 
of the fibres, of the San: the principal of trees 
will be the Sami’: the prevailing caste will be 
the Sidra: millet will be the more common 
grain: the milk in use will be chiefly that of 
goats: unguents will be made of Usira grass. 

MT-I OAT WaT FU we 

PATTEM STeATaT FeAl ATAATTI & 31 

HET UAT Fat HeI Tal BATT: FAM 

sft Bate eat AYU GAA ATG BI 

aR afanehepn: Wt: OA 

AT: WaTaafet BACTATT: 4 GI 

Pewrarragiarat F:sttenrot wear {OTT 

TASER A Ae safer eater wfereaeT 4 9 

The mother and father-in-law will be 
venerated in place of parents; and a man’s 
friends will be his brother-in-law, or one who 
has a wanton wife. Men will say, “Who has a 
father? who has a mother? each one is born 
according to his deeds:” and therefore they 
will look upon a wife’s or husband’s parents 
as their own. Endowed with little sense, men, 
subject to all the infirmities of mind, speech, 
and body, will daily commit sins; and 
everything that is calculated to afflict beings, 
vicious, impure, and wretched, will be 
generated in the Kali age. 


Firenmareant taanrtarelaatse 
aa ware fan safari Facata 4911 


aMedta UT YORUM AAA 
aid f Hayy Grad aver fe aude 
Sta siifaeqgray UBish We: STATI 

Then shall some places follow a separate 
duty,'* devoid of holy study, oblations of fire, 
and invocations of the gods.’ Then, in the Kali 
age, shall a man acquire by a trifling exertion 
as much eminence in virtue as is the result of 
arduous penance in the Krta age, of purity.'* 


532 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





NOTES 


1. Two kinds of great or universal dissolution are 
here intimated; one occurring at the end of a Kalpa, 
or day of Brahma, to which the term Upasanhriti is 
applied in the text, and Atyantika laya by the 
commentator; and the other taking place at the end 
of the life of Brahma, which is termed a great or 
elemental dissolution: Maha pralaya and Prakrta 
pralaya. 

2. These measures of time are more fully 
detailed in the first book: see Bk. I. Ch. III. 

3. This is an allusion to a popular notion, 
originating probably with Manu: “In the Krta age 
the genius of truth and right stands firm on his four 
feet; but in the following ages he is deprived 
successively of one foot,” etc. I. 81, 82. 

4. ‘Such an act is just what it is;’? ada 
wafsrafimar etl that is, it may be attended by 
inconvenience to the individual, but is utterly 
inefficacious for the expiation of sin. 

5. Whether it is conformable or contradictory to 
the Vedas and the law. The passage may be 
rendered also, ‘The doctrine or dogma of any one 
soever will be scripture.’ 

6. He will not part with the half of the half of 
half a Pana; that is, with ten Cowries; a Pana being 
equal to eighty Cowries, or small shells. Five Panas 
are equal to one Ana, or the sixteenth of a Rupee; 
and, at two shillings the Rupee, ten Cowries are 
equal to about one-seventh of a farthing. 

7. They will be valued for their individual use 
only, not from any notion of their generic sanctity. 

8. The Bhagavata has, “Religious students will 
be regardless of vows and _ purification; 
householders will beg, not give alms; anchorets will 
dwell in villages; and mendicants will be desirous 
of riches.” 

9. That is, princes and warriors will be so on 
longer by virtue of their birth and caste. 

10. Most of the mendicant orders admit members 
without distinction of caste; but probably Buddhists 
especially are here intended. The Bhagavata 
repeatedly alludes to the diffusion of heretical 
doctrines and practices, the substitution of outward 
signs and marks for devotion, and the abandonment 
of the worship of Visnu. The Saiva mendicant 
orders are probably those especially in view. The 
same probably are intended by our text in the 
subsequent allusion to unauthorized austerities, and 
sectarial marks. 


11. ‘Gavedhuka (Coix barbata) and other bad 
sorts of grain.’ Taye ery! Another 
reading is, “Yr sare! ‘Countries growing 
wheat, barley and the like.’ But to place wheat and 
barley amongst inferior grains, and to rank them 
lower than rice, is a classification that could have 
occurred to a native of Bengal alone. 

12. The Vayu says three and twenty; the 
Bhagavata, from twenty to thirty. 

13. The complaints of the prevalence of 
heterodox doctrines, and neglect of the practices of 
the Vedas, which recur in the Bhagavata and our 
text, indicate a period of change in the condition of 
the Hindu religion, which it would be important to 
verify. If reference is made to Buddhism, to which 
in some respects the allusions especially apply, it 
would probably denote a period not long 
subsequent to the Christian era; but it is more likely 
to be of a later date, or in the eighth and ninth 
centuries, when Sankara is said to have reformed a 
variety of corrupt practices, and given rise to 
others, See As. Res. vol. XVI. p. 12. 

14. Crotolaria juncea. 

15. The silk cotton, Bambax heptaphy!lla. 

16. The expression Kvacit-lokah (afaete:), ‘a 
certain place’, is explained by the commentator, 
Kikata, etc. ( ); confirming the inference 
that Buddhism is especially aimed at in the 
previous passages; for Kikata, or south Behar, is the 
sense of Sakya’s earliest and most successful 
labours. 

17. Several of the Puranas contain allusions to 
the degeneracy of the Kali age, but none afford 
more copious details. The description in the 
Bhagavata is much shorter; that of the Vayu is 
much the same, and employs many of the same 
verses and illustrations. 

18. This might be suspected of being said 
ironically, referring to what had been just observed 
of places where a religion prevailed that required 
neither study nor sacrifice. The commentator, 
however, understands it literally, and asserts that 
allusion is here made to the Vaisnava faith, in 
which devotion to Visnu or Krsna, and the mere 
repetition of his names, are equally efficacious in 
the Kali age with the penances and sacrifices of the 
preceding ages: therefore he concludes the Kali, by 
this one property, is the best of all the ages: 
wr afa: ads: geet:! This interpretation is 
confirmed by the following chapter. 


BOOK VI, CHAP, 2 


533 





CHAPTER 2 
fedreatseara: 


(Acar afaprer, yao, fray yee 
aula) 
WU Tara 
caress Nerahaera fe aqh 
TAPAAT ASNT Waa AA Tea: 11 VN 
Upon this subject, Maitreya, you shall hear 


what the wise Vyasa has related, as it is 
communicated truly by me. 


afar arerserat amat ear quad wer 
wibafieaye are: carat frat Far IH 
weehtaate deers Tera 

STA Beret we Tr yPTaTaT: 1 Bi 

Saye Aly aa Srgaraferet fas: 

Fears wend Tarahergi Y 
ATA TAT Weilaral Wea: | 

TRUS, HEPAT S TTT HG UI 
Weise Mrgatatargerens Yat AA 

cafet:, Wg: safe: Meas yuaat sear Gl 
Wai FAA Yas WAG A ATS 

sara Vy Aleafa YR seAsfa aera ot 
a Fara: Wye YA: we Tergha: | 

AAA: MASA TAMISHT BS It 
Wd; CAVA AAAS FTAA aATT| 
STRUTT HATA Ys AA 
PIAA Hara 
fender qari Aaa yA: | ott 
WAY: Us WE: Wat ATANTATI 

Set VARY AAA: BTA TATA VII 
ale: Uteafa aq wires oa: aifeafer alfa: 
Aare WIA A TMNT GA: FAL 
ae aa sgfresrar + Aq Yer Wey 

Te HLTA Aa RAT MATa WASP 23 


It was once a matter of dispute amongst the 
sages, at what season the least moral merit 
obtained the greatest reward, and by whom it 
was most easily displayed. In order to 
terminate the discussion, they went to Veda 
Vyasa to remove their doubts. They found the 
illustrious Muni, my son, half immersed in the 
water of the Ganges; and awaiting the close of 
his ablutions, the sages remained on the banks 
of the sacred stream, under shelter of a grove 
of trees. As my son plunged down into the 
water, and again rose up from it, the Munis 
heard him exclaim, “Excellent, is the Kali 
age!” Again he dived, and again rising, said in 
their hearing, “Well done, well done Sidra; 
you are happy!” Again he sand down, and as 
he once more emerged they heard him say, 
"Well done, well done, women; they are 
happy! who are more fortunate than they?” 
After this, my son finished his bathing, and the 
sages met him as he approached to welcome 
them. After he had given them seats, and they 
had proffered their respects, the son of 
Satyavati said to them, “On what account have 
you come to me?” They replied, “We came to 
you to consult you on a subject on which we 
entertain some doubt; but that may be at 
present suspended: explained to us something 
else. We heard you say, ‘Excellent is the Kali 
age! Well done, Sidra! Well done, women!’ 
Now we are desirous to know why this was 
said, why you called them repeatedly happy. 
Tell us the meaning of it, if it be not a 
mystery. We will then propose to you the 
question that occupies our thoughts.” 


Sarl Brena: wearers 

seat at yfser secs ary arfeafer ex 
AHA Siadiaaai sat Aq! 

BITt GT UTA STATA A Hew V4 
aa gerry Ware tet fe: 

went yarett afer: aiteater area 6 
A Fa WH AEM satsekery 
Bereta wari caeit Ugtet Ayres go tt 


534 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





amiqadadiam wetter yea: sett 
OTA SMT FRISHAS evs Ve 
arerearataren aa: vd fesnfater: 
ad: Taratamrddged fafereat: 11 29 tt 
aa aan Famed gaeat w ferry 
TAA Ta Wed aeadafah: Wari 2 ot! 
TATRA SITET Hay HAT! 
arsatanfeaget eareftrat FT: 2 Vt 
Untaat arg Vat arely St aa: | 
water & Fram creary serra Tear fea: But 
COME ECC MICA ICC IEGIE| 
Fray Saft a easy Ua aera Tera tt BS Ut 
Tea, Went Varkay St aa: 
Frrat BPprgeretareat afer: ut Bet 
wanfenfated aterel a Teri 
wramtedtst way apes aenfaferi 2&1 
TAT WSIS: UTA PRATT: | 
cat we fatrarney fast Tet TOUT Ett 
Ua aerst: You fara: 
far waft & ctarnancenfeary war 29 
afragqaat ag: arto war fire 
Had Maat Tees Gat FRAT Ve 
TATA USA ATT FHA TUT 
Tas sarge a Tar areata atfaa yee 
Wag a: aad fam afatrafrerran: | 
a Feed TM Us sami a: MST 2 ott 
Being thus addressed by the Munis, Vyasa 
smiled, and said to them, “Hear excellent 
sages, why I uttered the words ‘Well done, 
well done.’ The fruit of penance, of 
continence, of silent prayer, and the like, 
practised in the Krta age for ten years, in the 
Treta for one year, in the Dvapara for a month, 
is obtained in the Kali age in a day and night: 
therefore did I exclaim, ‘Excellent, excellent, 
is the Kali age!’ That reward which a man 
obtains in the Krta by abstract meditation, in 


the Treta by sacrifice, in the Dvapara by 
adoration, he receives in the Kali by merely 


reciting the name of KeSava. In the Kali age a 
man displays the most exalted virtue by every 
little exertion; therefore, pious sages, who 
know what virtue is, I was pleased with the 
Kali age. Formerly the Vedas were to be 
acquired by the twice-born through the 
diligent observances of self-denial; and it was 
their duty to celebrate sacrifices conformably 
to the ritual, Then idle prayers, idle feasts, and 
fruitless ceremonies, were practised but to 
mislead the twice-born; for although observed 
by them devoutly, yet, in consequence of some 
irregularity in their celebration, sin was 
incurred in all their works, and what they ate, 
or what they drank, did not effect the 
fulfilment of their desires. In all their objects 
the twice-born enjoyed no independence, and 
they attained their respective spheres only with 
exceeding pain. The Sidra, on the contrary, 
more fortunate than they, reaches his assigned 
station by rendering them service, and 
performing merely the sacrifice of preparing 
food, in which no rules determine what may or 
may not be eaten, what may or may not be 
drunk. Therefore, most excellent sages, is the 
Sadra fortunate. 

“Riches are accumulated by men in modes 
not incompatible with their peculiar duties, 
and they are then to be bestowed upon the 
worthy, and expended in constant sacrifice. 
There is great trouble in their acquisition; and 
great grief for their loss. Thus, eminent 
Bradhmanas, through these and other sources of 
anxiety, men attain their allotted spheres of 
Prajapati and the rest only by exceeding labour 
and suffering. This is not the case with 
women: a woman has only to honour her 
husband, in act, thought, and speech, to reach 
the same region to which he is elevated; and 
she thus accomplishes her object without any 
great exertion. This was the purport of my 
exclamation, ‘Well done!’ the third time. I 
have thus related to you what you asked. Now 
demand the question you came to put to me, in 
any way you please, and I will make you a 
distinct reply.” 


BOOK VI, CHAP. 2 


rahe by 





TUN JaTT 
ade WAT: Why Wet WanpA 
saree A YS waaq afer TAT QI 
aa: WET A We HONEaTaay Ger: 
FARA RAAT AAT 3 2 
wae vera MAT arat feera aUETT 


cat fe a: wag arg areas sf 3 30 

Tats waert ant faeafa & aici 

atrenpore: aferattaerfenteatt: 113 6 

West fiergeerreanty rat: | 

wT Taira ot uate fen 341 

CAAA saa AAA 

aoa acm fader qerfegu 3 § 

Tataaatard Tet afd war 

spate eat: fra aeaat fast: 3011 

The Munis then said to Vyasa, “The 
question we intended to have asked you has 
been already answered by you in your reply to 
our subsequent inquiry.” On hearing which 
Krsna Dvaipayana laughed, and said to the 
holy persons who had come to see him, whose 
eyes were wide open with astonishment, “I 
perceived, with the eye of divine knowledge, 
the question you intended to ask, and in 
allusion to it I uttered the expressions, Well 
done, well done.’ In truth, in the Kali age duty 
is discharged with very little trouble by 
mortals, whose faults are all washed away by 
the water of their individual merits; by Stdras, 
through diligent attendance only upon the 
twice-born; and by women, through the slight 
effort of obedience to their husbands. 
Therefore, Brahmanas, did I thrice express my 
admiration of their happiness; for in the Krta 
and other ages great were the toils of the 
regenerate to perform their duty. I waited not 
for your inquiry, but replied at once to the 
question you purposed to ask. Now, ye who 
know what virtue is, what else do you wish me 
to tell you?” 


ad: GoySs SF Cas WHET SYA: WAI 
manna feat aeahal nares gaye: 3c 
waniste wert! weet afd WAN 3 81 
MIATA BCAA ASP TUT: | 
SWAT POY BrwaT: Wt AIG ¥oll 
Tale WaT YY Sera T Heer! 
WHAAPATeS AAG aarfiy Av Vi 
Sf stfawygeay wsiyy feta: sear: 

The Munis then saluted and praised Vyasa, 
and, being freed by him from uncertainty, 
departed as they came. To you also, excellent 
Maitreya, have I imparted this secret, this one 
great virtue of the otherwise vicious Kali age. 
The dissolution of the world, and the 


aggregation of the elements, I will now 


describe to you.! 
FORK 


NOTES 


1. The illustration of the efficacy of devotion to 
Visnu given in this chapter is peculiar to this 
Purana, but the doctrine is common to it and the 
Bhagavata. It is repeatedly inculcated in that work. 
The paralled passage in the twelfth book is the 
following. “Purusottama, abiding in the hearts of 
men, takes away all the sins of the Kali age, 
produced by place or property. Bhagavan, abiding 
in the heart, the heard, repeated, read of, 
worshipped, or honoured, dissipates the ills of men 
for ten thousand births. As fire, entering into the 
substance of gold, purifies it from the allows with 
which it is debased in the mine, so Visnu, united 
with the devotee, is the refiner from all that is evil. 
By learning, penance, suppression of breath, 
friendship, pilgrimage, ablution, mortification, 
gifts, prayer, the soul attains not that exceeding 
purity which it derives from the presence of Visnu. 
Therefore, with all your soul, O king, hold Kesgava 
ever present in your heart. Let one about to die be 
most careful in this; for so he goes to supreme 
felicity. Let the name of the supreme god, Visnu, 
be repeated diligently by all in their last moments; 
for he who desires liberation shall attain it by the 
frequent repetition of the name of Krsna. Final 
felicity is derived in the Krta age from holy study; 


536 THE VISNU-PURANAM 





in the Treta, from religious rites. In the Dvapara it 
is attained by pious services; but in the Kali age it is 
secured by repeating the name of Hari.” Similar 
doctrines are taught in the Gita, and other Vaisnava 
works. See As. Res, vol. XVI. p. 116. 


kk* 


536 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





CHAPTER 3 


qararseara: 


(Freenfeercarres afifrarcrra a aut) 
UWI Save] 

waa wart fifaa: wf: 

afafaen: wafaacadarcatareay Aas 21 

Gren Aafraetat Heard Waaa: | 

seats Teer: Wat feats: 2H 


The dissolution of existing beings is of 
three kinds, incidental, elemental and 
absolute'. The incidental is that which relates 
to Brahma, and occurs at the end of a Kalpa: 
the elemental is that which takes place after 
two Pararddhas: the absolute is final liberation 
from existence. 


HAT Jaraq 


UU way! UAT Tat J A: 
faquitacanr Sa: wrea: wera: 1 3 


Maitreya said— Tell me, excellent master, 
what is the enumeration of a Pararddha, the 
expiration of two of which is the period of 
elemental dissolution’. 


WU Saray 


WAM WI erate Tat fe 
AASHTETA WY UTAH XI 
UTGlayot Ay wep: wera fe! 
derennsfact ara wed carafe nan 
Frat arqat alse AATATATATITAT: | 

dt: USee: Hier Fy HTM HET: 1G I 
Tsar Y WAT Bel SM A Ue a 
SHPATT: A YF VTATSAA SST 9 Ut 


SHATE: GaeaaRATT TTT AT: 
ART WA Wee A aC 
Tfserame Enat ygat fea 
aes Yeteq frearay fare <i 
adelantratreriry afefa 
fafadtioniad agar dargeEErqii Rot 
ay wee aga TyarEry 
UaNaeay aA Tao Fer Ve 


UT HOUSA WAAIYEM ASFA 
aed da Taq! are Ataf MT eV 


wea Ea Ara Neat TA 
STUY Wad WAT GAINS AAI V3 
Parasara continued— A Pararddha, 


Maitreya, is that number which occurs in the 
eighteenth place of figures, enumerated 
according to the rule of decimal notation’. At 
the end of twice that period elemental 
dissolution occurs, when all the discrete 
products of nature are withdrawn into their 
indiscrete source. The shortest period of time 
is a Matra, which is equal to the twinkling of 
the human eye. Fifteen Matras make a Kastha; 
thirty Kasthas, one Kala; fifteen Kalas, one 
Nadika. A Nadika is ascertained by a measure 
of water, with a vessel made of twelve Palas 
and a half of copper, in the bottom of which 
there is to be a hole made with a tube of gold, 
of the weight of four M4sas, and four inches 
long‘. According to the Magadha measure, the 
vessel should hold a Prastha (or sixteen Palas) 
of water. Two of these N&adis make one 
Muhirtta; thirty of which are one day and 
night. Thirty such periods form a month; 
twelve months make a year, or a day and night 
of the gods; and three hundred and sixty such 
days constitute a year of the celestials. An 
ageregate of four ages contains twelve 
thousand divine years; and a thousand periods 
of four ages complete a day of Brahma. That 
period is also termed a Kalpa, during which 
fourteen Manus preside; and at the end of it 
occurs the incidental or Brahma dissolution. 


BOOK VI, CHAP. 3 


537 





The nature of this dissolution is very fearful: 
hear me describe it, as well as that which takes 
place at the elemental dissolution, which I will 
also relate to you. 


agaTaeard ator Weta 
srratecdtatn area vrata ex ii 
aay TST ae MA MATT: | 

ara ant hae! urfsarsrt USAT 84 U 
at: W wary faa ERTS AT: | 
TMT AAT AHYATTAT: Wee: WT VEU 
wa: @ war faowrt: wary ya 
faa: fracrsrnftr sen arama v9 i 
drareifia arent mfingfirrenfi a) 

vine valet Bra! art oferta eet 
af TAR Mey Wer Waa wT 

UMey Baas aA aa Taher area ee i 
aerated dares feat: | 

@ Wa WHT: UA ART UA MAT oll 
seeigs A cared: aa fear: | 
SEAMS Tea Tae Te FET 2 Wi 
qa adteaciast fiat! arent: 
aigracianint Faeats Bra 2 2 
an freaqureg Sereemfaet fan 
THAT M TM PHYS TIATH!T: 3H 


At the end of a thousand periods of four 
ages the earth is for the most part exhausted. A 
total dearth then ensues, which lasts a hundred 
years; and, in consequence of the failure of 
food, all beings become languid and 
exanimate, and at last entirely perish. The 
eternal Visnu then assumes the character of 
Rudra, the destroyer, and descends to reunite 
all his creatures with himself. He enters into 


the seven rays of the sun,” drinks up all the 
waters of the globe, and causes all moisture 
whatever, in living bodies or in the soil, to 
evaporate; thus drying up the whole earth. The 
seas, the rivers, the mountain torrents, and 
springs, are all exhalled; and so are all the 
waters of Patala, the regions below the earth. 


Thus fed, through his intervention, with 
abundant moisture, the seven solar rays dilate 
to seven suns‘*, whose radiance glows above, 
below and on every side, and sets the three 
worlds and Patala on fire. The three worlds, 
consumed by these suns, become rugged and 
deformed throughout the whole extent of their 
mountains, rivers, and seas; and the earth, bare 
of verdure, and destitute of moisture, alone 
remains, resembling in appearance the bank of 
a tortoise. 


Wd: Hreateasa yar Aaetl Bit: 
VATA: UAT AEA VXI 
Wate We AW AT TACT TEM 
afraater Tenet aU TYAN V4 UI 
yacks wa wa waetlas Geren: 
TATA Baa Ulead 2 G1 
sradutvannta aereaataet Aan 
TATU TTA UATE 2 19 1 
arena ornare: | 
Hala THT Ageia WEAN VI 
Tees USAT SATA: WAI 
Teor Weis FT aac uefa: 1 VV 


The destroyer of all things, Hari, in the 
form of Rudra, who is the flame of time, 
becomes the scorching breath of the serpent 
Sesa, and thereby reduces Patdla to ashes. The 
great fire, when it has burnt all the divisions of 
Pataéla, proceeds to the earth, and consumes it 
also. A vast whirlpool of eddying flame then 
spreads to the region of the atmosphere, and 
the sphere of the gods, and wraps them in ruin. 
The three spheres show like a frying-pan 
amidst the surrounding flames, that prey upon 
all moveable or stationary things. The 
inhabitants of the two upper spheres, having 
discharged their functions, and being annoyed 
by the heat, remove to the sphere above, or 
Maharloka. When that becomes heated, its 
tenants, who after the full period of their stay 
are desirous of ascending to higher regions, 
depart for the Janaloka’. 


»~ 


338 


Wal SRA WN WaSRAM WATE: | 
Tara Bary athe BATA 3 of 
aa Thiers Farfer: 
sfaster var Stet ant: darter BAT:113 el 
cafe: ay HATA: | 
aman aat: cafe fener Tat: Tatert113 Vi 
HATAVAT HATA TAM 
faa Sette TAT: WIN | BM 
sacar: cfr: freer 3 v1 
Janarddana, in the person of Rudra, having 
consumed the whole world, breathes forth 
heavy clouds; and those called Samvartta, 
resembling vast elephants in bulk, overspread 
the sky, roaring, and darting lightenings. Some 
are as black as the blue lotus; some are white 
as the water-lily; some are dusky, like smoke; 
and some are yellow; some are of a dun 
colour, like that of an ass; some like ashes 
sprinkled on the forehead; some are deep blue, 
as the fapis lazuli; some azure, like the 
sapphire; some are white, as the conch or the 
jasmine; and some are black, as collyrium; 
some are of bright red, like the lady-bird; 


some are of the fierceness of red arsenic; and 
some are like the wing of the painted jay. 


ara: caferghastt Gat WaT: | 
chad yratreant: afar war aha 34 
RerMPS aq Weare VA: | 
WEITa ARTS: TERT ATSC 3 GN 
SUA WTA ETA TATA 
wmerafact far! tataaratfaagagn 30 
We art wet Asie autonahrarhar:| 
wae wT ae ashe APTA cl 
mater: wrafaad yar 
Yaris mang waar fed fameacn 
STAT TS AB META 
adteat & Werte qatar Marq ¥ ol 
gia siifamy yerot weigh geile: sreara:1 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


Such are these massy clouds in hue: in 
form some resemble towns, some mountains, 
some are like houses and hovels, and some are 
like columns. Mighty in size, and loud in 
thunder, they fill all space. Showering down 
torrents of water, these clouds quench the 
dreadful fires which involve the three worlds, 
and then they rain uninterruptedly for a 
hundred years, and delung the whole world. 
Pouring down in drops as large as dice, these 
rains Overspread the earth, and fill the middle 
region, and inundate heaven. The world 1s now 
enveloped in darkness, and all things, animate 
or inanimate, having perished, the clouds 
continue to pour down their waters for more 
than a hundred years. 


A 


NOTES 


1. The first is called Naimittaka, ‘occasional’ or 
‘incidental’ or Brahmya, as occasioned by the 
intervals of Brahma’s days; the destruction of 
creatures, though not of the substance of the world, 
occurring during his night. The general resolution 
of the elements into their primitive source, or 
Prakrti, is the Prakrtika destruction, and occurs at 
the end of Brahma’s life. The third, the absolute or 
final. Atyantika, is individual annihilation; Moksa, 
exemption for ever from future existence. The 
Bhagavata here notices the fourth kind, of which 
mention occurred in a preceding passage (Bk. I. Ch. 
III). Nitya or constant dissolution; explaining it to 
be the imperceptible change that all things suffer in 
the various stages of growth and decay, life and 
death. The various conditions of beings subject to 
change are occasioned by that constant dissolution 
of life which is rapidly produced by the resistless 
stream of time, taking every thing perpetually 
aways: Fearn Freret 
Ufontrracaren: Swetaeda:| The Vayu describes 
but three kinds of Pralaya, omitting the Nitya. 

2. Maitreya has a rather indifferent memory (see 
Bk. I. Ch. III); but the periods specified in the two 
places do not agree. In the first book two 
Pararddhas, as equal to one hundred years of 
Brahma, are 311,040, 000,000,000 years of 
mortals. 


BOOK VI, CHAP. 4 


539 





3. Counting according to this mode of 
enumeration, a Paradrdha is represented by 
100,000,000,000,000,000. The Vayu Purana has a 
term for each of these decimal values. Dasa (431), 
10; Satam (31), 100; Sahasram (ate), 1000; 
Ayutam (374d), 10,000; Niyutam (faq), 100,000; 
Prayutam (Wad), 1,000,000; Arvudam (348), 


10,000,000; Nyurvudam (=a), 
100,000,000;Vrindam (4%), 1000,000,000; Param 
(a), 10,000,000,000; Kharvam (@@4), 
100,000,000,000; Nikharvam 
(fra#),1000,000,000,000;  Sankham (%@), 
10,000,000,000,000; Padmam (4), 
100,000,000,000,000; Samudram (aK), 
1000,000,000,000; Madhyamam (AeA), 
10,000,000,000,000,000;  Pararddham (42S), 


100,000,000,000,000,000. In the first book the 
Pararddham, as the half of Brahma’s life, it but 
155,520,000,000,000 fifteen instead of eighteen 
places of figures. 


4, The description of the Clepsydra is very brief, 
and wanting in precision. One of the commentaries 
is more explicit: ‘A vessel made of twelve Palas 
and half of copper, and holding a Prastha, Magadha 
measure, of water, broad at top, and having at 
bottom a tube of gold of four Mashas weight, four 
fingers long, is placed in water, and the time in 
which the vessel is filled by the whole in the 
bottom is called a Nadika:’ ‘argsresacdaraa 
paatar weenfad wasn wan ari quid 
aacsrel afsaft! The term Salaka generally means 
a needle or stake, but it must here denote a pipe. 
The common measure of the Nadi is a thin shallow 
brass cup, with a smal] hole in the bottom. It is 
placed on the surface of water, in a large vessel, 
where nothing can disturb it, and where the water 
gradually fills the cup, and sinks it. As. Res. vol. V. 
p. 87. | 

5. See Bk. I. Ch. XI. n. 3. 


6. These also have their several appellations: the 
commentator quotes the Vedas as the authority; 
Araga, Bhraja, Patala, Patahga, Svamabhak, Jyotis 
mat, and Savibhasa. 

7. The passage may also be understood. “Those 
go to Janaloka who are desirous of obtaining 
Brahma, or final liberation, through the ten stages 
of perfection— devotion, penance, truth, etc.’ In the 


Vayu Purana more details are specified. Those 
sainted mortals who have diligently worshipped Vis 
nu, and are distinguished for piety, abide, at the 
time of dissolution, in Maharloka, with the Pitrs, 
the Manus, the seven Rsis, the various orders of 
celestial spirits, and the gods. These, when the heat 
of the flames that destroy the worlds reaches to 
Maharloka, repair to Janaloka in their subtile forms, 
destined to become re-embodied, in similar 
capacities as their former, when the world is 
renewed, at the beginning of the succeeding Kalpa. 
This continues throughout the life of Brahma; at the 
expiration of his life all are destroyed: but those 
who have then attained a residence in_ the 
Brahmaloka, by having identified themselves in 
spirit with the supreme, are finally resolved into the 
sole-existing Brahma. 
week 


BOOK VI, CHAP. 4 539 





CHAPTER 4 


qa Searea: 
(MiepANETAUTAT) 


WUT SaTT 
wats Reismte verze 
Wala vata Sereaaaet Aa: Vl 
Far:arast anata Weare: | 
argfarar gy Axa! qatoraferch waT VU 
SAAS IRA WAAL YAMA: | 
srifarifapared Urea AANA: 11 3 It 


When the waters have reached the region 
of the seven Rsis, and the whole of the three 
worlds is one ocean, they stop. The breath of 
Visnu becomes a strong wind, which blows for 
more than a hundred years, until all the clouds 
are dispersed. The wind is then reabsorbed, 
and he of whom all things are made, the lord 
by whom all things exist, he who is 
inconceivable, without beginning of the 
universe, reposes, sleeping upon Sesa, in the 
midst of the deep. 


Weanlvlea aderery Pega: Wey 
PASIAN: BA WATT uw 


540 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





waeteand: fad: arerehrga: | 
Taeraeta fara Gaya: n4 
sear feet atintrst wafer: | 
arent argeanet faray WaT 1g II 
we Afafaart are aaa! wfraat: 
fifa wa aad geet ft: 19 


The creator, Hari, sleeps upon the ocean, in 
the form of Brahma-— glorified by Sanaka and 
the saints who had gone to the Janaloka, and 
contemplated by the holy inhabitants of 
Brahmaloka, anxious for final liberation— 
involved in mystic slumber, the celestial 
personification of his own illusions, and 
meditating on his own ineffable spirit, which 
is called Vasudeva. This, Maitreya, is the 
dissolution termed incidental, because Hari, in 
the form of Brahma, sleep there, as its 
incidental cause. 


Ber By aaa WT Aa Ua WAI 
Prfeetdettact anrprargraseqan ct 
wet ay UTaaad 
Wel eles aaa TERT 8 
a: WAS Wat A: Ole Beet: 
Terran fawn F alt FT ot 


When the universal spirit wakes, the world 
revives; when he closes his eyes, all things fall 
upon the bed of mystic slumber. In like 
manner as a thousand great ages constitute a 
day of Brahma, so his night consists of the 
same period; during which the world is 
submerged by a vast ocean. Awaking at the 
end of his night, the unborn, Visnu, in the 
character of Brahma, creates the universe 
anew, in the manner formerly related to you’, 


sey Houser: weray fen 
afatrana alsa: Wea: Yat: TTT Ve 
saul Ha TAT AAI 
Batata cay warerahacy a 22h 
Aealefacncea fagrarder era 
siemens are wae wires 83 0 


I have thus described to you the 
intermediate dissolution of the world, 
occurring at the end of every Kalpa. I will 
now, Maitreya, describe to you elemental 
dissolution. When by dearth and fire all the 
worlds and Patalas are withered up and the 
modifications of Mahat and other products of 
nature are by all the will of Krsna destroyed, 
the progress of elemental dissolution 1s begun. 


amet water & yet aenberaraé Zorg 
STAT Ta YP: WATT ETA Vv 
WAY TWAATIS a Gest Stenferear 
TAMet AYR THATS TATA 24 I 
STATS WEB Sraeal WENA: | 


aangante fata frat a 
Ufeaeartaiaan Sitar SWAT: WATT OG i 


Tarte yo weg Tafaar wraet 7 A: 
AVANTE THAT RATT Hh V9 11 
aaa eater watfawa weary a 
arya F afer ara waar FA Wo 
@ Uta: Adal QA sed ANT AaTh 
adargey aanfirerar wes PA 8 
afte: uqe afer frehpeednereem 
TANARIS UE BT ATA WATATTN 2 ot 
Wey aw ame aguas faencah 


Then, first, the waters swallow up the 
property of earth, which is the rudiment of 
smell; and earth, deprived of its property, 
proceeds to destruction. Devoid of the 
rudiment of odour, the earth becomes one with 
water. The waters then being much 
augmented, roaring, and rushing along, fill up 
all space, whether agitated or still. When the 
universe is thus pervaded by the waves of the 
watery element, its rudimental flavour 1s 
licked up by the element of fire, and, in 
consequence of the destruction of their 
rudiments, the waters themselves are 
destroyed. Deprived of the essential rudiment 
of flavour, they become one with fire, and the 
universe is therefore entirely filled with flame, 
which drinks up the water on every side, and 


BOOK VI, CHAP. 4 


S41 





gradually overspreads the whole of the world. 
While space is enveloped in flame, above, 
below, and all around, the element of wind 
seizes upon the rudimental property, or form, 
which is the cause of light; and that being 
withdrawn, all becomes of the nature of air. 


WA WUT EAA faayH: 1 2 2 


wematt ater wafratgelrt Wer 
Freretan et wiles ara TT AAT AH 


AA WAAAY ST: AMAT: | 
Sees fra a Saat feet ser 11231 
arate yor VaSraaAreit TAT TA: 

wemnaa aa ary: Gy fseaay 1 Vvil 
TRUNCATE TT UPA 
PSMA PAS ANH 1 V4 I 
UTS TaSATATAAT NT Pre eTATUT A 
Vena aera wea fisher 2 e 
aa: wre YO weT earadt TA: 

qarsay yrag sat deady au VII 


The rudiment of form being destroyed, and 
fire deprived of its rudiment, air extinguishes 
fire, and spreads resistlessly over space, which 
is deprived of light when fire merges into air. 
Air then, accompanied by sound, which is the 
source of ether, extends every where 
throughout the ten regions of space, until ether 
seizes upon contact, its rudimental property; 
by the loss of which, air is destroyed, and 
ether remains unmodified: devoid of form, 
flavour, touch, and smell, it exists unembodied 
and vast, and pervades the whole of spacc, 
Ether, whose characteristic property and 
rudiment is sound, exists alone, occupying all 
the vacuity of space. But then the radical 
elements egotism devours sound, and all the 
elements and faculties are at once merged into 
their original. 


APM WI Wasa: Ve: 
Wate Tad aia wary a agra: VII 
Sat ASIA TAA: WAS ATATSITRTM 2 FM 


Ue UA Ferg! HU WHT at 
WME Fa: Wat vias TAATTI 3 ol 


This primary element is consciousness, 
combined with the property of darkness, and is 
itself swallowed up by Mahat, whose 
characteristic property is intelligence; and 
earth and Mahat are the inner and outer 
boundaries of the universe. In this manner, as 
in the creation were the seven forms of nature 
(Prakrti), reckoned from Mahat to earth?, so, at 
the time of elemental dissolution, these seven 
successively re-enter into each other. 

wangd wanvsncg wits 

Baran Aas AIA 3 eI 
SEH Ay Vira Ua F AAI 

wafratal ort anit aA MATT: 3 VI 
waiaa yerad t Tet Wer 
Terday: afed vaferrad fer 3 311 


TUATHA WET | 

Wead WHited WA BOT TTA 3 VI 

The egg of Brahm4 is dissolved in the 
waters that surround it, with its seven zones, 
seven oceans, seven regions, and their 
mountains. The investure of water is drunk up 
by fire; the stratum of fire is absorbed by that 
of air: air blends itself with ether: the primary 
element of egotism devours the ether, and is 
itself taken up by intellect, which, along with 
all these, is seized upon by nature (Prakrti). 
Equilibrium of the three properties, without 
excess or deficiency, is called nature Prakrti, 
origin (Hetu), the chief principle (Pradhana), 
cause (K4rana), supreme (Param). 


SUT Wala: Pat centers 
ornare dfeay Aaa! cAI 3 4 II 
Ua: Yalsad fear: weet aa Tar 
Ase: WaT HAT! UAT 3 Il 
qT Ufat aa Bast araaTenfaanewt: | 
TAMA HA WAAR: Fs S911 
a Fal Aq Wt aM ATTA Te EI 


a faa: watas aa Aaa Bit 3 cll 


542 


This Prakrti is essentially the same, 
whether discrete or indiscrete; only that which 
is discrcte is finally lost or absorbed in the 
indiscrete. Spirit also, which is one, pure, 
imperishable, eternal, all-pervading, is a 
portion of that supreme spirit which is all 
things. That spirit which is other than 
(embodied) spirit, in which there are no 
attributes of name, species, or the like— which 
is one with all wisdom, and is to be understood 
as sole existence— that is Brahma, infinite 
glory, supreme spirit, supreme power, Visnu, 
all that is; from whence the perfect sage 
returns no more. 


Waal wat Gaal ernrerncaeafqun 


FRET CA VTA 3 8 
UAT A AANA: UAT: | 


PaOPTEN FT ay AarIG WWMM vol 


Nature (Prakrti), which I have described to 
you as being essentially both discretc and 
indiscrete, and spirit (which is united with 
body), both resolve into supreme spirit. 
Supreme spirit is the upholder of all things, 
and the ruler of all things, and is glorified in 
the Vedas and in the Vedanta by the name of 
Visnu. 


wars Froaa fefat at afer 
aMATAUNA yaa: Waght: A ssrA v a 
wy-ay: Vaart: vadiead wel 
GRIT ARIA YEN: USAT: WS 
ATT AAA WATT: WA 

Raw afitratt fa ianeme: v3 


Works, as enjoined by the Vedas, are of 
two kinds, active (Pravritta) and quiescent 
(Nivrtta); by both of which the universal 
person is worshipped by mankind. He, the lord 
of sacrifice, the male of sacrifice, the most 
excellent male, is worshipped by men in the 
active mode by rites enjoined in the Rk, Yajur 
and Sama Vedas. The soul of wisdom, the 
person of wisdom, Visnu, and giver of 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


emancipation, is worshipped by sages in the 
quiescent form, through meditative devotion. 


we ceeay fasacahrrr 

aa ararafaaa cere faeoprera: 11 4x 
ark UT Ua Werth FT Ue Pease: | 
ume a fareat fasracent eft: ssn 
arena aren waft: weet 
Teenie aq! enfirrereacaran x & 1 


The exhaustless Visnu is whatever thing 
that is designated by long, short, or prolated 
syllables, or that which is without a name. He 
is that which is discrete, and that which is 
indiscrete: he is exhaustless spirit, supreme 
spirit, universal spirit, Hari, the wearcr of 
universal forms. Nature, whether discrete or 
indiscrete, is absorbed into him, and 
(detached) spirit also merges into the all- 
diffusive and unobstructed spirit. 


farina: aret: alsa at War aan 
aeeerer Hag! feonittiorer Hea ¥'9 11 
wath U Wal CI Wea Gee aM 

wa Reet Fen ara aA WENN Yc 
Aare 4 From freer wearer: | 
THN TTT FATA & 8 


The period of two Pararddhas, as I have 
described it to you, Maitreya, is called a day of 
that potent Visnu; and whilst the products of 
nature are merged into their source, nature into 
spirit, and that into the supreme, that period is 
termed his night, and is of equal duration with 
his day. But, in fact, to that eternal supreme 
spirit there is neither day nor night, and these 
distinctions are only figuratively applied to the 
almighty. 

Sau aa Ara! afaa: weal wa: 
aTeaaraataay Tarhararer WTA SATTN & 01] 
ofa sitfanygerot apist age: stearer:1) 

I have thus explained to you the nature of 
elemental! dissolution, and will now expound 
to you which is final’. 


BOOK VI, CHAP. 5 543 





NOTES 


1. The Naimittika Pralaya is described in the 
Vayu, Bhagavata. Karma, and other Puranas, to the 
same effect, and very commonly in precisely the 
same words. 

2. See Bk. I. Ch. I. 

3. The Bhagavata notices the Prakrta pralaya 
much more briefly, and it is omitted in the Vayu. 


KEKE 


BOOK VI, CHAP. 5 543 





true wisdom, and detachment from human 

objects, obtains final dissolution. The first to 

the three pains, or Adhyadtmika, is of two 

kinds, bodily and mental. Bodily pain is of 

many kinds, as you shall hear. Affections of 

the head, catarrh, fever, cholic, fistula, spleen, 

haemorrhoids, intumescence, sickness, 

ophthalmia, dysentery, leprosy, and many 

other discases, constitute bodily affliction. 

Mental sufferings are love, anger, fear, hate, 

covetousness, stupefaction, despair, sorrow, 

CHAPTER 5 malice, disdain, jealousy, envy, and many 
USRISEM: other passions which are engendered in the 
: mind, These and various other afficitions, 


mental or corporeal, are comprised under the 
(snenftraratraaaniay, war areata as P 


class of worldly sufferings, which is called 
Vesta AN, Wad: Uaeraulrs) Adhyatmika (natural and inseparable). That 


pain to which excellent Brahman, the term 
QU Sara 


sremicdenta Haat! TAT ATTA Fa: 
SRAM: WET CAL I I 
srenferar a fefea: smth) wae 
WA aee ers STATS TU VI 
Forerer- wf para-SATILT-ATT 

TOAST :- TAT - AA FETA TAT 3 
TATRA ATL- HST STAT ATS: 

fad casreaat are atrerrefan vi 

SHUT- HT-WAT-SA-CA-Ae- FARTS: | 
PAT AT- AAA BA ATT ETAT & I 
arrarsta fare! arat sata Ace 
smamifetaceaat anemia: CANE UI 
Wr-ufer-wyerel: firprrenem- Tere: | 
BargaEsy Fort seas arate: i ot 
vititenrerrereratrg- serie yaa : | 

amar farawsrs! aead ufaciaa: ici 
TH-W-MU AFA TAT 

Bra Veen Naftard Yr gH 


Adhibhautika (natural, but incidental) is 
applied, is every kind of evil which is inflicted 
(from without) upon men by beasts, birds, 
men, goblins, snakes, fiends, or reptiles; and 
the pain that is termed Adhidaivika (or 
superhuman) is the work of cold, heat, wind, 
rain, lightning and other (atmospherical 
phenomena). Affliction, Maitreya, is 
multiplied in thousands of shapes in the 
progress of conception, birth, decay, disease, 
death and hell. 


Gea sya greg 
seadataal yyettareraata: tt 20 1 
IAS MATT AUT GAT: | 
STATA TRATAAAS A I eM 
TAUNTS TTA: | 
WPT War Usa VM 
Fea: WaT: CTE WTA 

aTed TMisfage Pornd art: 93 UI 

The tender (and subtle) animal exists in the 


embryo, surrounded by abundant filth, floating 
in water, and distorted in its back, neck, and 


The wise man having investigated the three bones; enduring severe pain even in the course 
kinds of worldly pain, or mental and bodily of its development, as disordered by the acid, 
affliction and the like', and having acquired acrid, bitter, pungent, and saline articles of its 


544 


mother’s food; incapable of extending or 
contracting its limbs; reposing amidst the 
slime of ordure and urine; every way 
incommoded; unable to breathe; endowed with 
consciousness, and calling to memory many 
hundred previous births. Thus exists the 
embryo in profound affliction, bound to the 
world by its former works. 


TT: WerpAaypa acest: | 
WATT STAT USE: Ne 
sreigant & fad waet: afrarat:! 
SARITA HOUTA TTT 1 BG I 
TearraTeA Wedl WARY ATA 
faareraretfa Bray ATT 2 
agetta gag madita afta: 
Ufaaonfaataat axvat frat Far 1 got 
HOSA UTM: ULaS TAT: | 
CATANIA a ULTATU Va 


When the child is about to be born, its face 
is besmeared by excrement, urine, blood, 
mucus, and semen; its attachment to the uterus 
is ruptured by the Prajapati wind; it is turned 
head downwards, and violently expelled from 
the womb by the powerful and painful winds 
of parturition; and the infant losing for a time 
all sensation, when brought in contact with the 
external air, is immediately dcprived of its 
intellectual knowledge. Thus born, the child is 
tortured in every limb, as if pierced with 
thorns, or cut to pieces with a saw, and falls 
from its fetid lodgment, as from a sore, like a 
crawling thing upon the earth. Unable to feel 
itself, unable to turn itself, it is dependent 
upon the will of others for being bathed and 
nourished. 


ayfa: wet ga: sede 
aemaronste jdat wat fafrarcan eet 
WAS GRR FAR SATTUT at 
area aareifa snfesitareantt UN ot 


Laid upon a dirty bed, it is bitten by insects 
and mosquitoes, and has not power to drive 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


them away. Many are the pangs attending 
birth, and many are those which succeed to 
birth; and many are the sufferings which are 
inflicted by elemental and superhuman agency 
in the state of childhood. 

SAATAATTA FST: AT: | 

q arate aa: watss Fars Tear feaTTH: 2 VU 

ot aq TASS GOT fararory! 

fae caret fermenred ot fer aed fina area 22 

alsa: aay a ad: afer add aT Ha 

fa aroraded fe ar fe qureteaqn 231 

Enveloped by the gloom of ignorance, and 
internally bewildered, man knows not whence 
he is, who he is, whither he goes, nor what is 
his nature; by what bonds he is bound; what is 
cause, and what is not cause ; what is to be 
done and what is to be left undone; what is to 
be said, and what is to be Kept silent; what is 
righteousness, what is iniquity; in what it 
consists, or how; what is right, what is wrong, 
what is Virtue, what is vice. 

Ua UMass WET 

STATA ASS POPTUB 

STAT ATTA Ae: HVAT: TAT: 

Saat variat He oreTa FEST VGH 

a Hut aa HeredEsa: 

TACT Fas AAA SAAT 2G I 

Thus man, like a brute beast, addicted only 
to animal gratifications, suffers the pain that 
ignorance occasions. Ignorance, darkness, 
inactivity, influence those devoid of 
knowledge, so that pious works are neglected; 
but hell is the consequence of neglect of 
religious acts, according to the great sages, 
and the ignorant therefore suffcr affliction 
both in this world and in the next. 


wees feraetara: BATA 
farreradtnlagral ae BATATTGT: 1 Vol 
SUA STATA 

AA aaa A- AT ATTST 2S Il 


BOOK VI, CHAP. 5 


545 





adtpraaeagererdtete: | 
SMARSU MANAUS ETAT | 2 PI 
PPAR ANAT TTA TT: I 
TRETSPATA: BARICMACAT: I 3 011 
sR: WARY HUTT: | 
ARIS YAATTSTAAAT RATT 3 2 


When old age arrives, the body is infirm; 
the limbs are relaxed; the face is emaciate and 
shrivelled; the skin is wrinkled, and scantily 
covers the veins and sinews; the eye discerns 
not afar off, and the pupil gazes on vacuity; 
the nostrils are stuffed with hair; the trunk 
trembles as it moves; the bones appear beneath 
the surface, the back is bowed, and the joints 
are bent; the digestive fire is extinct, and here 
is little appetite and little vigour; walking, 
rising, sleeping, sitting, are all painful efforts; 
the ear is dull; the eye is dim; the mouth is 
disgusting with dribbling saliva; the senses no 
longer are obedient to the will; and as death 
approaches, the things that are perceived even 
are immediately forgotten. 


AHS Aras AYALA: 
MTT: BUTTS ATA 1) 3 2H 
seas qat Wayad Wah 


FAATARTTON ATTA TE ea: 1 3 3 

yeftonfacrytees faerrenreyE:| 

ara: ufaatenta Ffetounstrarera: 113 sl 

aqyaivaratery saree 

Fare dat det F:afacatrenfta: 340 

Tanah gah Waray a 

aot anet esata arene poy aPAPT 3 GN 

The utterance of a single sentence is 
fatiguing, the wakefulness is perpetuated by 
difficult breathing, coughing, and painful 
exhaustion. The old man is lifted up by 
somebody else; he is clothed by somebody 
else; he is an object of contempt to his 
servants, his children, and his wife. Incapable 
of cleanliness, of amusement, or food, or 
desire, he is laughed at by his dependants, and 


disregarded by his kin; and dwelling on the 
exploits of his youth, as on the actions of a 
past life, he sighs deeply, and is sorely 
distressed. Such are some of the pains which 
old age is condemned to suffer. I will now 
describe to you the agonies of death. 


VOUMATTS HST SATA ATA FPA 

Rena Yeaterantag: 1 39 

fawa-ara-aa-aTaT-ea-Terlew) 

We ae afoeatar wa AMAT: NaN 

aafadenn: anette arent: | 

PMC CROIPINS DEI CU cr aT ER aT 

faerie geaare Fe: fa) 

AYAIAMAea SHAY N¥oN 

freganer dtteeraranea: | 

AIT ASAT SATALIAT VATA AAT ATI 2 

PAMS AAT STASIS: | 

aa ATMS FIT WTNH  s 21 

Tarrant aenfay ear weet Foy! 

TO AT AA werd TeayT Ns 3 

The neck droops; the feet and hands are 
relaxed; the body trembles; the man is 
repeatedly exhausted, subdued, and visited 
with interrupted knowledge; the principle of 
selfishness afflicts him, and he thinks what 
will become of my wealth, my lands, my 
children, my wife, my servants, my house? 
The joints of his limbs are tortured with severe 
pains, as if cut by a saw, or as if they were 
pierced by the sharp arrows of the destroyer; 
he rolls his eyes, and tosses about his hands 
and feet; his lips and palate are parched and 
dry, and his throat, obstructed by foul humours 
and deranged vital airs, emits a rattling sound; 
he is afflicted with burning heat, and with 
thirst, and with hunger; and he at last passes 
away, tortured by the servants of the judge of 
the dead, to undergo a renewal of his 
sufferings in another body. These are the 
agonies which men have to endure when they 
die. I will now describe to you the tortures 
which they suffer in hell. 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





546 
anafagtaryniarent eusatst | 
qaeg ly vil 


HUA A-Alg-AA- VreaTSaraay | 

Were ATS Te aaa feet! SAT Uw 

Hae: WEIMAR aa 

Hot: FMAM yHt aly PraTATT ve Mt 

VASAT ATAEA WAPAATA! 

YS: ARAN Etat Ty TAT & 9 11 

ware dermeay a feyaat artnet: 

Sara fare AeA se 

ae ot estat wrens a1 

Wey Ahan! sat den a fart use 

Men are bound, when they die, by the 
servants of the king of Tartarus with cords, 
and beaten with sticks, and have then to 
encounter the fierce aspect of Yama, and the 
horrors of their terrible route. In the different 
hells there are various intolerable tortures with 
burning sand, fire, machines, and weapons; 
some are served with saws, some roasted in 
forges, some arc chopped with axes, some 
buried in the ground, some are mounted on 
stakes, some cast to wild beasts to be 
devoured, some are gnawed by vultures, some 
torn by tigers, some are boiled in oil, some 
rolled in caustic slime, some are precipitated 
from great heights, some tossed upwards by 
engines. The number of punishments inflicted 
in hell, which are the consequences of sin, is 
infinite?. 

a hat fate aes garage: 

watisia wresitees afroaited Fafa: 14 oft 

wa mH walt wad TIA: FAs 

Tm factaa wal wrerlseafat NY Vt 

foad AREY aremrasa ata 

Tea a aa: WT aT AT FAT WU 4 VA 

But not in hell alone do the souls of the 
deceased undergo pain: there is no cessation 


even in heaven; for its temporary inhabitant is 
ever tormented with the prospect of 


descending again to earth. Again is he liable to 
conception and to birth; he is merged again 
into the embryo, and repairs to it when about 
to be born; then he dies, as soon as born, or in 
infancy, or in youth, or in manhood, or in old 
age. Death, sooner or later, is inevitable. 


Wawtatt waa waarfad: wr: 
AeA et arate TAT 3 
FORTH TAA Wes BT AMT FOIA 


WAATHS GN AASV & 
ae ae wifiat yar ae Axa! ara 


ACS SSA SAT TESA & & Ul 

As long as he lives he is immersed in 
manifold afflictions, like the seed of the cotton 
amidst the down that is to be spun into thread. 
In acquiring, losing, and preserving wealth 
there are many griefs; and so there are in the 
misfortunes of our friends. Whatever is 
produced that is cost acceptable to man, that, 
Maitreya, becomcs a sced whence springs the 
tree of sorrow. 


HAA-YA- FMS YE-AA-TAM 

fara A der ait YS Ta BAS AAA & GI 
sft dong araarrafterca 
faghamarsrange Hr GS FATT Yo 
dee fafarentt ¢:aarter uftsd:| 
THAT AAT WAAR St 
FreeenfarerargreyaurawereTUM | 

eet waaay AAT 4G 8 


Wife, children, servants, house, lands, 
riches, contribute much more to the misery 
than to the happiness of mankind. Where 
could man, scorched by the fires of the sun of 
this world, look for felicity, were it not for the 
shade afforded by the tree of emancipation? 
Attainment of the divine being is considered 
by the wise as the remedy of the threefold 
class of ills that beset the different stages of 
life, conception, birth, and decay, as 
characterized by that only happiness which 
effacts all other kinds of felicity, however 
abundant, and as being absolute and final’. 


BOOK VI, CHAP. 5 


347 





TaN AAS AT: anes: uftsdtt: 

qanfeeqaitas aa alk WETTIG ott 

sited facentet fae art qatar 

ees Ut Ter fadenerqi & vit 

are Tt sala Caaasaraay 

aear gaat art ae famed! faders 2 

It should therefore be the assiduous 
endeavour of wise men to attain unto god‘. 
The means of such attainment are said, great 
Muni, to be knowledge and works. Knowledge 
is of two kinds, that which is derived from 
scripture, and that which is derived from 
reflection. Brahma that is the word is 
composed of scripture; Brahma that is 
supreme is produced of reflection*. Ignorance 
is utter darkness, in which knowledge, 


obtained through any sense (as that of 


hearing), shines like a lamp; but the 
knowledge that is derived from reflection 
breaks upon the obscurity like the sun. 

aateare deel war warraT 

AOTTIAA Trae Tet WAG 3 

x Tet Afeaed yreagel wer AAI 

Vecgarfor Freona: ut wenferresten & wit 

% faa Atenedt & sf arerdoh af: 

Uta ATMS ATT Rall 

What has been said by Manu, when 
appealing to the meaning of the Vedas with 
respect to this subject, I will repeat to you. 
There are two (forms of) spirit (or god), the 
spirit which is the word, and the spirit which is 
supreme. He who is thoroughly imbued with 
the word of god obtains supreme spirit®. The 
Atharva Veda also states that there are two 
kinds of knowledge; by the one, which is the 
supreme, god is attained; the other is that 
which consists of the Rk and other Vedas‘. 


ACTH AT aT | 

separnsy Uforaerera gH & & 

fay wert fret sreatrrearorg 

cae Ua: Wa Ae as UAT YTT Ue Ott 


TE TH TA OTT Ag as hare: | 
girarrafat wet afget: wot weg ci 


That which is imperceptible, undecaying, 


inconceivable, unborn, inexhaustible, 
indescribable; which has neither form, nor 
hands, nor feet; which is almighty, 


omnipresent, eternal; the cause of all things, 
and without cause; permeating all, itself 
unpenetrated and from which all things 
proceed; that is the object which the wise 
behold, that is Brahma, that is the supreme 
state, that is the subject of contemplation to 
those who desire liberation, that is the thing 
spoken of by the Vedas, the infinitely subtile, 
supreme condition of Visnu. 

aa Waa TET WATT: | 

STAT ATA AT: MG FU 

ud fafeahea ward TAT ara: 

Wat Bt Tat WAR TATU ot 

That essence of the supreme is defined by 
the term Bhagavat*: the word Bhagavat is the 
denomination of that primeval and eternal god: 
and he who fully understands the meaning of 


that expression, 1s possessed of holy wisdom, 
the sum and substance of the three Vedas. 


WMATA AeA Sf seo fis 

Yara wae: ead errenita: 9 

We Vea wt safer art 

AA! MTT: TARTAN 9 21 

aera wat wat wearesedgaaa: | 

tar Walaa VST TATA AAT 3 

The word Bhagavat is a convenient form to 

be used in the adoration of that supreme being, 
to whom no term is applicable; and therefore 
Bhagavat expresses that supreme spirit, which 
is individual, almighty, and the cause of 
causes of all things. The letter Bh implies the 


cherishes and supporter of the universe. By ga 
is understood the leader, impeller, or creator. 


ares eres ere aera: fare: 
We-amraata Fant wT SAAT OSI 


548 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





aara aa sett yarerafaenrcar 
PAYA NAG TAHT AAS AT: 1119 I 
Wane Weryrent waa MAA 


UUMGTAYTS ATYSTST ATT 9G 

aa rae aifen- area aaa 

VAST ATA BAA TANT: N99 1 
sata weIaa TANT AT 

afa faermfaers a anal wrafiaecn 
a- difth-aerad- aerate: 
maaan faa Farfonfatit: 9 eu 


The dissyllable Bhaga indicates the six 
properties, dominion, might, glory, splendour, 
wisdom and dispassion. The purport of the 
letter va is that elemental spirit in which all 
beings exist, and which exists in all beings’. 
And thus this great word Bhagavan is the 
name of Vasudeva, who is one with the 
supreme Brahma, and of no one else. This 
word therefore, which is the general 
denomination of an adorable object, is not 
used in reference to the supreme in a general, 
but a special signification. When applied to 
any other (thing or person) it is used in its 
customary or general import. In the latter case 
it may purport one who knows the origin and 
end and revolutions of beings, and what is 
wisdom, what ignorance. In the former it 
denotes wisdom, energy, power, dominion, 
might, glory, without end, and without defect. 


Pater ax yeh ater aTAT eT 
HAT TU Malet Agere: BAU ol 
GiseaTHaS YE: Beat: YT 
TMM SYST AAT US VU 
WAY Aad Visaaaaa B At Aq 
eet faatat Wat aTqeaea: WT: USN 
a Vayaneit faery 

Yuriy ater Aa! aaita: 
aritaatatuns Raeneat 

AAA AHARATTA & 3 


reraAraTUTUTTAAL fe 
Tapnerengary4wany: | 
Soot RAE 


SHU CL 


The term Vasudeva means that all beings 
abide in that supreme beings, and that he 
abides in all beings’, as was formerly 
explained by Kesidhvaja to Khandikya, called 
Janaka, when he inquired of him an 
explanation of the name of the immortal, 
Vasudeva, He said, “He dwells internally in all 
beings, and all things dwell in him; and thence 
the lord Vasudeva is the creator and preserver 
of the world. He, though one with all beings, 
is beyond and separate from material nature 
(Prakrti), from its products, from properties, 
from imperfections: he is beyond all investing 
substance: he is universal soul; all the 
interstices of the universe are filled up by him: 
he is one with all good qualities; and all 
created beings are endowed with but a small 
portion of his individuality. Assuming at will 
various forms, he bestows benefits on the 
whole world, which was his work. 


We aetaa A eTaMNT: 
waaay: | 
Ul: UU WaT A aA 
SAMA: Ut WATTS S&H 
a Sau aaeanfent 
ATH ARUS THETA: | 
aaut: Wa: Waa 
TARA: WHATS CEN 
Baad Or aaetere 
We wt Footer 
agyat areaferTeat At 
CHM AAAANS ASH 69 
sft sitfereaygerot Osi UA: SATA: Il 
Glory, might, dominion, wisdom, energy, 
power, and other attributes, are collected in 


him. Supreme of the supreme, in whom no 
imperfections abide, lord over finite and 


BOOK VI, CHAP. 6 


549 





infinite, god in individuals and universals, 
visible and invisible, omnipotent, omnipresent, 
omniscient, almighty. The wisdom, perfect, 
pure, supreme, undefiled, and one only, by 
which he is conceived contemplated, and 
known, that is wisdom; all else is ignorance.” 


NOTES 


1. The three kinds of affliction, inseparable, 
incidental and superhuman, are fully described in 
the commentary on the first verse of the Sankhya 
Karika in a similar strain as that which is adopted in 
the text. 

2. Some further particulars of the different hells, 
and the punishments inflicted in them, have been 
given before : see Bk. I. Ch. XIV. 

3. All this is conformable to the Samkhya 
doctrines in particular, although the same spirit 
pervades all Hindu metaphysics. 

4. Tasmat Tat praptaye yatna kartavya 
panditairnaraih 9 (TeAT Iq; Hae: 

:). The expression Tat Praptaye, ‘for the 
obtaining of that,’ refers to the phrase immediately 
preceding, Bhagavatprapti, ‘obtaining of,’ or 
‘attaining to, Bhagavat,’ the lord. 

5. Brahma is of two kinds; Sabda-Brahma, spirit 
or god to be attained through the word, that is, the 
Vedas and the duties they prescribe; and Para- 
Brahma, spirit or god to be attained through 
reflection, by which the difference between soul 
and matter is ascertained. 

6. This seems intended as a quotation from 
Manu, but it has not been found in the code; it is 2 
wenn aferet wea wd aq we wef From: a 
Tents | 

7. The commentator quotes other passages from 
the Vedas of a similar tendency, intimating, 
however, the necessity of performing acts prior to 
attaining knowledge; as, S14 BAH: wa dal WH 
q Warifa:! ‘The decoction (preparatory process) 
being digested by rites, thereafter knowledge is the 
supreme resource.’ sfamargey dat faererqaread 
‘Having crossed the gulf of death by ignorance 
(ceremonial acts), man obtains immortality by 
(holy) knowledge.’ 

8. According to the comment, allusion is here 
made to the twelve syllable Mantra, or mystic for 
mula addressed to Visnu: “Om _ Bhagavate 
Vasudevaya namah; ‘Om! salutation to Bhagavat 


Vasudeva:’ the repetition: of which, by those 
devoted (bhakta) to Visnu, is the easy mode of 
securing their liberation.” The mysticism 1s, 
however, no doubt older than the worship of Visnu; 
and the term Bhagavat is defined in the text 
according to the interpretation of the Vedas. 

9. The commentator says: these interpretations 
are from the Nirukta, the glossary of the Vedas. 
The more etymological derivation of the term is, 
Bhaga, ‘power,’ ‘authority’, and vat possessive 
affix. 

10. From the root Vas (@€), 
‘dwelling.’ See Bk. I. Chs. I and II. 


KK 


‘abiding,’ 


BOOK VI, CHAP. 6 549 





CHAPTER 6 
UBseara: 


(cafvreert-wattserafaarony) 
WIN SARA 


Tara VAAN W svat Fea: 

cenftentet wer aecfefer area eh 

arearag Aaarae AM TAA TI 

TARATA-ATANTAT ULATAT WATT 1 

AOS TATATATAT ATA AT 

qT Uae FE Paya: Wwe a 

Paradsgara said~ He, Purusottama, is also 
known by holy study and devout meditation; 
and either, as the cause of attaining him, is 
entitled Brahma. From study let a man proceed 
to meditation, and from meditation to study'; 
by perfection in both supreme spirit becomes 
manifest. Study is one eye wherewith to 
behold it, and meditation is the other: he who 


is one with Brahma sees not with the eye of 
flesh. 


aaa garg 
TTS aS Art afrants Ft aa 
We afaereant was UTA Si 


Maitreya said— Reverend teacher, I am 
desirous of being informed what is meant by 


350 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





the term meditation (Yoga), by understanding 
which I may behold the supreme being, the 
upholder of the universe. 
TUS Sara 

aa cage: We Ttsears Wea 

THT UT at as BTA TG 

Parasara said— I will repeat to you, 

Maitreya, the explanation formerly given by 
Kesidhwaja to the magnanimous Khdandikya, 
also called Janaka. 


aay Jara 
Gitsea: aisvaq gery al at Hieasts aad 
cet Tay Paral APTA TTI & 1 


Maitreya said— Tell me first, Brahman, 
who Khandikya was, and who was 
Kesidhwaja; and how it happened that a 
conversation relating to the practice of Yoga 
occurred between them. 


WUT Sara 
qe A TART Wat TaeaaT: | 
PAA Ae A Barearercaya: i 91 
ATT YaST Gard: Shea fear: 
Ua fireasrenta wifteaat waratsaad ¢ il 
antanists wiftser: yfremmraq aati 
cigars eadlaratarcataenfaenze: il <I 
mata wiser: fatartg wa 
HMA Wises: TUMBTeAU AA: 1 oll 
qeerer afatter WraalsecaR: | 
TRNATHA: BIST SUT AAS AAT 11 22H 
Sat BIST Gael AA WATT: | 
Tafaarntasra ay Fequfaeran 82 


Parasara said— There was Janaka, named 
Dharmadhwaja, who had _ two _ sons, 
Amitadhwaja and Krtadhwaja; and the latter 
was a king ever intent upon existent supreme 
spirit: his son was the celebrated Kesidhwaja. 
The son of Amitadhwaja was Janaka, called 
Khandikya?. Khandikya was diligent in the 
way of works, and was renewed on earth for 


religious rites. Kesidhwaja, on the other hand, 
was endowed with spiritual knowledge. These 
two were engaged in_ hostilities, and 
Khandikya was driven from his principality by 
Kesidhwaja. Expelled from his dominions, he 
wandered with a few followers, his priest and 
his counsellors, amidst woods and mountains, 
where, destitute of true wisdom, he performed 
many sacrifices, expecting thereby to obtain 
divine truth, and to escape from death by 
ignorance}. 

Wael eae aT UNTfaet az 

qa, AAANI-Miget fase AI 8311 

Hay WT Se AAT ef SITY UAT: | 

wafer @ ures fare fatadii evi 

Once whilst the best of those who are 
skilled in devotion, Kesidhwaja, was engaged 
in devout exercises, a fierce tiger slew his 
milch cow’ in the lonely forest. When the Raja 
heard that the cow had been killed, he asked 


the ministering priests what form of penance 
would expiate the crime. 


Y ured ad faq: ayre: yegeenfata 

wgrenty dared wre wTPTATN 84H 

WAs Yoo Tag! we Aer a aaa 

BT Wea AAR AseMs GOT TPN EN 

7 agreed dag 7 ura: arad yan 

awa Va esq: wiltsaat a frarzawi gon 

They replied that they did not know, and 

referred him to KaSeru. KaSeru when the Raja 
consulted him, told him that he knew not, but 
that Sunaka would be able to tell him. 
Accordingly the Raja went to Sunaka, but he 
replied, “I am as unable, great king, to answer 
your question as Kaseru has been; and there is 
no one now upon earth who can give you the 
information except your enemy Khdandikya, 
whom you have conquered.” 

a ag ¢ warts weary AN 

Wea Ua Vat aM ate at a sfareafen ec 

wafreasren afe yey afecaten 

TeaMfaaet arnt Aree! afaear ¢¢n 


BOOK VI, CHAP. 6 


551 





Upon receiving this answer, Kesidwaja 
said, “I will go, then, and pay a visit to my foe: 
if he kill me, no matter, for then I shall obtain 
the reward that attends being killed in a holy 
cause; if, on the contrary, he tell me that 
penance to perform, then my sacrifice will be 
unimpaired in efficacy.” 


WUT Sat 


SYRAUNGS HOM FI: 

ad WTA Gare Gfosaa: A TaTAfe: ll Vol 

ward Weter wnvsea Foyer: 

Wares wear: Wa aaa: 1 2 ei 

Pardésara continued— Accordingly he 

ascended his car, having clothed himself in the 
deer skin (of the religious student), and went 
to the forest where the wise Khandikya 
resided. When Kh&ndikya beheld him 
approach, his eyes reddened with rage, and he 
took up his bow, and said to him, 


wiftsay sara 

RUN a Haar eniaseatal 

PUNfat Aiea a aha wehweats 22H 

wT aa WBE we! seonfsrt + far 

Aat waa WaT aa: wear: fervaraar: 123 

a wang etrenta a F sitaq fatter 

Baa saa! wT Weed fT eK 

Khandikya said—- “You have armed 
yourself with the deer skin to accomplish my 
destruction, imagining that in such an attire 
you will be safe from me; but, fool, the deer, 
upon whose backs this skin is seen, are slain 
by you and me with sharp arrows: so will I 
slay you; you shall not go free whilst 1 am 
living. You are an unprincipled felon, who 


have robbed me of my kingdom, and are 
deserving of death.” 


aia Sara 
witasea! Upret we aeaTATATTA: | 
twat oe faroriag ard ares ys AH KI 


To this Kesidhwaja answered, “I have 
come hither, Khandikya, to ask you to solve 
my doubts, and not with any hostile intention: 
lay aside therefore both your arrow and your 
anger.” 

UTM Sara 
aa: @ Aba: AEP Bye: | 
TARAS THtset: Vata WENA: eG A 
agyufan aeat figte agi at: 
at g yfaat wat an ayer ufeeafin 201 
wiltgeung ary Warada A Ayre: 
aa 7 yfaat wat an aver wfaeafan ect 
Ueetataenrsy ylsat waren AA 
7 Ba ARaATa WT AT TANT 
we WAY Mrnsefeeat CNS AIAN 2811 
WNT: TATA WETS: | 
werred + fefaed aq geste aan aq 3 ott 
aaeues wiiseqatat fra 
Wet waa ad Aq YS Aare 113 21 

ParaSara said— Thus spoken to, Khandikya 
retired a while with his counsellors and his 
priest, and consulted with them what course to 
pursue. They strongly urged him to slay 
Kesidhwaja, who was now in his power, and 
by whose death he would again become the 
monarch of the whole earth. Khandikya 
replied to them, “It is no doubt true that by 
such an act I should become the monarch of 
the whole earth: he, however, would thereby 
conquer the world to come; whilst the earth 
would be mine. Now if I do not kill him, I 
shall subdue the next world, and leave him this 
earth. It seems to me that this world is not of 
more value then the next; for the subjugation 
of the next world endures for ever; the 
conquest over this is but for a brief season. I 
will therefore not kill him, but tell him what 
he wishes to know.” 

aa: wa sage moteyzadt fan 
Aaa A UTD wearer fe TOTAL 3 2 


§52 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





a Mas aaa fet! BAN Aq 

Wagan aa a aa facia 3 311 

fafemt: a At VisyaAt AeTAM 

armafingaaret as Wat: fa: HTN 3 I 

mam fafa ant dar asaya: | 

HARAETA Year FAA Urea: waa 

afer safert: We wee wa Tam 

adenfartiseqtar rats hrc aearn 3 & 

Taney Aras Tat wa farafwar 

afertnd areata an fa qa 391 

Sit afera ae Wet wT Tatafe: 

wifiseara 3 cata War a Weeaferon 3 ci 

WM AT aa Ta Ware Unie: 

Aaa! ahr teat at STAs 

Returning then to Kesidhwaja, Khandikya 

desired him to propose his question, which he 
promised to answer; and Kesidhwaja related to 
him what had happened, the death of the cow, 
and demanded to know what penance he 
should perform. Khandikya, in _ reply, 
explained to him fully the expiation that was 


suited to the occasion; and Kesidhwaja then, 
with his permission, returned to the place of 


sacrifice, and regularly fulfilled § every 
necessary act. Having completed the 
ceremony, with its supplementary rites, 


Kesidhwaja accomplished all his objects: but 
he then reflected thus: The priests whom ] 
invited to attend have all been duly honoured; 
all those who had any request to make have 
becn gratified by compliance with their 
desires; all that is proper for this world has 
been effected by me: why then should my 
mind feel as if my duty had been unfulfilled?” 
So meditating, he remembered that he had not 
presented to Khandikya the gift that it is 
becoming to offer to a spiritual preceptor, and, 
mounting his chanot, he immediately set off to 
the thick forest where that sage abode. 
Khandikya, upon his reappearance, assumed 
his weapons to kill him; but Kesidhwaja 


exclaimed, “Forbear, venerable sage. I not 
here to injure you, Khandikya: dismiss your 
wrath, and know that I have come hither to 
offer you that remuneration which is due to 
you aS my instructor. Through your lessons I 
have fully completed my sacrifice, and I am 
therefore desirous to give you a gift. Demand 
what it shall be.” 


aiisentsty dared Gaspar gaya: 

wea wa Palas FW PAT won 

Mt are Uwe wa: Tartsea! aT eT: 

TUM EPA aMaate ATTA © V1 

Franfeat war at: Wah AISA: | 

Sisé 3 aaqfrantt quer Waefeoryn ¥ 2 

at: UT Abate: ares AaraTaTa Ufera: 

trehreptcenrnise fared sretariaten x 3 tt 

TU TTS wretaThate 

aie: Weald tenmrantad Sh: y xv 

Weed ae FT: W Uifeseay versa: 

Tarratet WAIST Ta: Mea HEMT 4 I 

WaNARAAST GUAR AMT: | 

aad: wer ase ae ae fewer: sg i 

Khandikya having once more commenced 
with his counsellors, told them the purpose of 
his rival’s visit, and asked them what he 
should demand. His friends recommended him 
to require his whole kingdom back again, as 
kingdoms are obtained by prudent men 
without conflicting hosts. The reflecting king 
Khandikya laughed, and replied to them, 
“Why should a person such as IJ be desirous of 
a temporary earthly kingdom? Of a truth you 
are able counsellors in the concerns of this 


life, but of those of the life to come you are 
assuredly ignorant.” 


Sqaa Ue TF afpeast yoA 
sara fanaga wf carta yeaa ort 
aetaa we: witsrrenaaad! 
TATA AAMT TATA ARUT: 11 YS 

afe aétad Wet Waar arena: | 


BOOK VI, CHAP. 7 553 


TL SATA Ae GAT AATAN eet 
fa sifawrguey wsigt We: Se 

So speaking, he went back to Kesidhwaja, 
and said to him, “Is it true that you wish to 
make me a gift, as to your preceptor?” “Indeed 
[ do,” answered Kesidhwaja. “Then,” rejoined 
Khandikya, “as it is known that you are 
learned in the spiritual learning that teaches 
the doctrine of the soul, if you will 
communicate that knowledge to me, you will 
have discharged your debt to your instructor. 
Declare to me what acts are efficacious for the 


alleviation of human affliction.” 
2 3 3K 





NOTES 


1. Both study of the Vedas (Svadhyaya) and 
abstraction (Yoga) are to be practised : when a man 
is weary of one, he may apply to the other. The 
Yoga, however, limits the practical part of silent 
prayer, WORST: Welde AR: ytd 
“‘Wearied of meditation, let him pray tmaudibly: 
weary of prayer, let him repeat meditation.’ 
wera ude ‘By the union of 
prayer and meditation let him behold soul m 
himself.’ 

2. No such names occur amongst the Maithila 
kings of the Visnu Purana (see Bk. IV. Ch. V.); but, 
as there noticed (note 6), the Bhagavata inserts 
them. Janaka is used as a title. Kriadhvaja, in some 
of the copies, is read Ritadhwaja. 

3. The performance of rites as a means of 
salvation is called ignorance in the Vedas (see Bk. 
VI. Ch. V. n. 7). Works are recommended as 
introductory to the acquirement of knowledge: it is 
ignorance to consider them as finite. 

4. Tasya-dhenum (e184). Once copy has 
Homa-dhenu, ‘cow of sacrifice;’ another, Dharma- 
dhenu, ‘cow of righteousness.’ The commentator 
explains the terms as importing the same thing, a 
cow yielding milk for holy purposes, or for the 
butter which is poured in oblations upon the 
sacrificial fire. 

tek 


BOOK VI, CHAP. 7 553 





CHAPTER 7 
MAAS: 
(seramnProry:) 
efor Sara 
a Midd aa Hea TRS 


Wann faa werd atraroratafrany 1 en 


“But,” said Kesidhwayja, “why have you not 
asked of me my kingdom, now free from all 
annoyance? What else except dominion is 
acceptable to the warrior race?” 


witeaat sara 
Sfieran Fava wi war a wiwe aa: 
WRITS A AT TeAETaoSAays 1) Bh 
aired eat ay waraftarerty 
Sey ay Sr Tara a ATA 3 
TAH F Sat Farge waa 


BNA VATA SteaeTeTHASSTATI I 

warearferendiad URE WA 

araat dean tar edtarpeeaan 4 i 

Tet area aat wea Pat AP 

stat 4 arferdt tsafaarenrht wan gi 

The Ferafagray waraedeanra: | 

HEAT UA-Acaal FT ASST Vt 

“J will tell you,” replied Khandikya, “why I 

did not make such a demand, nor require that 
territory which is an object of ignorant 
ambition. It is the duty of the warrior to 
protect his subjects in peace, and to kill in 
fight the enemies of his sway. It is no fault that 
you should have taken my kingdom from one 
who was unable to defend it, to whom It was a 
bondage, and who was thus freed from the 
encumbrance of ignorance. My desire of 
dominion originated in my being born to 
possess it: the ambition of others, which 
proceeds from human frailties, is not 
compatible with virtue. To solicit gifts is not 
the duty of a prince and warrior: and for these 


554 


reasons I have not asked for your kingdom, 
nor made a demand which ignorance alone 
would have suggested. Those only who are 
destitute of knowledge, whose minds are 
engrossed by selfishness, who are intoxicated 
with the inebriating beverage of self- 
sufficiency, desire kingdoms; not such as J am. 
WRN Sard 

Wee: Uleata ore aa: Hirer FT: 

wiftsearad Wear seat aed am 21 

When king KeSidhvaja heard these words, 


he was much pleased, and exclaimed, “It is 
well spoken!” 


SEaaNggy aya: Hf a 

Tet artis fafaeny att: guaera qa et 

Then addressing Khandikya affectionately, 
he said, “Listen to my words. Through desire 
of escaping death by the ignorance of works | 
exercise the regal power, celebrate various 
sacrifices, and enjoy pleasures subversive of 
purity. 

fed a wat fase fadcartat vam 

FAA ASAIN: TT HATTA! Qo! 

SUT ATG ates tafe at Aft: 

afaemreananmag fear Fann 9en 


Fortunate is it for you that your mind has 


attached itself to the dominion of 
discrimination. Pride'of your race! now listen 
to the real nature of ignorance. The 


(erroneous) notion that self consists in what is 
not self, and the opinion that property consists 
in what is not one’s own, constitute the double 
seed of the tree of ignorance. 


Wayans ee Aah AeaAaT: | 

senafedhayad: Had Hafan ez it 

Sa aaa yaa: yore fe 

areas wa BH: maths weratH e381 

The  ill-judging embodied being, 
bewildered by the darkness of fascination, 
situated in a body composed of the five 


elements, loudly asserts, ‘This is I’: but who 
would ascribe spiritual individuality to a body 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


in which soul is distinct from the ether, air, 
fire, water, and earth (of which that body is 
composed?! 


aerating fe yeaaieast wi: 

Tee BNA Wa WA|Nfafa WAN wXn 
SUR YR-Uay aeeteniady Fi: 

HUT UST: TAMA HevaT 24 1 


What man of understanding assigns to 
disembodied spirit corporeal fruition, or lands, 
houses, and the like, that it should say, “These 
are mine?’ What wise man entertains the idea 
of property in sons or grandsons begotten of 
the body after the spirit has abandoned it? 


ad teria qed eal aa: 
SES Tel TAKS AMT FATA EI 
Man performs all acts for purpose of bodily 
fruition, and the consequence of such acts is 


another body; so that their result is nothing but 
confinement to bodily existence. 


yas aan Ne frat aw yearn 
Unfaeansa AMT VAY WATTIA APA: it Yo rt 


In the same manner as a mansion of clay is 
plastered with clay and water, so the body, 
which is of earth, is perpetuated by earth and 
water (or by eating and drinking). 

TET: Vays ay: 

mead ae aa: Yar watsa fee an een 
STARAAMEA CANUTE THT! 

TgAH WaTAIS HY aTAATTOP TST: ke tt 

The body, consisting of the five elements, 
is nourished by substance equally composed of 
those elements; but since this is the case, what 
is there in this life that man should be proud 
of? Travelling the path of the world for many 
thousands of births, man attains only the 
weariness of bewilderment, and is smothered 
by the dust of imagination. 


WAST aq Pisea ToiAreaniom 
wer Parcarerer art ANA: WAN Von 
Way WG et WMA: HOT: Ga 


BOOK VI, CHAP. 7 


555 





arraigned ut Fratorpasfan 2 ei 

When that dust is washed away by the 
bland water of real knowledge, then the 
weariness of bewilderment sustained by the 
wayfarer through repeated births is removed. 
When that weariness is relieved, the internal 
man ts at peace, and he obtains that supreme 
felicity which is unequalled and undisturbed. 


PATO WaT ATTA ACT: | 
SSE Tat: WHAT F ATTN 2 IH 
aera aera: wrettagrrants fe 
pregency renter uit Ta AA 2 BA 


This soul is (of its own nature) pure, and 
composed of happiness and wisdom. The 
properties of pain, ignorance, and impurity, 
are those of nature (Prakrti), not of soul. There 
is no affinity between fire and water, but when 
the latter is placed over the former in a caldron 
it bubbles and boils, and exhibits the 
properties of fire. 


COTTA: VATS RANT: | 

aad MHA eta fe BtseTT evil 
aed alert aherafaerneada wih 

SAAS oat Ae aTe FTAA 2G M1 


In like manner, when soul is associated 
with Prakrti it is vitiated by egotism and the 
rest, and assumes the qualities of grosser 
nature, although essentially distinct from 
them, and incorruptible. Such is the seed of 
ignorance, as I have explained it to you. There 
is but one cure of worldly sorrows, the 
practice of devotion; no other is known.” 


waitsey sara 


ey Ge set! adh anfagua! 
fasrrarrsreneeateat falter 2&0 
“Then,” said Khandikya, “do you, who are 

the chief of those versed in contemplative 
devotion, explain to me what that is; for in the 
race of the descendants of Nimi? you are best 
acquainted with the sacred writings in which it 
is taught.” 


afer Sara 
array waiftser! syqat meat wm 
aa Radt + aad wer getert WAT: NON 
TA Wa AAMT AUT TAMNATA: | 
aaa fararafe yart fafaast qa 2 cit 


“Hear,” replied Kesidhvaja, “the account of 
the nature of contemplative devotion’, which I 
impart to you, and by perfection in which the 
sage attains resolution into Brahma, and never 
suffers birth again. The mind of man 1s the 
cause both of his bondage and his liberation: 
its addiction to the objects of sense is the 
means of his bondage; its separation from 
objects of sense is the means of his freedom. 


fara: wares fagrrean war WP: 


fers Fa Tent UTAH Ve 

Tea AIR wage ead AAT 

feared: wae CieAreRdasy BAN 3 oll 

The sage who is capable of discriminative 
knowledge must therefore restrain his mind 
from all the objects of sense, and therewith 
meditate upon the supreme being, who Is one 
with spirit, in order to attain liberation; for that 
supreme spirit attracts to itself him who 
meditates upon it, and who ts of the same 
nature, as the load stone attracts the iron by the 
virtue which is common to itself and to its 
products‘. 


srearacratan faferer ar warafe: | 
AA Gellar Waray aro srafeeiadn 3 eh 
Tanase HATA IT: | 

ae ahrer & anit yyezetireitaran 3 BH 


Contemplative devotion is the union with 
Brahma, effected by that condition of mind 
which has attained perfection through those 
exercise which complete the control of self: 
and he whose contemplative devotion is 
characterized by the property of such absolute 
perfection, is in truth a sage, expectant of final 


liberation from the world. 


556 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





arr yet anit yaar afer 
faftrramfing at gettoeferrqn 3 31 
TATA SS ATT ATTA 
Wea Bie: et Aad 3 


fafraranteng afta ata sat 

wrens anh annfrerrpateants Ferra 34 
serraiea we Bena 

Baa Bet freaat abeaat tact Faq 3 ht 
TaeNa- iraq UaNG-aaiha Frearerary 
Hala Terfor dar WSL adh WA: BO 


“The sage, or Yogi, when first applying 
himself to contemplative devotion is called the 
novice or practitioner (Yoga yuj); when he has 
attained spiritual union he is termed the adept, 
or he whose meditations are accomplished‘. 
Should the thoughts of the former be 
unvitiated by any obstructing imperfection, he 
will obtain freedom, after practising devotion 
through several lives’. The latter speedily 
obtains liberation in that existence (in which 
he reaches perfection), all his acts being 
consumed by the fire cf contemplative 
devotion. The sage who would bring his mind 
into a fit state for the performance of devout 
contemplation must be devoid of desire, and 
Observe invariably continence, compassion, 
truth, honesty, and disinterestedness: he must 
fix his mind intently on the supreme Brahma, 
practising holy study, purification, 
contentment, penance and self-control. 


Ua at: Art: wast Var wailftar:1 
fafexaeer: aren: Freemont faqier:3 on 
Uh AAT wares OA: | 

TOTS aareeT asttet Frey aie 3 ei 
WOR SINAN Het F ATI 
wore: w fags: Wahisaet Wa Ti voit 
UTE wrote zarkreth 

Hed: UBIAT Tatar: PTAA ¥ Vi 

ae Meats: Wet we fr 
MATA MATS ATT: BAN Y Ph 


These virtues, respectively termed the five 
acts of restraint (Yama), and five of obligation 
(Niyama), bestow excellent rewards when 
practised for the sake of reward, and eternal 
liberation when they are not prompted by 
desire (of transient benefits). Endowed with 
these merits, the sage self-restrained should sit 
in one of the modes termed Bhadrdsana, etc., 
and engage in contemplation’. Bringing his 
vital airs, called Prana, under subjection, by 
frequent repetition, is thence called 
Pranayama, which is as it were a seed with a 
seed’. In this the breath of expiration and that 
of inspiration are alternately obstructed, 
constituting the act twofold; and_ the 
suppression of both modes of breathing 
produces a third”. The exercise of the Yogi, 
whilst endeavouring to bring before his 
thoughts the gross form of the eternal, is 
denominated Alambana”. 


veleaqenth Fryenenttr amfaqi 


SAAT ATAAOT MEATS TATU: th 3 
SPaaT UAT Aa Wrets freee 


SPRATT ST APTI: Ys 


He is then to perform the Pratyahara, which 
consists in restraining his organs of sense from 
susceptibility to outward impressions, and 
directing them entirely to mental perceptions. 
By these means the entire subjugation of the 
unsteady senses is effected; and if they are not 
controlled, the sage will not accomplish his 
devotions. 


MUTA Wet: Wearercat Vs: 
avg: Hatq fat da: YER yal 
When by the Prandydma the vital airs are 
restrained, and the senses are subjugated by 


the Pratyahara, then the sage will be able to 
keep his mind steady in its perfect asylum.” 


wtsay sare 
SAA A WENT! Waray A: WAPTa: | 
AAT TST STAT RAT SG A 


BOOK VI, CHAP. 7 


557 





Khandikya then said to Kesidhvaja. 
“Tllustrious sage, inform me what is that 
perfect asylum of the mind, resting on which it 


destroys all the products of (human) 
infirmity.” 
SET SaTI 

BATT Ta FRM Ta Tavita: 


TI TATIS WS i vii 

fafaer srerar sya! feeatrafarater Th 

TAST Hag T TMT ATEN STAT ¥ CII 
weranterent eet stearanfetar TT 
swatar aware fafaer wresraat ¥ 8 
CAA TY TEMA Fat: | 
HUMTATA AA SATA: WATT 4 oN 


To this, Kesidhvaja replied: “The asylum 
of mind in spirit (Brahma), which of its own 
nature is twofold, as being with or without 
form; and each of these is supreme and 
secondary”. Apprehension of spirit", again, is 
threefold. I will explain the different kinds to 
you: they are, that which 1s called Brahma, 
that which is named from works, and that 
which comprehends both. The mental 
apprehension which consists of Brahma is one; 
that which is formed of works is another; and 
that which comprehends both is the third: so 
that mental apprehension (of the object or 
asylum of the thoughts) is_ threefold. 
Sanandana and other (perfect sages) were 
endowed with apprehension of the nature of 
Brahma. The gods and others, whether 
animate or inanimate, are possessed of that 
which regards acts. 


fecrrnuifey a werennttcrar fgem 

wreneranraeny fra ATA G 81 

sraiarg way fasaarang! 

fasted wt urate ehraget TANG VI 

Were BL CAAT 

TATA TM TAA ATTN & 31 

The apprehension that comprehends both 

works and spirit exists in Hiranyagarbha and 


others, who are possessed of contemplative 
knowledge of their own nature, and who also 
exercise certain active functions, as creation 
and the rest. Until all acts, which are the 
causes of notions of individuality, are 
discontinued, spirit is one thing, and the 
universe of another, to those who contemplate 
objects distinct and various; but that is called 
true knowledge, or knowledge of Brahma, 
which recognises no distinctions, which 
contemplates only simple existence, which is 
indefinable by words, and is to be discovered 
solely in one’s own spirit. 

aa fant: Ut ROTA! 

faena THAT WAT 4 YI 

a aganngen west ga! faa aa: 

aa: Wet Bt we fea PaaTATAI GG II 

feat sary araaise warafa: . 

Treat AAA GAT ATHENA WNT: 14 & Il 

TIq-aat SAE: AH TAMA: | 

WAM: Ua: Vo: Waa: AA FAT yo 

qo! yaragerfar wai A a saa: | 

waite Past VATA ATTA & CU 

Wana BUSH AgUTISATe A 

AAAS BE AAAI & 8 I 

That is the supreme, imperishable form of 
Visnu, who is without (sensible) form, and is 
characterised as a condition of the supreme 
soul, which is variously modified from the 
condition of universal form. But this condition 
cannot be contemplated by sages in their 
(early) devotions, and they must therefore 
direct their minds to the gross form of Hari, 
which is of universal perceptibility. They must 
meditate upon him as Hiranyagarbha, as the 
glorious Vasava, as Prajapati, as the winds, the 
Vasus, the Rudras, the suns, stars, planets, 
Gandharvas, Yaksas, Daityas, all the gods and 
their progenitors, men, animals, mountains, 
oceans, rivers, trees, all beings, and all sources 


of beings, all modification whatever of nature 
and its products, whether sentient or 


558 


unconscious, one-footed, two-footed, or many- 
footed; all these are the sensible form of Hari, 
to be apprehended by the three kinds of 
apprehension. 

Wad wate fast sedans 

Waar fae: yierearagr & ot 

FOSe: WUT SHAT SAAT TTI 

staan aaara adtar yiAfTETA & Vn 

aa daggikh: a afgar zo Wan 


PAAR ATA ATA & 2 

cat ferifencara vite: Aagreiferen 

MaAyAT OTe! AAA TATA & 30 

All this universal world, this world of 
moving and stationary beings, is pervaded by 
the energy of Visnu, who is of the nature of 
the supreme Brahma. This energy is either 
supreme, or, when it is that of conscious 
embodied spirit, it is secondary. Ignorance, or 
that which is denominated from works, is a 
third energy; by which the omnipresent 
energy of embodied spirit is ever excited, and 
whence it suffers all the pains of repeated 
worldly existence. Obscured by that energy (of 
ignorance or illusion), the energy that is 
denominated from embodied spirit is 
characterised by different degrees of 
perfection in all created beings. 


STMOTACY LACTTCUT TaTaY Tats ferear 

MA AIG PASAT Tag & WN 
Uae Ware: Tagraca Tears fern 
UMA Wasaga Ta: waiferays 1g Ga 
TASHA AM-Teaa-aatet Saat FT 

WR: MARCHA HATTA & GH 
facramista ta: Ga: wavered: | 
CATT TET BUTT THAT & 1910 
See Hay SATA ATA TAM 


In things without life it exists in a very 
small degree: it is more in things that have 
life, but are (without motion): in insects it is 
still more abundant, and still more in birds; it 
is more in wild animals, and in domestic 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 


animals the faculty is still greater: men have 
more of this (spiritual) faculty than animals, 
and thence arises their authority over them: the 
faculty exists in an ascending degree in Nagas, 
Gandharvas, Yaksas, gods, Sakra, Prajapati, 
and Hiranyagarbha: and is above all 
predominant in that male (Visnu) of whom all 
these various creatures are but the diversified 
forms, penetrated universally by his energy, as 
all-pervading as the ether. 


facta faopagrer ariretet wera & oi 
aad Tau SI aq Bfeyen Fe: 
Uae: PRHAsat FT aa Wlalwar: ug en 
agvErEd a woe ted! 
MARAT AL Hallet HATH oN 


VT ART SPATS SAT ArT 19 2 


“The second!’ state of him who is called 
Visnu, and which is to be meditated upon by 
the (advanced) sage, is that imperceptible, 
shapeless form of Brahma, which is called by 
the wise, ‘That which is'*, and in which all the 
before described energies reside. Thence 
proceeds the form of the universal form, the 
other great form of Hari, which is the origin of 
those manifested forms (or incarnations) that 
are endowed with every kind of energy, and 
which, whether the forms of gods, animals, or 
men, are assumed by him (Hari) in his sport. 
This active interpcsition of the indefinable 
god, all-comprehending and irresistible, 1s for 
the purpose of benefiting the world, and is not 
the necessary consequence of works. 


aga fears wee aba FT! 
farnatayeed Pafareaeayerry nie en 
VA SgaeNa: Het cet Act: | 

wan fant faapatir wafafeaaqn 3 i 
TAT MARGATE TA UAT: | 

pala uate a g fagyar yeaa wn 
yar: @ fare weet saat: 


BOOK VI, CHAP. 7 


559 





farenratdtal Fat Bia FING 

This form of the universal form is to be 
meditated upon by the sage for the object of 
purification, as it destroys all sin. In the same 
manner as fire, blazing in the wind, burns dry 
grass, so Visnu, seated in the heart, consumes 
the sins of the sage; and therefore let him 
resolutely effect the fixation of his mind upon 
that receptacle of all the three energies (Vis 
nu), for that is the operation of the mind which 
is called perfect Dharana:" and thus the 
perfect asylum of individual as well as 
universal spirit, that which is beyond the three 
modes of apprehension, is attained, for the 
eternal emancipation of the sage. 


say Yenera! rat a sro: 


YS ATA SAM: AAT 9G i 
wd waa we watersraty- aE 

War a acon Hat afar aT aA oH 
wa wa et ed aeH fart safe: 
PATTATAEN TOT ANTE 9 CH 


The minds of other beings, which are not 
fixed upon that asylum, are altogether impure, 
and are all the gods and the rest, who spring 
from acts. The retention or apprehension by 
the mind of that visible form of Visnu, without 
regard to subsidiary forms, is thence called 
Dharand4; and I will describe to you the 
perceptible form of Hari, which no mental 
retention will manifest, except in a mind that 
is fit to become the receptacle of the idea." 

wararededt Werqaratarory) 
Garret Yfaeiolernewcrnssaery i 9 8 

ArH afaarey- area aT 

arated yfauivl-sracarenaraeraqu ¢ 0 tl 

actfaufear venir aretor ah 

weranays fawparanty agar ¢ en 

anadtergs grenferamagary 

The meditating sage must think (he beholds 


internally the figure) of Visnu as having a 
pleased and lovely countenance, with eyes like 


the leaf of the lotus, smooth cheeks, and a 
broad and brilliant forehead; ears of equal size, 
the lobes of which are decorated with splendid 
pendants; a painted neck, and a broad breast, 
on which shines the Srivatsa mark; a belly 
falling in graceful folds, with a deep-seated 
navel; eight long arms, or else four; and firm 
and well-knit thighs and legs, with well- 
formed feet and toes. 


fartda war Wer Urahara ¢ 2 

fatearenat-aearefasyirary 

PUG Vg Nel-S- AATAAT A ATTN ¢ 3 

Let him, with well-governed thoughts, 
contemplate, as long as he can persevere in 
unremitting attention, Hari as clad in a yellow 
robe, wearing a rich diadem on his head, and 
brilliant armlets and bracelets on his arms, and 
bearing in his hands the bow, the shell, the 
mace, the sword, the discus, the rosary, the 
lotus, and the arrow”. 


faaaq arr anit Gaara 

wae wag edhe aaa Fa! aM oxi 
aHaasasag at wee ae Haas 
areata ver fara fast wala at wen eu 
aa: Vg-Nel-aa-wigtetted Fa: 
PaATRTATET WIT MATITHT 6 GH 


When this image never departs from his 
mind, whether he be going or standing, or be 
engaged in any other voluntary act, then he 
may believe his retention to be perfect. The 
sage may then meditate upon the form of Vis 
nu without his arms, as the shell, mace, discus, 
and bow; and as placid, and bearing only his 
rosary. 


Ul aay NO AeA AT: 
fate-aaeyeaefant vet BATT clon 
aentaad eg deer fe gage: 
Haaasaaars wUrTay WaT 66 Ht 
ALUMI Waa ET 
aaa wrens: wefan TIN. 8H 
aeaq Herat wens fF a 


560 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





WTA earafrearer: wafer: Asha e ott 


When the idea of this image is firmly 
retained, then he may meditate on Visnu 
without his diadem, bracelets, or other 
ornaments. He may next contemplate him as 
having but one single limb, and may then fix 
his whole thoughts upon the body to which the 
limbs belong. This process of forming a lively 
image in the mind, exclusive of all other 
objects, constitutes Dhy4na, or meditation, 
which 1s perfected by six stages: and when an 
accurate knowledge of self, free from all 
distinction, is attained by this mental 
meditation, that is termed Samadhi.?! 

fagrt wrod wer ut garfor urea! 
MTU MAT OTT STAT: 11.8 2H 
Rae: BU AA aot aT A aA 

front yma & qerpet Pavan 21 
ARATAATTAAAS A TATA 

HANA NEY TATA HA WATS 3 
fares Art arerenatas ra 

BTA TaN Ware a: Hier evi 
Syme wen: wise! aftgesa: | 
dara-frennary fara fraat wan 84 i 

“(When the Yogi has accomplished this 
stage, he acquires) discriminative knowledge, 
which is the means of enabling living soul, 
when all the three kinds of apprehension are 
destroyed, to attain the attainable supreme 
Brahma”. Embodied spirit is the user of the 
instrument, which instrument is true 
knowledge; and by it that (identification) of 
the former (with Brahma) is attained”. 
Liberation, which is the object to be effected, 
being accomplished, discriminative knowledge 
ceases. When endowed with the apprehension 
of the nature of the object of inquiry, then, 
there is no difference between it (individual 
and) supreme spirit: difference is the 
consequence of the absence of (true) 
knowledge. When that ignorance which is the 
cause of the difference between individual and 


universal spirit is destroyed finally and for 
ever, who shall ever make that distinction 
between them which does not exist? Thus have 
I, Khandikya, in reply to your question, 
explained to you what is meant by 
contemplative devotion, both fully and 
summarily. What else do you wish to hear?” 


witsey sare 

afad arreea wate Fat 7A 

aaa SAT AMAT Tas & Ht 

aaa waren wera UTE 

ata! nfeg wreranfa fagaafet: neon 

sé Waafaes Sage: | 

UOT RTSTAN WI TTA TASC 

qamres Sere vad wbaRaat Hay! 

afgafenmet arr: whe: Sfresrrerats 11 e et 

Khanahikya replied to Kesidhvaja, and 
said, “The explanation which you have given 
me of the real nature of contemplative 
devotion has fulfilled all my wishes, and 
removed all impurity from my mind. The 
expression ‘mine,’ which I have been 
accustomed to use, is untruth, and cannot be 
otherwise declared by those who know what is 
to be known. The words ‘I? and ‘mine’ 
constitute ignorance; but practice is influenced 
by ignorance. Supreme truth cannot be 
defined, for it is not to be explained by words. 
Depart therefore, Kesidhvaja; you have done 


all that is necessary for my real happiness, in 
teaching me contemplative devotion, the 


‘inexhaustible bestower of liberation from 


existence.” 

WUT SAT 
aareqaren at wifased a yf: 
STAM YC Taletat: APART FA Yo ol 
waftsaastt ya Hear wart are 
ad are mifee farafgrrarra: ti go V1 
area efeaOTSTELT: | 
fama fue geoaara zafreta go 2 


BOOK VI, CHAP. 7 


561 





aioeanisty yaad taateronaype: | 

ay fara ad wean arahrafeaq 20 3 

A Acura atoranas wera 

stare fatguead aeranett ft go vil 

sta sifaenrgtrat uBigt weAA: seATT: 1 

Accordingly king Kesidhvaja, after 
receiving suitable homage from Khandikya, 
retuned to his city. Khandikya, having 
nominated his son R4ja*, retired to the woods 
to accomplish his devotions, his whole mind 
being intent upon Govinda: there his entire 
thoughts being engrossed upon one only 
object, and being purified by practices of 
restraint, self-control, and the rest, he obtained 
absorption into the pure and perfect spirit 
which is termed Visnu. Kesidhvaja also, in 
order to attain liberation, became averse from 
his own perishable works, and lived amidst 
objects of sense (without regarding them,) and 
instituted religious rites without expecting 
therefrom any advantages to himself. Thus by 
pure and auspicious fruition, being cleansed 
from all sin, he also obtained that perfection 
which assuages all affliction for ever. 


NOTES 


1. The text is somewhat obscure, but it is in 
some degree cleared up by the illustration. No one 
would think of applying the property of self— the 
idea of possession or personality— to soul, separated 
from body: but the objection is equally applicable 
to soul in the body; for whilst there it is as distinct 
in its nature from the materials of body as if it was 
disembodied, and quite as incapable of individual 
personal fruition. 

2. That is, in the race of princes of Mithila. 

3. The term Yoga (41:), which is that used in 
the text, in its literal acceptation signifies ‘union’, 
‘junction’ from 4 ‘to join:’ in a spiritual sense it 
denotes ‘union of separated with universal soul;’ 
and with some latitude of expression it comes to 
signify the means by which such union is effected. 
In the Bhagavad Gita it is variously applied, but 
ordinarily denotes the performance of religious 
ceremonies as a duty, and not for imterested 


purposes. Thus Krsna says to Arjuna, 4PRY: He 
sami! “Engaging in Yoga, perform ites, 
Dhananijaya, being indifferent to success or failure: 
such indifferences is called Yoga.” II. v. 48. It is 
elsewhere defined, ‘exemption from the contact of 
pain:’ 4@eam faart apraiedi VI. v. 23. The word 
has been accordingly rendered ‘devotion’ by 
Wilkins, and ‘devotio’ by Schlegel, in their 
translations of the Gita. In this place, however, it is 
used in a less general sense, and signifies, as is 
subsequently explained, reunion with spirit through 
the exercises necessary to perfect abstruction as 
they are taught and practised by the followers of 
Patanjali. 

4. This illustration is however only to a limited 
extent, explanatory of the nature of Yoga; for 
though the loadstone and iron unite, by virtue of a 
community of kind, yet the union that takes place is 
only that of contiguity, Samyoga (@at), not that of 
identification or unity. Tadaikyam (#¢44). Some 
further explanation therefore is required. 

5. The first stage is the Atma prayatna, the 
practice of moral and religious restraint, Yama, 
Niyama, &c. When the novice is perfect in these, 
then he is fit to attain the perfectibility of an adept, 
through the especial practices which treatises on the 
Yoga prescribe. When the mind has attained the 
state which can alone be attained through them, 
then the union with Brahma, which is the 
consequence, is called Yoga: aTeayactardanfafersrar 
Tafa: Ten watt Part aby scafaeiadi The Atma 
prayatna is defined to be that which has Yama, &c. 
for its objects, aafranfefaqa:! The next phrase, 
araraat, is explained @utAI ‘depending upon, or 
relating to, such control.’ WalMfa is the same as 

condition or state of mind which is fafrst 
perfected: of that state of mind, union with Brahma, 
is Yoga. Union with Brahma is the abstraction that 
proposes the identity of the living with the supreme 
spirit of the Jivatma, with Brahma; 
ftand Yoga is understanding of the 
identity of the contemplator and the object 
contemplated; tay ti A text of Yajfavalkya 
is quoted to this effect: wi . fats 
qq: warm amt sant slarqqaret:! 
“Know holy wisdom to be the same with Yoga’ (the 
practice of) which has eight divisions. That which 
is termed Yoga is union of the living with the 
supreme soul.’ 


562 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





6. Vinispannasam4dhi is the expression of the 
text, which can scarcely be regarded an appellative. 
The commentator terms the adept Brahmajiianin, 
“He who knows Brahma.’ 

7. After three lives, according to the Vayu 
Sanhitd, as quoted in the comment. 

8. Thcre are various postures in which the Yogi 
is directed to sit when he engages in meditation. In 
the Bhadradsana he is directed to cross his legs 
underneath him, and to lay hold of his feet on each 
side with his hands. 

9. adit ade waa It is itself figuratively the 
seeds of the fruit, which is meditation; but it is to be 
accompanied with what is also technically called 
Bija, or seed, inaudible repetition of certain prayers, 
and meditation on the visible form of the deity, 


termed likewise Alambana, and presently 
mentioned. 

10. Pranayama is performed by _ three 
modifications of breathing: the first act is 


expiration, which is performed through the right 
nostril, whilst the left is closed with the fingers of 
the right hand; this is called Rechaka; the thumb is 
then placed upon the right nostril, and the fingers 
raised from the left, through which breath is 
inhaled; this is called Piraka; in the third act both 
nostrils are closed, and breathing suspended; this is 
Kumbhaka; and a succession of these operations is 
the practice of Pranayama. 

11. Alambana is the silent repetition of prayer. 

12, siIsasaa ge fe Tea caeca Yo AAT a 
at ara ail The Brahma that is without form 
(Amirtta) may be Para or Apara. Supreme formless 
spirit is without attributes of any kind. Secondary 
formless spirit is invested with the attributes of 
power, glory, truth, perfection. Spirit embodied, or 
with form in his highest state, is, according to out 
text, Visnu and his manifestations. Spirit in an 
inferior or secondary series of bodily forms is 
Brahma and all other living beings. 

13. The term is Bhavan4, defined to be, ‘function 
to be engendered by knowledge;’ WAT: AH: 
the mental impression of apprehension following 
upon knowledge. Here it implies in particular the 
formation of a fixed idea by the Yogi of the object 
of his contemplations. It is also termed Bhava- 
bhavana, ‘apprehension of the being, the existence, 
or substantiality, of the objects; the thing 
contemplated: wat aq afgya Aaa BTasTeAtl 


14. The term used throughout is Sakti (xf), 
‘power,’ ‘ability,’ ‘energy.’ By the first kind, or 
Para, is understood knowledge able to appreciate 
abstract truth, or the nature of universal soul; by the 
second, ability to understand the nature of 
embodied soul; and by the third, inability to discern 
one’s own nature, and reliance on moral or 
ceremonial merit. These different kinds are called 
energies, because they are the energies or faculties 
of the supreme spirit, or according to the Vais 
navas, of Visnu, accompanying soul in all its 
various conditions of existence. 

15. The first, which has been intended to be 
described in the foregoing passages, was the 
universal, visible form of Visnu; the second is his 
formless or imperceptible condition. 

16. Sat (Aq), ‘what is being.’ 

17. Retention, or holding of the image or idea 
formed in the mind by contemplation: from Dhr 
(YJ), ‘to hold,’ literally or figuratively. 

18. The explanation of Dharan4 given in the text 
is rendered unnecessarily perplexed by the double 
doctrine here taught, and the attempt to combine 
the abstraction of Yoga theism with the sectarian 
worship of Visnu. 

19. The two last implements are from the 
comment; the text specifies only six. 

20. They are, 1. Yama &c., acts of restraint and 
obligation; 2. Asana, sitting in particular postures; 
3. Pranayama, modes of breathing; 4. Pratydhdara, 
exclusion of all external ideas; 5. Bhavana, 
apprehension of internal ideas; 6. Dh4rana, fixation 
or retention of those ideas. 

21. The result of the Dhyana or Samadhi is the 
absence of all idea of individuality, when the 
meditator, the meditation, and the thing or object 
meditated upon, are all considered to be but one. 
According to the text of Patafijali: ‘Restraint of the 
body, retention of the mind, and meditation, which 
thence is exclusively confined to one object, is 
Dhy4na: the idea of identification with the object of 
such meditation, so as if devoid of individual 
nature, is Samadhi;’ teeafera oro wat 
eM) deanna wera aarti: 

22. The expressions of the text are somewhat 
obscure, nor does the commentator make them 
much more intelligible, until he cuts the matter 
short by stating the meaning to be, that 
‘discriminative knowledge enables the living spirit 


to attain Brahma’: faa sera WaT Woadieaet 


BOOK VI, CHAP. 8 563 





23. The text is very elliptical and obscure. 
Having stated that embodied spirit (Ksetrajfia) is 
the Kakranin, the possessor or user of the Karana, 
which is knowledge, it adds, #1 Wt Ted literally, 
“by that, of that, that;’ i.e. Tat, ‘that which is;’ and 
Brahma, or supreme spirit, is the attainment of that 
spirit which abides in body by that instrument, or 
discriminative knowledge, of which it has become 
possessed through perfect meditation: daa: wait 
Ww su A wa al fens aed arf qa 
Read faa Fadl 

24. The commentator, in order to explain how 
Khandikya should have -given what he did not 
possess, states that it is to be understood that 
Kesidhvaja relinquished to him the kingdom; or the 
term Raji may denote merely, master of, or 
acquainted with, mystic prayers, or Mantras: “él 


Usa AaAaHA Geatl 


KKK 


BOOK VI, CHAP. 8 


563 





CHAPTER 8 
SATASEATT: 
(Freq reaTay, AOU Area TET eT!) 


WIG Sarg 
Sag alot: WH Tite: WS: 
aneafranr fagtaaat erat seafor preg en 
wrtas wirentas ae waarafer ay 
ayrgafed da waar wet wan BM 
Yar aera Wa tenleaeary4rry 
fats wager: yearataarearq 3 1 
Ta wratta! wh yawasarayy 
aeaefe amet dq Taste Aarts avi 


Pardsara said—- I have now explained to 
you, Maitreya, the third kind of worldly 
dissolution, or that which is absolute and final, 
which is, liberation and resolution into eternal 
spirit. I have related to you primary and 
secondary creation, the families of the 
patriarchs, the periods of the Manvantaras, and 
the genealogical histories (of the kings). I have 


hearing it, the imperishable Vaishnava Purana, 
which is destructive of all sins, the most 
excellent of all holy writings, and the means of 
attaining the great end of man. If there is any 
thing else you wish to hear, propose your 
question, and I will answer it. 


Wa sara 


aay! afd wed ay Versa War yz 
FASTA THAT AL TESTA TG 
fafasat: adacet qaed WTA: Hay! 
CATS ATA See Fah ATT: 1G 


wagiaa ue: waiter fafa WT! 

fag wife areds fafaer wreareatiisi 

ATE Het AAT FFA 

addefact fannie cafafteaan on 

Maitreya said— Holy teacher, you have 
indeed related to me all that I wished to know, 
and I have listened to it with pious attention. I 
have nothing further to inquire. The doubts 
inseparable from the mind of man have all 
been resolved by you, and through your 
instructions I am acquainted with the origin, 
duration, and end of all things; with Visnu in 
his collective fourfold form?; his three 
energies}; and with the three modes of 
apprehending the object of contemplation‘. Of 
all this have I acquired a knowledge through 
your favour, and nothing else is worthy to be 
known, when it is once understood that Visnu 
and this world are not mutually distinct. 


PUA S SATA S- KATATE | 

auieniaar eat fafa aayred: ie i 

wqas Agus we aH warfaer 

wate fanart! wer weerAfet An gon 

UR SMATATA AAS AAT TT 

TL erat fasteisfer A gat Ga-fereray: 1 Ve 

O Great Muni, I have obtained through 

your kindness all I desired, the dissipation of 


my doubts, since you have instructed me in the 
duties of the several tribes, and in other 


repeated to you, in short, who were desirous of obligations; the nature of active life, and 


564 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





discontinuance of action; and the derivation of 
all that exists from works. There is nothing 
else, venerable Brahman, that I have to inquire 
of you; and forgive me if your answer to my 
questions have imposed upon you any fatigue. 
Pardon me the trouble that I have given you, 
through that amiable quality of the virtuous 
which makes no distinction between a disciple 
and a child. 


WR Jard 

Ut GMM Yaot seat 

TASTY MASAI: Wea VN 

wigs wfrenigy den Aeaarafor a 

aymqartd great Wart va alfeterqn 2311 

STH SARA Sear WaT ATATAT: | 

Te FASE: FAT: HAAS TATA TAMT VXI 

TA Wise: Beard wea: | 

argard aan cat fafersaftar a1 V4 

qua: wey ASA: YOR AesaT AEN: 

Veer Warquansnttants a strarq 2é 11 

AVIA FAT ACTA Pea: | 

Yat WANT] AT: WAU: WAI Von 

Pardsara said— I have related to you this 
Purana, which is equal to the Vedas in 
sanctity, and by hearing which all faults and 
sins whatever are expiated. In this have been 
described to you the primary and secondary 
creation, the families of the patriarchs, the 
Manvantaras, the regal dynasties; the gods, 
Daityas, Gandharvas, serpents, Raksasas, Yaks 
as, Vidyddharas, Siddhas, and heavenly 
nymphs; Munis endowed with spiritual 
wisdom, and practisess of devotion; the 
distinction of the four castes, and the actions 
of the most eminent amongst men; holy places 
on the earth, holy rivers and oceans, sacred 
mountains, and legends of the truly wise; the 
duties of the different tribes, and the 
observances enjoined by the Vedas. By 
hearing this, all sins are at once obliterated. 


seafa-feata-arerat egal Hratsers: | 
Aaya: Galen Heart wary ees een 


TSAVAN WAHT Slfra MATT: | 
gary fagqead wa: faeneddafzan gen 


In this aiso the glorious Hari has been 
revealed, the cause of the _ creation, 
preservation, and destruction of the world; the 
soul of all things, and himself all things: by 
the repetition of whose name man is 
undoubtedly liberated from all sins, which fly 
like wolves that are frightened by a lion. 


ware sified sera faery 
Aageurarat anata Wags: 2 ol 
afrarraneyy Aare FUT 

wate facts Wa: UPS AATTARzAN 2 eh 
ferram-2a-3-ea-fern-fra-aragit: 
faatdgia: aetfaucarett: gt: 22M 
Baq- TATU: fastea-merd-ara: | 
STH ANA: TeeryY 1 230 
aafifirear frerafeerenferafafiream 


aeuratqetey ata Uys: evn 
aitgtfaeses tert: wadiee: 
aar-fR- ae Bea- rare: TEPTPSA BGM 
weattatia fed gerosufact fea! 
iterated was FETA VE 1 

a Ud: Wala waaett wraisa:| 
HAT MTA ANCA UTIMOTSTA: Ht V9 I 


The repetition of his name with devout 
faith is the best remover of all sins, destroying 
them as fire purifies the metal from the dross. 
The stain of the Kali age, which ensures to 
men sharp punishments in hell, is at once 
effacted by a single invocation of Hari. He 
who is all that is, the whole egg of Brahma, 
which Hiranyagarbha, Indra, Rudra, the 
Adityas, the Asvins, the winds, the Kinnaras, 
the Vasus, the Sddhyas, Visvadevas, the 
celestial gods, the Yaksas, serpents, Raksasas, 
the Siddhas, Daityas, Gandharvas, Danavas, 
nymphs, the stars, asterisms, planets, the seven 
Rsis, the regents and superintendents of the 
quarters, men, Brahmanas and the rest, 
animals tame and wild, insects, birds, ghosts, 
and goblins, trees, mountains, woods, rivers, 


BOOK VI, CHAP. 8 


565 


oceans, the subterrene legions, the division of receives the reward of an uninterrupted 


the earth, and all perceptible objects—~ he who 
is all things, who knows all things, who is the 
form of all things, being without form himself, 
and of whom whatever is, from mount Meru to 
an atom, all consists— he, the glorious Visnu, 
the destroyer of all sin— is described in this 
Purana. 


ASMA Aa: Wee I Hey 
Aeaet AAT eae ATA 2S 
Wat ERT da Her Wael 
PUTT: Mel TEA AATTAT: 12 8M 


By hearing this Purdna an _ equal 
recompense is obtained to that which is 
derived from the performance of an 
Asvamedha sacrifice, or from fasting at the 
holy places Prayaga, Puskara Kuruksetra, or 
Arbuda. 


qatar yea atoncifa a werd 

WH WHat AST HAI WHT 3 oll 
aeyHarerat ware a Fray: 
agar eft eye wreatfer ata aT eh 
aac tet Wa AE SATA 
yuorerrer fast! ayreahGrarra: tt 3 2A 


Hearing this Purana but once is as 
efficacious as the offering of oblations in a 
perpetual fire for a year. The man who with 
well-governed passions bathes at Mathura on 
the twelfth day of the month Jyestha‘, and 
beholds (the image of) Hari, obtains a great 
recompense; so does he who with mind fixed 
upon KcSava attentively recites this Purana. 


apart Mae waa ATE: | 
STII TAA Wreeataaet WAN 331 
aaArateret wart: Year yaa 
PABST Ut FSPAAUaTAH AI! 3 ¥I 
The man who bathes in the waters of the 
Yamuna on the twelfth lunation of the light 
fortnight of the month in which the moon is in 


the mansion Jyesthd, and who fasts and 
worships Acyuta in the city of Mathura, 


Asvamecha. 
Mea eoaAaAAA TT 
Wad faetgraat fra: afta: 134 I 
aia Wea: afore: | 
srelfaeate Mears Henan ae 3 «i 
Rare fad wt a aareza 
TUG AACA: TAHA: 11 319 11 


Beholding the degree of prosperity enjoyed 
by others of eminence, through the merits of 
the descendants, a man’s paternal ancestors, 
his parents and their parents exclaim, 
“Whosoever of our descendants, having 
bathed in the Yamuna and fasted, will worship 
Govinda in Mathura, in the light fortnight of 
Jyestha, will secure for us eminent exaltation: 
for we shall be elevated by the merits of our 
posterity!” 


Were fad wa wae VATA 

GI Hew: usr APATA Wareafai 3 ci 

A man of good extraction will present 
obsequial cakes to his fortunate ancestors in 
the Yamuna, having worshipped Janardana in 
the light fortnight of Jyestha. 


ara] are Wael aa HUT Warfed: | 

arat froSry Paar SAAT ACTEM T: 11 3 8 I 
aaron at: Gos aay a frarrVNrt 
STAT TATA TOT ASAT SoM 
Ua Pareikeont WaT TAA! 
GaeIMt FO AagEagUrTN ¥ 8 


But the same degree of merit that a man 
reaps from adoring Janarddana at the season 
with a devoted heart, and from bathing in the 
Yamuna, and effecting the liberation of his 
progenitors by offering to them on such an 
occasion obsequial cakes, he derives also from 
hearing with equal devotion a section of this 
Purana. This Purana is the best of all 
preservatives for those who are afraid of 
worldly existence, a certain alleviation of the 


566 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





sufferings of men, and remover of all 


imperfections. 
STM WW Wes BAA BUSA: | 
mY: Praga WA AATAsTaITI & 21 
anh: waftars wrart a arnary 
Oa Ua Wels TT: ATAATSATH ¥ 3 I 
TION Yeas Wert a atari 
THAT TATA AMT WON AU YI 
ANAS AMAT ses ATTRA fet! 
ag fea: We Acar SPIT Si ¥ 4 
HAN GT eatedenwas At A 


Water MATA Arora AT wat 

Weardehaet Tat wat eet 

ad waft da arene strat Yor 

Wala dararae yore 

afyisarera TATA wyfa TAT SCI 

Tarte qt Wa? aaraq afer fare 

ATOM Hearty Weara se I 

This Purana, originally composed by the Rs 
1 (Narayana), was communicated by Brahma 
to Rbhu; he related it to Priyavrata, by whom 
it was imparted to Bhaguri. Bhaguri recited it 
to Tamasitra‘, and he to Dadica, who gave it to 
Sarasvata. From the last Bbrgu received it, 
who imparted it to Dhrtaradstra the Naga king, 
and to Purana of the same race, by whom it 
was repeated to their monarch V4suki. Vasuki 
communicated it to Vatsa, and he to ASsvatara, 
from whom it successively proceeded to 
Kambala and Elapatra. When the Muni 
Vedasiras descended to Patala, he there 
received the whole Purana from these Nagas, 
and communicated it to Pramati. Pramati 
consigned it to the wise Jatukarna, and he 
taught it to many other holy persons. Through 
the blessings of Vasistha it came to my 
knowledge, and I have now, Maitreya, 
faithfully imparted it to you. You will teach it, 
at the end of the Kali age, so Samika’. 

Sea UT Tet afore 

a: suns ae: we: @ aafest! WRAY ol 


faqaarayeng: wreameagt: | 

aM at waeae a: sponfer fay FEA & vi 

altered Guerrero 

HATA SMATAAAG A A WHA Vl 

Whoever hears this great mystery, which 
removes the contamination of the Kali, shall 
be freed from all his sins. He who hears this 
everyday acquits himself of his daily 
obligations to anccstors, gods and men. The 
great and rarely attainable merit that a man 
acquires by the gift of a brown cow, he derives 
from hearing ten chapters of this Purana*. 
Gea Uenet JON Fea: Heat WA, 
aa TaN VATA TATA 
art TIAITTEed Barat fet 
a went + deraseafaanet serra TENT & 3 

He who hears the entire Purana, 
contemplating in his mind Achyuta, who is all 
things, and of whom all things are made; who 
is the stay of the whole world, the receptacle 
of spirit; who is knowledge, and that which is 
to be known; who is without beginning or end, 
and the benefactor of the gods— obtains 
assuredly the reward that attends the 
uninterrupted celebration of the Asvamedha 
rite. 

Gael WIGENTATS Vel MT TT a:, 

TEATS RAAT TAT TTT | 

THUY Yor; UAT WaT US] ATA, 

MCAT TAL AAR a fese les & BI 

He who reads and retains with faith this 
Purana in the beginning, middle, and end of 
which is described the glorious Achyuta, the 
lord of the universe in every stage, the master 
of all that is stationary or moveable, composed 
of spiritual knowledge, acquires such purity as 


exists not in any world, the eternal state of 
perfection, which is Hari. 


aferrenmtad alfa ath caniste afer, 
fact aa fraforararrrar gransfa catsera: | 


BOOK VI, CHAP. 8 


567 





ain data a: feaalsneteat yar earaera:, 
fa fas weet sents fact aarega alfa & 
The man who fixes his mind of Visnu goes 
not to hell: he who meditates upon him regards 
heavenly enjoyment only as an impediment: 
and he whose mind and soul are penetrated by 
him thinks little of the world of Brahma; for 
when present in the minds of those whose 
intellects are free from soil, he confers upon 
them eternal freedom. What marvel therefore 
is it that the sins of one who repeats the name 
of Achyuta should be wiped away? 
a 4 gerd weer ara a ahr: 
ay wey a aad 3 faa at aga daa, 
Aaa GT Uma ad: far aT St: TAATIN | Gh 
net a: fren fated gers qech Wa) 
taal Warner: Tareraara ray) 
afer gain waoikatrerst writ a mara, 
Fort wate ofa age art a art af: neon 
Should not that Hari be heard of, whom 
those devoted to acts worship with sacrifices 
continually as god of sacrifice; whom those 
devoted to meditation contemplate as primary 
and secondary, composed of spirit; by 
obtaining whom man is not born, nor 
nourished, nor subjected to death ; who is all 
that is, and that is not (or both cause and 
effect); who, as the progenitors, receives the 
libations made to them; who as the gods, 
accepts the offerings addressed to them; the 
glorious being who is without beginning or 
end; whose name is both Svaha and Svadha’; 
who is the abode of all spiritual power; in 
whom the limits of finite things cannot be 
measured'’; and who, when he enters the ear, 
destroys all sin? who is substance that knows 
not change. 


arse ae TT ae aaa Te 
ated wear uftonnfaateae 
aera wyafaacrag, 
Ret TASTAT YRRATATETA ETN C11 


I adore that ever inexhaustible spirit, who 
assumed sensible qualities; who, though one, 
became many; who, though pure, became as if 
impure, by appearing in many and various 
shapes; who is endowed with divine wisdom, 
and is the author of the preservation of all 
creatures. 


Was ASTTNPT Ages Ua, 
Walsayrg sa oifarrmd:| 
TA TASH THT WETTIG BH 
I adore him, who is the one conjoined 

essence and object of both meditative wisdom 
and active virtue; who is watchful in providing 
for human enjoyments; who is one with the 
three qualities; who, without undergoing 
change, is the cause of the evolution of the 
world; who exists of his own essence, ever 
exempt from decay. 


WNT Yay 
amare yaaa 
VMNPAT TITIAN ae 

TARTANA WERT § 011 


Sarena aT 
SA DICE ODI MEDI DT 
Ga: AaRAaA RT aATTHTT 
SAA VENA Wel AaTSTeAN & Vh 


I constantly adore him, who is entitled 
heaven, air, fire, water, earth, and ether; who 
is the bestower of all the objects which give 
gratification to the senses; who _ benefits 
mankind with the instruments of fruition; who 


is perceptible, who is subtile, who is 
imperceptible. 
ofa fafarnrer ae a 


WHA Bade 

mtaeTg qa 
shasmrsraifeant a Fae & 21 
ofa sifanrgrmat agist SER: SRATT: II 


568 


THE VISNU-PURANAM 





May that unborn, eternal Hari, whose form 
is manifold, and whose essence is composed 
of both nature and spirit, bestow upon all 
mankind that blessed state whieh knows 


neither birth nor decay! 
* % 


NOTES 


|. The term is Brahmani layah (wef @a:), 
which means, ‘a melting away,’ ‘a dissolution’ or 
‘fusion,’ from the root Li (#1), ‘to liquefy,’ ‘to 
melt,’ ‘to dissolve. 

2. Or with Visnu in the four modifications 
described in the first section, spirit, matter, form, 
and time: sce Bk. [. Ch. II. 

3. Or Sakti, noticed in the last chapter Ch. VII. 

4, Or Bhavanas, also described in the preceding 
section, Ch, VII. 

5. This month is also called Jyesthamtla, which 
the commentator explains to mean, the month, of 
which the root or cause (Mila) of being so called ts 
the moon’s being full in the constellation Jyestha: 
but it may be so termed, perhaps, from the lunar 


asterism Mila, which is next to Jyestha, falling also 
within the moon’s passage through the same 
month. 

6. This name is also read Tambamitra. One copy 
has Tava-mitraya, ‘to thy friend,’ as if it was an 
epithet of Dadhicha; but the construction of the 
verse requires a proper name, ‘Bhaguri’ gave it to 
Tambamitra, and he to Dadhici:’ ‘“Mmftefatiara 
aera a waar! 

7. A different serics of narrators has been 
specified in the first book, Bk. 1. Ch. 1. 

8. This seems to be an injudicious interpolation; 
it is not in all the copies. 

9. The words or prayers employed in presenting 
oblations with fire. 

10. The text has, afer arf at afar frat 
avafat Mana commonly means ‘pride,’ but here it 
scems most appropriately rendered by its radical 
import ‘measure:” the measures which are for the 
determination of measurable things are not 
applicable to Visnu. : 


END OF THE SIXTH BOOK 
amafad sifaargrror 


HERE ENDS THE VISNU-PURANAM 


