IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, VOL.9 No.1 , January 2009 
 
363
Manuscript received  January 5, 2009 
Manuscript revised January 20, 2009 
Analysis Of Acoustic of “OM” Chant To Study It’s Effect on 
Nervous System 
Ajay Anil Gurjar , Siddharth A. Ladhake, Ajay P. Thakare 
Prof_gurjar1928@rediffmail.com  
Sipna’s College of Engineering & Technology, Amravati (Maharashtra), India 
 
 
Summary 
OM does not have a translation. Therefore, the Hindus consider 
it as the very name of the Absolute, it is body of sound. In the 
scriptures of ancient India, the OM is considered as the most 
powerful of all the mantras. The others are considered aspects 
of the OM, and the OM is the matrix of all other mantras. It has 
been recognized that the Mantras have beneficial effects on 
human beings and even plants. The syllable OM is quite 
familiar to a Hindu. It occurs in every prayer. Invocation to 
most gods begins with this syllable. OM is also pronounced as 
AUM. The syllable OM is not specific to Indian culture. It has 
religious significance in other religions also. Although OM is 
not given any specific definition and is considered to be a 
cosmic sound, a primordial sound, the totality of all sounds etc. 
The entire psychological pressure and worldly thoughts are 
removed by chanting OM Mantra .To systematically understand 
the sound ‘OM’ and its effect on nervous system is the 
endeavor of this research work. With proposed algorithm 
analysis has been carried out for the divine sound OM. By this 
analysis we could conclude OM is therefore serves as a brain 
stabilizer, which is also an energy medicine for human being 
under stress.  
Key words: 
OM Mantra, Pitch, Frequency Modulation, 
Nervous system, Energy Medicine 
1. Introduction 
OM Mantra itself is not a mere human invention, going 
long with particular cultures or groups. Rather, the OM 
Mantra (or AUM Mantra) is a symbol of deep realities 
that already exist. The levels of gross (A), subtle (U), and 
causal (M), and the states of waking (A), dreaming (U), 
and deep sleep (M) are definitely there, regardless of the 
symbolism captured in the mantra when stated as AUM 
Mantra [1][2]. It is these realities that are most useful in 
our spiritual practices. If the OM mantra is repeated just 
for the feeling, having no sense of meaning at all, the 
experience can be quite pleasant, calming, and balancing 
[2]. However, if one has a sense of the deeper meanings 
of the mantra, and different methods of using it, then the 
experience can be even richer and more revealing as one 
progress in yoga meditation. By experimenting with the 
various methods, one of them may emerge that feels most 
personally in tune. The use of this mantra can be 
profound. At first, it is best to use the mantra gently and 
for short periods of time. The insights from the OM 
mantra can be significant, and it is good to integrate the 
insights gradually with daily life. 
2. Om Mantra and Methods of Practice 
 It is proposed by Swami Jnaneshvara Bharti that there 
are many rhythms in the body and mind, both gross and 
subtle. The sound of OM, rising and falling, at whatever 
speed is comfortable and natural. It may be very fast, 
several cycles per second. Or it may be slower, several 
seconds for each cycling of OM Mantra. Or it might 
become extremely slow; with the mmmmmm... sound 
continuing in the mind for much longer periods, but still 
pulsing at that slow rate. It is somewhat like one of these 
vibrations:  
 
OMmmOMmmOMmm...  
OMmmmmOMmmmmOMmmmm...  
OMmmmmmmmOMmmmmmmmOMmm
m.  
 
This kind of awareness of the OM mantra can be used 
both at meditation time and during daily life. The OM 
mantra is allowed to be somewhat of a constant 
companion. It brings a centering, balancing quality to 
daily life. This doe’s not mean being in a dull, lethargic 
state. Rather, done well, it brings clarity of mind and a 
greater ability to be in the world, and selflessly serving 
others. This is not intended as a blocking mechanism to 
prevent dealing with one's thought process or with the 
challenges of life. It is not a method of escapism. 
However, it definitely can have the effect of bringing 
focus to the mind, which can break a pattern of disturbing 
or distracting thoughts coming from the noisy or 
chattering mind. In this way, one has a greater openness 
to being aware of positive thoughts and spiritual realities 
that are always there, different methods are proposed to 
practice OM mantra [3]. 


IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, VOL.9 No.1, January 2009 
 
 
364
One method: Imagine the sound of OM Mantra 
internally, in the mind only, making no external sound. 
Allow the mantra to flow with the breath. Repeat like 
this:  
 
Exhale: "OMmmmmmmm..."  
Inhale: "OMmmmmmmm..."  
Exhale: "OMmmmmmmm..."  
Inhale: "OMmmmmmmm..."  
Exhale: "OMmmmmmmm..."  
Inhale: "OMmmmmmmm..."  
        Another method: Alternatively, imagine the OM 
mantra only on exhalation, if that feels more 
comfortable:  
Exhale: "OMmmmmmmm..."  
Inhale: "      (silence)      "  
Exhale: "OMmmmmmmm..."  
Inhale: "      (silence)      "  
In this practice, you come to experience the mind, breath, 
and mantra flowing in unison. This synchronization has a 
beautiful effect on meditation. Simply allow the OM 
Mantra to come and go with each inhalation and 
exhalation. Allow there to be no gap, no space, no pause 
between inhalation and exhalation, or between exhalation 
and inhalation. When the word OM is heard, what is the 
concept and object that comes to mind? What is that 
thing that goes along with that word, OM? The concept 
that goes with OM is the one-ness or entirety of the 
universe. The object that goes with the word OM is the 
entire universe, as a single unit, including the gross, 
subtle, causal planes of reality, both manifest and un-
manifest. It means that whole, as if it was one, single 
object. It is that infinitely huge object, which is the object 
that goes with the word OM.  There is a feeling of 
stretching, as if the attention had to get bigger and bigger, 
to contain the whole, the same way as the chair has a 
back, a seat, and legs, yet is collectively a chair. Continue 
to repeat OM, and continue to expand, so as to allow 
your attention to contain the whole of the object called 
OM. In other words we can say that it becomes imbued 
within the consciousness of the person listening or 
sounding it i.e chanting meditation [4]. 
 3. Chanting Meditation 
It means keeping a not-moving mind and perceiving the 
sound of your own OM. Perceiving your voice means 
perceiving your true self or nature. Then you and the 
sound are never separate, which means that you and the 
whole universe are never separate. Thus, to perceive our 
true nature is to perceive universal substance. With 
regular chanting, our sense of being centered gets 
stronger and stronger. However, when we do chanting 
meditation correctly, perceiving the sound of our own 
voice and the voices all around the sound of the voice. 
Ultimately, we learn that chanting meditation is not for 
our personal pleasure, to give us good feeling, but to 
make our direction clear. Our direction is to become 
clear and enlightened, in order to save all beings from 
suffering… What’s important is to perceive the sound 
and become one with it, without making “I” and 
“sound.” At the moment of true perceiving, there is no 
thought, no separation, only perceiving sound. This is 
the crucial point. So during chanting time, perceive your 
own voice and the voice of others, just perceive this bell 
or drum sound, and cut off all thinking. Then your 
wisdom will grow, you will get enlightenment, and thus 
save all beings. 
4. Database 
 Recordings of OM chanting served as a database of this 
experiment. The recordings were made in a quite room 
at 44.1 kHz sampling rate using a close-talk microphone. 
All files were segmented manually. Male and female 
speakers of age group 30 to 40 years did the entire 
recording in evening time after a days work before 
dinner by sitting in a padmasana position, which is best 
position for mediation. Recording is done for about 10 
minutes. 
5. Technique and Concept used 
This section gives a brief introduction of the concepts 
and techniques utilized. The proposed algorithm is  
1) Recording of the OM chant using a close-talk 
sensitive microphone in the windows ‘. wav’ format. 
2) Digitizing the analog waveforms with the help of a 
MATLAB using a sampling rate of 44.1 KHz. 
3) Start & end point detection to resize wave file  
4) Segmentation of complete chant into OM samples. 
5) Dividing each OM sample into overlapping frames to 
determine average pitch (fo). 
6) Frequency modulation with maximum frequency 
deviation 2fo. 
 
The configuration of the computer used for analysis was 
a Pentium IV 2.66 GHz with 512 MB RAM running on 
Microsoft Windows XP Media Center Edition Version 
2002 with  
Service Pack 2. The software used for analysis was 
MATLAB 7.0.0 (R14b).  
 


IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, VOL.9 No.1, January 2009 
 
 
365
Since the professional studio recording was a stereo 
recording, it was recorded as 44.1 KHz 16 bit stereo 
audio file for duration spells of ten minutes each. In the 
stereo recordings, the first Channel data was obtained 
using MATLAB software and used for further analysis. 
In this Research work, the ten-minute recording has been 
scientifically analyzed.  
6. Analysis Results 
Waveforms of Frequency modulation by OM chant are 
presented below 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TIME(sec)
FREQUENCY
TIME FREQUENCY ANALYSIS OF OM MANTRA USING SPECTOGRAM
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
-2
-1
0
1
2
TIME(sec)
AMPLITUDE
TIME FREQUENCY ANALYSIS OF OM MANTRA USING FM
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
TIME(sec)
AMPLITUDE
FREQUENCY MODULATED SIGNAL
Fig. 1 Depicts the chanting of  “OM” by a male speaker and frequency modulated waveform. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, VOL.9 No.1, January 2009 
 
 
366
TIME(sec)
FREQUENCY
TIME FREQUENCY ANALYSIS OF OM MANTRA USING SPECTOGRAM
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
-4
-2
0
2
4
TIME(sec)
AMPLITUDE
TIME FREQUENCY ANALYSIS OF OM MANTRA USING FM
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
TIME(sec)
AMPLITUDE
FREQUENCY MODULATED SIGNAL
Fig. 2 Depicts the chanting of  “OM” by a female speaker and frequency modulated waveform. 
7. Conclusion 
From above observation it is clear that in the initial part 
of FM signal carrier swing is more which is due to initial 
OM chanting. As we go on chanting OM mantra, the 
mind becomes calm. When the mind becomes calm, the 
body relaxes, and the breath becomes even soother and 
slower. That rate of speed at which the OM mantra is 
being repeated naturally slows down. It is not a matter of 
forcing the mantra to slow, but rather, this slowing comes 
quite naturally. Allow the mind to stay wide-awake and 
alert, as the OM mantra and breath become naturally 
slower and slower. Within minutes your mind and body 
begin to relax, negative thoughts are dramatically swept 
away to releasing this internal life force that heals the self 
on a cellular level, with more energy, strength and focus. 
The electrical activity presents throughout the body and 
is a by-product of the activity within every living cell  
 
changes. It is all due to biofeedback. This effect is shown 
graphically by final part of OM chant, for this carrier 
swing is less and uniform. 
 
From this we could conclude that chanting OM mantra 
results in stabilization of brain, removal of worldly 
thoughts and increase of energy. It means that 
concentrating on OM mantra and continuously doing it 
slowly shifts our attention. It is reflection of the most 
fundamental interlocking processes in our bodies…the 
harmony we play echoes the harmonic relationships of 
every vital system i.e. our heartbeat, our breathing, our 
brainwaves pulsing, our neuronal firing, our cells 
throbbing, our metabolic, enzymatic, and hormonal 
rhythms and our behaviors in our addictions and our 
habits. In this sense OM mantra is a brain stabilizer, by 
practicing it one can enter deeper and deeper into the own 
natural state, which is also an energy medicine for human 
being under stress.  


IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, VOL.9 No.1, January 2009 
 
 
367
References 
[1] “The 
Meaning 
of 
Om” 
from 
http://www.omsakthi.org/worship/mantra.html 
[2] “The 
OM 
chant” 
from 
http://www.divinegold.com/meditation
/meditationchants.htm 
[3] Om mantra & seven methods of Practice from 
http://www.swamij.com/om-mantra.htm 
[4]  “Mantra Meditation” from  
 
http://www.meditationiseasy.Com/mC
orner/techniques 
Mantra_meditation.htm. 
[5] Stigsby, B., J.C. Rodenburg, and H.B. Moth. 
"Electroencephalographic Findings during Mantra 
Meditation (Transcendental Meditation):A Controlled, 
Quantitative Study of Experienced Meditators." 
[6] John G. Proakis, Dimtris G. Manolakis, and 
1999.Digital 
Signal 
Processing: 
Principles, 
Algorithms and Applications. Prentice-Hall of India 
Private Limited, India 
[7] Fast Fourier transforms - Wikipedia, the free 
encyclopedia 
[8] Ajay Anil Gurjar, Siddharth A. Ladhake, “Time-
Frequency Analysis of Chanting Sanskrit Divine 
Sound “OM” Mantra”. International Journal of 
Computer Science & Network Security, Vol. 8 No. 8 
pp. 170-175 (Aug-2008) 
 
 
Ajay Anil Gurjar received master’s 
degree   in   2002  in   Electronics   Engg. 
from  Sant     Gadgebaba       University 
Amravati,   India.   He  has  13  years   of 
teaching experience. He is currently 
working as Assistant Professor in Dept. 
of Electronics & Telecomm at Sipna’s 
College of Engineering &    Technology, 
Amravati (India). His main research  
interests include Speech   signal 
processing; Image processing, Wavelet 
transform and pursuing PhD in speech processing. He is a 
member of IETE & ISTE. He has published 5 papers in 
National & International Journal & Conferences on speech 
signal. He has awarded junior research fellowship from CSIR in 
1995.                                                                                                                         
 
Siddharth A. Ladhake received 
master’s degree in   1990 & PhD in 2004 
in 
Electronics 
Engg 
from 
Sant 
Gadgebaba University Amravati, India. 
He has 25 years of teaching experience. 
He is currently working as Principal at 
Sipna’s College of Engineering & 
Technology, 
Amravati 
(India). 
Previously he was holding a post of 
Professor from 1999 to 2005 at College 
of Engineering Badnera. His main research interests include 
Signal processing, Image processing, Code conversion, 
Multivalued logic etc. He is a fellow member of IETE & 
member of ISTE, IE & IEEE. He has published 24 papers in 
National & International Journal & Conferences. 10 students 
are doing PhD under his guidance.  
 
 Ajay P. Thakare received master’s                           
degree in 1996 in  Electronics Engg.   
from 
Sant 
Gadgebaba 
University 
Amravati, India. He was an Assistant     
Professor in Ethiopia for 3& 1/2 years 
and worked as Section Head of   
Communication Tech. Department in   
the Defense  Engineering College Debre 
Zeit, Addis Ababa Ethopia, East  Africa. 
He  has 19 years of teaching experience 
He is currently working as Professor in Department of 
Electronics & Telecommunication at Sipna’s College of 
Engineering & Technology, Amravati (India). His main 
research interests include Signal processing; Electromagnetics, 
Smart Antenna, Microwave Communication and pursuing PhD 
in the area of Antenna Switching feed network. He is a member 
of IETE & ISTE. He has published 5 papers in National & 
International Journal & Conferences. 
