http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                  1 of 30 
 
 
 
Vastu for House 
The eBook details the world of Vastu Shastra. It covers the topics Principles of Vastu 
Shastra, Vastu Residential Land, Vastu Shastra House, and Interior Decoration. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                  2 of 30 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Overview …………………………………………………………………………………. 3 
Chapter 1 - The Principles of Vastu Shastra ………………………………………. 4 
Chapter 2 - The Vastu Residential Lot or Land …………………………………… 7 
Chapter 3 - The Vastu Shastra House ……………………………………………… 17 
Chapter 4 - Vastu and Interior Decoration …………………………………………. 26 
Conclusion ………………………………………………………………………………. 29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                  3 of 30 
 
 
OVERVIEW 
Vastu Shastra a refined combination of ancient Hindu traditions developed as an art, 
analyzed as a science, and interpreted astrologically can lead the way into healthy 
living. There is a universal call for world peace hence the smallest unit of the society like 
the family should raise their offspring in an environment that knows the meaning of 
peace.   
 
The ebook details the world of Vastu Shastra; it teaches us how to recognize a land 
suitable as a vastu for a house that will receive magnetic energy from elemental forces: 
the Sun, the Earth, the Sky, the Air, and the Water.   
Discover how ancient principles and practices interpret the value of land in terms of 
shapes and other geographical characteristics. How even the debris and rubbish 
unearthed can play an important part on the quality of the land we build our house on. 
Understand how and where we should position ourselves in order to receive the sun’s 
unseen benefits. We all wish to live a life as peacefully and comfortably as we can and 
a simple knowledge of the positive elemental influences can help us achieve what we all 
hope for.  
Learn the importance of laying out your house in a manner that will ensure a 
harmonious balance between you and nature. The objective is to become open to 
positive elemental influences and at the same time become protected from unseen 
malevolence. Positive vibrations can bring happiness through excellence in health and 
business dealings while the negative vibrations can bring grief and losses. There is a 
purpose in each location and positioning. What we do as dwellers in a house designed 
as per vastu shastra can be aptly guided by the way our rooms are positioned.   
Vastu Shastra is a vast field and it may take more than this ebook to acquire 
specialization. Some basic knowledge on what are favorable and unfavorable will help 
us develop our own instincts to recognize a suitable land, a correct alignment, and an 
ideal location. Understanding the scientific reasons will help us appreciate the logic of 
ancient traditions which may very well help us to achieve what has been elusive for so 
long: happiness, contentment, and inner peace.   
 


http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                  4 of 30 
 
    
CHAPTER 1 - THE PRINCIPLES OF VASTU SHASTRA 
India in the richness of its culture and tradition has some helpful tips to share with us on 
how we can design our homes or any kind of building for that matter. It lies in the basic 
principle that for man to get the maximum benefits of life’s energy giving sources, he 
must keep his bodily placement in balance with nature. The guiding principles are 
embodied in the ancient tradition known as Vastu Shastra.  
Roughly translated Vastu means land to live on and Shastra has reference to harmony 
and balance of man with nature. Vastu Shastra teaches us on how we can lay out our 
house design so that we as human beings can get the maximum benefits of the natural 
forces given-off by nature. Basically, this system deals with the five elements in Indian 
Mythology namely, air, water, earth, fire, and sky which are believed to be sources of 
natural power. 
These five elements in ancient Hindu beliefs are said to be capable of giving off energy. 
How we, as human beings absorb this energy rely on where we are positioned. 
Therefore a good enough knowledge and understanding about the art or science of 
vastu shastra helps us appreciate its traditional values.  
Before we get into details about vastu shastra, let us first have a clearer concept about 
the five elements and its significance to human life. Ancient Hindu tradition believes that 
the Earth was formed 460 million years ago and it started out from being just a big fiery 
ball. Hindu theory has it that it possessed magnetic forces that caused a surface to be 
formed out of the rocks that melted through the passing of time. As magnets have it, 
there is the existence of two poles: the North Pole and the South Pole.  
Then there came the creation of space represented by the sky, the air inherent in 
space, or vacuum, the earth which is the solid surface, the water which comprises ¾ of 
the earth’s surface and the fire which is natural to the sun.  
Sky something that denotes space, a vacuum endless and infinite yet holds an 
unimaginable power that can reach our earthly existence. 
Air the gasses biologically needed by all living things on earth whether for subsistence 
or for ecological balance. 


http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                  5 of 30 
 
 
Water believed to be rainfall from the skies which filled up the gaps and low lying areas 
of the Earth. 
Earth that which was formed out of the molten rocks and which attracts all other 
elements because of its great magnetic force. 
Sun the bearer of fire and the main source of life on earth. It plays an important part in 
vastu shastra since it is worshipped as the personification of God being the potential 
source of creation. If we are to really think about it, life without the sun is like having the 
main switch turned-off. 
The invisible powers emanating from these elements can come in all directions. It is a 
must therefore to know where we can position our property, our house as well as our 
physical beings in order to receive the natural life forces.  
POSITION 
 
 
 
BENEFITS 
North - 
 
 
 
Happiness and Calm  
East -  
 
 
 
Abundance of wealth 
South - 
 
 
 
Shortage of female members or tragedies 
West -  
Stomach and sexual troubles to occur among male 
members 
North West -   
 
 
Unhealthy rivalry that can cause trouble  
South West -  
 
 
Brings conflict with the son 
South East -   
 
 
Death will be dreaded 
Center of the House -  
 
Suffer from heavy monetary losses 
Vastu Shastra adapts its principles by revolving its concept in the huge power of the 
Sun to reach man’s existence on earth. A mere fraction of the Sun’s heat is enough to 
sustain the life and continuous existence of living things in a place as distant as the 
Earth thus the placing of a structured habitat to receive the most of the energy from all 
elemental forces is rendered important. 


http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                  6 of 30 
 
 
The methods and the techniques adhered to in order to achieve the benefits of vastu 
shastra are based on both myths and scientific explanations. The following are the basic 
objectives of the vastu shastra ideology:   
Dharma or Religion: The goal is to achieve spiritual happiness among the dwellers of 
the house and this can be best achieved by letting natural energy forces do the job. As 
we deal with family, friends, businesses, and people within the community, we often 
show respect and deference by observing the teachings of our religion. Thus we 
promote harmony by manifesting our religious maturity. 
Arth or Wealth: The objective is to gain wealth as this will provide the dweller comfort 
and luxury. 
Kama or Desire: The goal is to have the house and entire family members attain their 
heart’s desires for those that cannot be bought by way of money. As long as harmony 
and contentment fill the various rooms of the vastu house, real and intangible desires 
will be realized.       
Moksha or Salvation: Being human is being vulnerable to the worldliness of our 
environment hence the soul craves for salvation or redemption as a way of cleansing 
the soul. The positive energy forces that surround us in our environment will steer us to 
do what is good and what is best. 
The use of vastu shastra to fill in our dwellings with positive energy forces can help us 
achieve the four main focus of our human existence; hence we will go through this life 
with much satisfaction and contentment. 
*** 
 
 
 
 
 


http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                  7 of 30 
 
 
CHAPTER 2 - THE VASTU RESIDENTIAL LOT OR LAND   
A house should be constructed on a good vastu or land to live on. Hence care and 
proper selection should be exercised when choosing to buy a property you intend to 
build your house on.  
As we have come to an understanding that different cosmic energy fields reach our 
place of existence here on earth, the benefits we derive from them rely on the paths 
where these solar and magnetic energy meet at certain points on the Earth’s surface. 
Hence importance is placed on how we should position our lands and homes while 
these different types of energy emit their life giving powers on Earth.  
The sunbeams during the morning are bearers of profuse and positive energy quite 
beneficial to the body, while afternoon sunbeams which can easily tire the human body 
are best avoided because they are not useful. For this purpose, energy coming from 
different directions is treated in different ways. Energy received from Northeast direction 
to Southwest direction is to be stored in the body since the Northeast is a positive pole 
and the Southwest is a negative pole. Hence in constructing our homes or buildings, the 
Northeast side should have wider openings while the Southwest should have smaller 
openings. 
The principle behind this is to get as much positive energy as possible to achieve 
maximum potential for development and growth. Thus these will all start with the land 
upon which we build our energy receptacle or house.  
Here are some helpful learning guides when acquiring lots or lands for your buildings or 
edifices:   
Geographic Qualities of the Vastu Land 
Shapes of the Lot or Land 
Vastu Shastra recommends square or rectangular shapes of lands. However, since  
perfectly shaped lands are hard to come by, vastu recommends what is known as the 
Sherdah or one where the land is wider in front and coming out narrower at the rear.  
 


http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                  8 of 30 
 
 
There is also the favorable vastu known as Gaumukhi wherein the front part is narrower 
compared to the rear part where the lot is wider.   
The Plot or Land Facings 
1. A lot facing Northeast is a good site for homes, factories, and offices. 
2. A lot facing Northwest is ideal for trading, business, and industrial sites. 
3. A lot facing Southeast is good for chemical, petro-chemical, and electricity-
related industries. 
4. A lot facing Southwest can bring good business for night time activities.  
5. Plots facing a road in more than one direction can also be significant in vastu 
principles.  
• Land facing the West road brings fame and popularity. 
• Land facing a South road is ideal for business ventures. 
6. Plots facing two-side roads : 
• Lots facing North and East roads are good for overall prosperity. 
• Lots facing East and South roads foretell prosperity for female residents. 
• Lots facing South and West roads as well as those facing North and South 
roads will provide moderate fortune. 
• Lots facing West and North roads are considered as prosperous lands. 
7. Lots facing roads on three sides, one side of which leads to a road end or facing 
a T-junction are considered as not ideal or weak plots.  
8. The best plot of all is the lot facing roads on all sides.  
The Quality of Soil  
Land that has good soil quality is perfect for cultivation where agricultural production 
can prosper. Land with too many rocks, worms, humus, and thorny trees are not 
promising sites.  Black and clay-like soil is hardly suitable for building sites which is also 
true for soil with crumbly rock composition. Soil considered as perfect for construction 
use are those that are yellowish in color.  
 


http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                  9 of 30 
 
 
Vastu Shastra also gives importance to the different debris materials found in the soil 
during excavation processes of construction. Vastu guiding principles make use of them 
as indicators as to how the land fared during the past.  
Listed below are the equivalent interpretations for each material dug out of the soil 
during excavation proceedings: 
Stone  
 
 
 
Abundance of wealth 
Bricks   
 
 
 
All types of riches and possessions in the future 
Copper or metals    
 
Affluence in life 
Coal    
 
 
 
Illnesses and loss of health and wealth 
Bones of animals   
 
Hindrance to future developments 
Snake or Scorpion   
 
Stumbling blocks to progress in construction 
Anthill or Termites   
 
Damage to wealth and lessening the longevity of life 
Straw or Eggs  
 
 
Death leading to pointless expenses 
Cotton   
 
 
 
Grief 
Pieces of wood 
  
 
Need to vacate the place 
Skull   
 
 
 
Intense quarrels and litigation procedures 
Horns of cow  
 
 
Wealth and abundant possessions 
Gold or silver coins  
 
All kinds of comforts and luxuries   
Zinc or brass  
 
 
Wealth and comforts 
Rugs or torn clothes 
 
Conflict, quarrels, and strife 
Iron or steel pipes  
 
Death or Extinction 


http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                  10 of 30 
 
 
Effects of Roads near the Plot  
North / Northeast - 
Ideal for women and for business activities as this will 
ensure wealth  
East / Northeast - 
Promotes upward trend in life especially among men; useful 
for newspaper offices / presses / photo studios / media 
industries, and residences 
South / Southeast - 
Best for women as it brings happiness as well as excellence 
in finance 
East / Southeast - 
Tends to make the residents greedy but brings more 
expenses 
North / Northwest - 
Instability and lack of discipline and may lead to unlawful 
deals 
West / Northwest - 
Good for businessmen with its quality to improve attitude 
and behavior 
South / Southwest - 
Indicates accidents and bad habits for women and can lead 
to trouble  
West / Southwest -  
Indicates frequent feuds, strife, and financial instability 
Other Things to Consider while Buying Land 
1. Triangular, diamond, and L-shaped lots are unpromising and therefore should not 
be purchased. 
2. Lands that are cut in the corner or takes the shape of a headless body should be 
avoided. 
3. Extensions on some portions of the land found on the Northwest side are not 
good. They are believed to be causes for losing fortune or money.  On the other 
hand, extensions on the Northeast side are said to be bearers of wealth, 
happiness, and fame. 
4. Avoid plots that are humped at the center which tend to slope on all sides. If at all 
possible, choose a land where the north east half or the solar half is lower than 
the south west half or the lunar half.  Adhering to this geographical make up  


http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                  11 of 30 
 
 
ensures the natural flow of light, solar energy, and polar energy. Vastu principles 
maintain that these types of land bring happiness, good children and all kinds of 
successes to the home dwellers.  
5. Land obstructed on the North, Northeast, or East side by hills, tall buildings, or 
towers blocks the Sun and will be prevented from beaming down on your 
property. Hence, this type of land becomes unpopular. On the other hand, if the 
obstructions are found on the west or south side of the property which will render 
your property protected from the harmful heat of the sun, the property now 
becomes a favorable choice and it will bring health, wealth, and happiness.   
6. Land located near electrical power stations or large electric poles on the 
Northeast side of the plot does not complement the property with good vibrations. 
7. If you are buying property near a temple, hospital, factory, or other public places, 
there should be a distance of at least 80 feet away from the public places. This is 
to ensure that the shadow of the temple or public building will not loom over your 
house. 
Magnetic Fields and Influences 
Each and every land we find ourselves possesses unseen magnetic forces that can 
attract other elemental emissions. The strength or the density depends on how we have 
positioned ourselves, possibly right in the path where these unseen forces meet or 
about a meter away or even just remotely so.  
Vastu tradition advises that square plots are ideal for house construction because there 
is concentration of energy in these types of lots. Unseen by us are several round 
rotational lines revolving within the house, vibrations that we do not see but we can at 
least slightly feel. It is a feeling that we instinctively recognize when we sometimes enter 
certain rooms or buildings. 
Hence an understanding about the shapes, purposes, and where openings are located 
whether North, East, South, or West enable us to receive certain magnetic influences. 
Consult a vastu expert as they readily recognize the geographical shapes as a whole in 
order to determine how and where the influences of these magnetic forces come from. 
We can hardly recognize the shape as square or rectangular once we are faced with the 
vastness of a land. Professional help can also give us correct directional intuition as to  
 


http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                  12 of 30 
 
 
North, East, South, or West directions. Our objective is to find the best land for a 
construction as per vastu.   
Myths and Rituals about the Vastu or Land 
I. 
There are certain properties considered unsuitable based on myths:  
1. Property being sold due to insolvency. 
2. Property belongs to persons suffering from leprosy. 
3. Property owned by lunatics or demented individuals. 
4. Property of persons who intend to leave the country or those who have left the 
country. 
5. Property near meat shop, workshop, laundry, and shoe shop. 
 
As a matter of propriety, land donated to a temple, assigned to a watchman of a village, 
acquired through charitable trusts, and those without any title deeds are not suitable for 
purchase. 
II. 
Bhoomi Pooja or Ritual in Preparing a Land for Construction 
 
Vastu Shastra provides that the land to be used for construction should undergo certain 
rituals to make them suitable. Listed below are the different steps in the ritual 
proceedings: 
• After acquiring the property, cultivate and grow plants on the land. Prior to using 
the land for construction, make preparations for clearing out the land. Dirt, debris, 
humus, and all kinds of rubbish should be removed from the land including the up 
root of thorny plants and bushes. 
• Commence setting up the property during a most favorable time under a most 
favorable constellation. To ensure accuracy, a qualified astrologer should give 
advice as to the proper time to set up the land for construction. Commonly known 
as favorable days to observe such rituals are usually on Mondays and 
Thursdays.  
• Do not start on the construction if a female member of your household is more 
than seven months pregnant. 
• The groundbreaking ceremony should be done when the sun is in the northern 
hemisphere and when days are longer than nights; usually this transpires from 
June 21 to December 20. 
 


http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                  13 of 30 
 
 
 
• Construction work once it commences should be unrelenting although work 
during the day should stop at sunset. It is unadvisable to continue working during 
the night. There should be a qualified engineer to oversee the construction 
project. 
• Storing of the building materials should be done in the Southwest or Southeast 
corner of the property under construction. The warehouse should be positioned 
at least a meter away from the property boundary. Guards securing the property 
should stay in a house at the southeast corner to ensure danger away from 
thieves. 
• Recycling old construction materials to build a new house or building is definitely 
out of the question under the Vastu Shastra principles. Old materials should be 
sold if still suitable and the money from the sale should be used to buy new 
materials.  
 
The First Construction Goal: The Well or Water Source 
The first construction project to deal with in building a new house is the well or water 
source. It is prescribed under vastu shastra that the water source will be dug on the 
North or Northeast side of the property. To locate the most ideal site to dig the well, you 
should draw a line from the Southeast corner to Northeast corner and mark your well to 
the right or left of the line and not on it.  
Below are the vastu guidelines for the Well:   
1. To ensure that the water derived from the well is pure, a ritual should be first 
performed on the land at an astrologically favorable time. A downward-facing 
constellation is said to be the best astrological time to dig the well.   
 
2. Traditionally and ideally, the well should be round. 
 
3. It is located either on the Southeast corner or Northeast corner in a spot where it 
will be exposed to five hours of sunlight each day. 
 
4. Wells are not recommended to serve two properties. 
  
 
 


http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                  14 of 30 
 
 
The Compound Walls and Gates 
The compound walls and gates are required to be built before the actual construction of 
the house or building goes underway. Favorable constellations are also influential 
during the actual construction of these walls and the agreeable days on which to 
commence the construction should fall on a Monday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday. 
Construction of these compound walls should begin from the Southwest side. 
As a matter of vastu shastra practice, the compound wall should not be higher than the 
house to be built. The height of these walls if possible should not be uniform; the 
Southwest part of the wall should be higher than the rest. Other provisions require that 
the walls on the North and East side should be shorter by 21 inches than the wall on the 
West and South sides. 
However, if this is not possible, the North and East sides should maintain at least a 
lowered difference of 3 inches than the West and South sides. For this matter, it is ideal 
to install two gates for the compound so that evil forces that enter one gate will make an 
exit to the other gate. Take note however that the South side should not be used for 
gates.  
Obstructions in front of the Main Gate 
Several obstructions to the main gate can be enumerated and thus be avoided because 
these obstructions bring ill effects: 
Big Tree -  
This obstruction can cause detriments to the progress of 
children 
Gutter or Ditch - 
This connotes grief and sorrow  
Open Well -                        This is negative since it equates with mental problem 
Corner of another building -  
This too concerns mental unrest instability  
Water drain -  
 
Income will be drained by unnecessary expenses 
 
 


http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                  15 of 30 
 
 
Straight street -  
 
 
Can shorten the life span of residents  
 
Dilapidated house or walls - 
This has a negative effect on prosperity 
 
Staircase railings -   
 
Often associated with sadness  
Pillars - 
Electric or telephone posts can affect the well being of 
female members 
However, the existence of a public road to separate obstruction from the property will 
lessen if not void the deficiencies. In a similar manner, if the distance between the 
obstruction and the house results to a difference that is twice the house’s height, the 
effect of the deficiencies will be nullified. 
The Trees and Plants on the Property 
As much as trees and plants provide natural adornment to the property, there are also 
certain considerations and norms to be observed in keeping with the vastu shastra: 
1. Planting should be done during favorable constellations. Seedlings should be 
grown initially in clay pots before being planted on the grounds. Tulasi plants are 
recommended plants for vastu shastra. 
 
2. Trees are best planted on the North, Northeast, East, or in front of the house. 
However, they should not to be planted directly in front of the main entrance 
since a shadow will loom over the entrance. 
 
3. Grow an even number of trees and should be grown on the South or West side of 
the house; it would be ideal if grown on both sides. It is not advisable to plant 
trees on the North, Northeast, or East side of a building.  
 
4. Large trees should not be planted too near the house since their roots might 
damage the foundations of the building and the compound wall. For that matter, 
do not allow tree branches to touch the house. Besides, large roots tend to 
absorb much sunlight and will compete with the dweller’s own need for the sun’s 
energy. 
 
 


http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                  16 of 30 
 
 
5. If a tree is to be removed because of its negative effect, it should be done in the 
months of Magh or Bhadrapada. Worship the tree and express your apologies for 
cutting it before finally removing it and make sure that it will fall East or North 
ways. Vow to plant a new tree in its place then do it within the next three months.   
 
6. Thorny plants except roses should not be planted at all while creepers should be 
grown only in a garden with their own support to prevent them from crawling up 
the building.  
 
Parking Lot 
The Northwest corner of the property is the ideal location for the parking lot but it should 
not be connected to the compound wall or the main building. While parked, cars should 
face east or north and not facing south; otherwise, the car owner will be destined to 
travel a long way. The parking garage should be painted with a light color.  
 
*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                  17 of 30 
 
 
CHAPTER 3 - THE VASTU SHASTRA HOUSE  
Supporters of vastu shastra firmly believe that a house built without integrating vastu 
principles is dangerous. Total disregard of the cosmic influences makes a household 
vulnerable to all that can be possibly negative. As we struggle against conflict, we will 
continuously go through life with serious complications. Believers maintain that all else 
happening is never too late to adhere to vastu principles as there are corrective steps 
that can be taken to become sturdy and progressive.  
Under Vastu Shastra, the house should be constructed with the following views in mind: 
The Main Doors and Windows: 
• Make sure they are located in the East. Placements may be modified as Northeast, 
East of Northeast, or North of Northeast. This location allows the positive energy to 
flow into the room. As an added feature it even suggests the swastika symbol to be 
placed on the door aside from suggesting heavy decorations as adornment.  
 
• Vastu house construction recommends that the house should have two points of 
entry. They should not be set in a straight line and the one which is used as an exit 
door should be smaller and must have only one shutter.  
 
• The main door being larger than the other doors should be equipped with two 
shutters. A recommended material for a door to bring in good balance is teak. 
 
• For a main entrance to be ideal, vastu shastra prescribes the following: 
 
• The main entrance should not face a wall and a door opening to the next room 
should be provided 
• Make sure that a shadow does not loom on the main door 
• It is not advisable to position the main entry point at the center of the house or in 
the extreme corners 
• It is also important in vastu principles that the main entrance should not face road 
intersections or dead end roads 
• There shouldn’t be large trees or imposing lamp posts that appear to be blocking 
the entrance 
• If there is a short flight of stairs leading to the main entrance, the number of steps 
should be kept even 
• It is not advisable for two houses to share a single main entrance 


http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                  18 of 30 
 
 
• If a main entrance door is located in the south side of the building, remember that 
it is best if a balcony or veranda is affixed to it 
The Living Room 
1. In keeping with the traditional spots for living room you can have it at the forefront 
of the house, wide, and as large as you please. This is because the living room 
ranks first in the vastu shastra household. However, take heed as to where the 
dwellers are supposed to face while inside the room. Facing the East can give 
good results while facing the North could also be beneficial provided the living 
room 
is 
situated 
at 
the 
front 
side 
instead 
of 
front 
center. 
 
2. Don’t construct your living room on the west side or south side of your front room 
as these spots will not give-off the correct vibrations of the cosmic energy. 
 
3. You can keep more than one door for living rooms in accordance with vastu 
shastra but keep it in the right location. Keep this room beautiful and decorate as 
well as you can to promote a life with little strife and with much enjoyment. 
 
4. Be careful where you position yourself if you are in this room. If it will be used for 
discussions or business deals observe your seating arrangements. As the owner, 
take a seat that faces towards the East and your guests or business associates 
should sit facing the south or west. This seating arrangement will give you victory 
on the negotiation aspects.   
The Bedrooms 
1. For male family members, vastu places their bedrooms in the West or Northwest 
since this section holds commanding and authoritative forces. 
 
2. For female family members, the South or Southeast will ensure good health and 
happiness if their bedroom doors and windows are located here. 
 
3. Main 
or 
Master’s 
Bedroom 
is 
suitably 
located 
at 
the 
Southwest. 
 
4. Bedrooms of adult married children are also ideally placed here at the Southwest. 
For that matter if there is a second story level, the master’s bedroom should be 
located on the said second level. It would be unwise to choose this area for 
children’s 
bedroom 
as 
it 
is 
said 
to 
cause 
trouble. 
 
 


http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                  19 of 30 
 
 
5. It is not advisable for newly wed couples to use the east side for their bedroom as 
it is said to bring bad luck. 
 
6. The 
following 
bed 
habits, 
norms 
and 
decors 
should 
be 
observed: 
 
 If one is sleeping as a guest, he should not sleep with his head facing north. 
Otherwise the bedroom owner should sleep heads facing east or south while 
sleeping 
 
 As one rises out of bed he should set his right foot first on the floor. 
 
 If one studies in the room the east side should be used to achieve best 
results. 
 
 Northwest and Southside of the bedroom is ideal place for putting the 
wardrobes, while TVs and heaters should be located in the Southeast corner.   
 
 If there should be a bathroom within the room, it is best to put it in the west or 
north 
sides 
of 
the 
room.  
 
 It is not advisable to put safes in the bedroom but if necessary, place the safe 
on 
the 
south 
wall. 
 
 
Place something on the southwest corner of the room since it is not 
advisable 
to 
keep 
this 
spot 
empty. 
 
 
Photos, calendars, idols, or statues should not be kept in bedrooms. 
 
 
Never keep the room in total darkness, instead keep a night bulb lighted. 
 
 Recommended colors for bedroom walls are light rose, dark blue, or dark 
green 
but 
never 
white 
or 
light 
yellow.    
 
7. Vastu provides the following pointers for the children’s bedroom: 
 Children’s bedrooms are best located in the Northwest or Eastside of the 
house. 
 
 


http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                  20 of 30 
 
 
 There should be vacant spaces in the North side and East side in a children’s 
bedroom. If a space could not be provided, place the child’s bed at the South, 
West, or Southwest corner. 
 
 The directions of their head while laid in their beds should be on the East side 
with the legs placed towards the west side. This is said to attract energy that 
will bring intelligence and memory power. 
    
The Bathroom 
1. Vastu places the West and South for the bathroom and provides that the flow of 
its drain should be towards Northeast. This position has something to do with the 
sun 
falling 
on 
the 
body 
after 
a 
good 
bath. 
 
2. Positioning of the toilet should be at the West or Northwest of the room at a level 
of 
30 
to 
60 
cm 
above 
the 
ground. 
 
3. If the bathroom is structured as an attachment to the building, it should be 
positioned on the West or Northwest and never on the Northeast side. 
 
4. Bathtubs and sinks are best located on the Northeast, North, or East side of the 
room. 
The Dining Room 
1. Vastu recommends the dining room to be near or attached to the kitchen and 
situated   either at the Southeast, Northwest, or Northeast corner of the house. 
To encourage profitability coming in, place the dining room at the West side of 
the 
building. 
 
2. It is best to keep in mind not to place your kitchen at the Southwest corner of the 
house since it is said to obstruct financial increase and brings certain detriments 
to 
the 
health 
of 
its 
dwellers. 
 
3. You can place the dining table at the center of the house but make sure that it is 
not 
situated 
towards 
the 
Southwest 
corner. 
 
 


http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                  21 of 30 
 
 
4. Positioning the kitchen on the ground floor and the dining room on the upper floor 
is said to be improper since carrying food while crossing stairs is in itself 
improper. 
 
5. During mealtime, the proper table places should have the head of the family 
facing the East while the rest should either face East, West, or North. It is said 
that placing a family member in a position facing the South will result to petty 
quarrels.  
 
6. Make sure that the door of the dining room area does not face the main entrance 
of 
the 
room. 
 
7. The dining hall area must have a door to the East, North, or West and should not 
be 
decorated 
with 
arches. 
 
8. Dining tables should either be square, rectangular in shape or never round, egg-
shaped, or irregular. Dining tables attached or folded against the wall are not 
advisable. 
 
9. There should be water and wash basin in the East or North but never in the 
Southeast 
or 
Southwest 
corner 
of 
the 
room. 
 
10. Landscape paintings or portraits of nature will permit a happy atmosphere in the 
dining area. In addition keep the dining room positive by painting the walls with 
light 
blue, 
yellow, 
saffron, 
or 
light 
green 
hues. 
 
11. Toilets are best kept as not annexed to the dining room although there’s no harm 
for the laundry room to be near the dining room.  
The Kitchen 
1. Position the kitchen at the Southeast, although placing it in the Northwest can 
also be desirable. Whichever of these locations get occupied by the kitchen 
should also consider the cook who should be placed at the East. Avoid using the 
Northeast part of the house for kitchens; it’s bound to bring negative vibrations 
concerning 
family 
relationships 
and 
finances.  
 
 
 


http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                  22 of 30 
 
 
2. The location of the sink where the tap water should be located at the Northeast 
and must not be near the stove or fire area since situations like this will hold back 
peace 
and 
mutual 
love 
within 
the 
family. 
 
3. It is a must to avoid placing the kitchen at the Northeast corner since conflict 
among 
family 
member 
will 
always 
take 
place. 
 
4. Storage shelves and attics should be in the South and West particularly those 
that are heavy.  
The Pooja or the Prayer Room 
1. The pooja room is ideally placed at the Northeast corner of the house preferably 
on the ground floor; if this isn’t possible, alternative areas can be East, South, 
and 
West 
but 
never 
on 
the 
Northwest. 
 
2. Although we may explore areas here as to where we can have the Gods give 
more attention to our prayers, we should not forget the fact that our Gods can be 
prayed too almost anywhere because it is our faith and devotion that will be 
looked 
upon. 
 
3. Pictures and icons of the gods to be worshipped should face either the East or 
the West, while the person in worship should face either the East or the North. 
The altar should not be attached to the wall but instead kept about 2.5 cm away 
from 
the 
wall.  
 
4. If possible, it is good for a Pooja room to be pyramid in shape sloping inward and 
pointing upwards to the roof. But it is more important for the pooja room to have a 
door 
with 
two 
shutters. 
 
5. Pooja room should not share a common wall with the toilet or be placed opposite 
the bathroom or the toilet. This is in keeping with the pooja room being kept 
fragrant aside from being kept clean and clutter free since the room is a 
receptacle for blessings. It shouldn’t be situated above electrical appliances or 
gas stoves either as there are a lot of external energy emanating from these 
gadgets. 
  
6. White, light blue, or light yellow are the perfect colors for the pooja room. 
 
 
 


http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                  23 of 30 
 
 
The Study Room 
1. The Northeast of the house is the perfect spot for a study room. To make its 
location a more beneficial, place it next to the pooja or prayer room. When using 
this 
room 
be 
sure 
that 
you’re 
facing 
East 
or 
North. 
 
2. The library section should take the West side but not in the corners. Avoid 
placing your bookshelves in the Northwest or Southwest; having them on the 
East, 
West, 
or 
North 
of 
the 
room 
will 
give 
better 
benefits. 
 
3. The Northeast corner is the best for a study room. If the study room and place of 
worship 
room 
are 
adjacent 
then 
it 
is 
considered 
most 
beneficial. 
 
4. Provide this room with a two-shuttered door located at the North, Northeast, or 
West of the room while set your windows on the East, North, or West of the 
room. 
 
5. Similar to the prayer room, setting up a pyramidal study room will allow a good 
place 
for 
meditation.   
 
6. Have the study room painted either with white, sky blue, cream, or light green to 
give it the right touch.  
 
The Swimming Pool (or Underground Water Tank, Wells, and Bore-Well) 
1. The swimming pool, underground water tank, wells, and bore-wells are ideally 
constructed in the East or Northeast of the property; another choice would simply 
be the North side as these are favorable spots outside of the house. 
 
2. As water denotes a positive flow of cash, bank balances, and good credit for the 
residents, take note that the flow of the swimming pool or water item should 
begin from the Northeast side going to the East side or from the Northeast side 
going 
to 
the 
North 
side. 
 
3. For more positive results, the slope inside a swimming pool should begin from 
the West to the East if the pool is located at the North side. On the other hand, if 
the pool is located on the East side of the property, the slope in the swimming 
pool 
should 
begin 
from 
the 
South 
to 
the 
North.   
 


http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                  24 of 30 
 
 
4. Wells and tube wells are also ideally placed on the Northeast corner of the 
property; otherwise the home owner is bound to suffer from financial losses 
based on Vastu Shastra studies. 
The Overhead Water Tank 
1. Contrary to underground water tanks, the overhead water tank should be placed 
Southwest as the best location or West corner as an alternative location in the 
corner buildings. Neither should the overhead water tank be placed in the middle 
of 
the 
building 
roof. 
 
2. Placing the overhead water tank in the Northwest corner is acceptable only if the 
tank is small and located about a meter away from the building’s corner roof. 
 
3. In the correct location, the overhead water tanks should be placed elevated on a 
platform 
about 
a 
meter 
from 
roof 
level.  
 
4. If possible choose overhead tanks that are light colored and not made of plastic. 
If plastic tanks could not be avoided, make it black or dark blue plastic to avoid 
microbial 
growth 
usual 
in 
water 
containers. 
 
5. Ideally, there should be a separate water tank for the kitchen where water is used 
for food handling and for the bathroom where water is used for general cleaning 
purposes.    
The Balconies and Verandahs 
1. The balcony can achieve good health and wealth if it is incorporated at the 
Northeast of a house being constructed. If the house is already constructed and 
a balcony was placed in the Southwest, this should be corrected by enclosing it 
with 
glass 
or 
screen 
affixtures.  
 
2. The floor or roof of a balcony should be at a lower level than the floor of the main 
building. 
 
3. A slanted tin balcony roof where the corners of the structure are not rounded 
comprises 
a 
good 
balcony 
or 
verandah 
feature. 
 


http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                  25 of 30 
 
 
4. Avoid arches and planting creepers on the verandah while flower pots should be 
kept 
in 
minimal 
sizes. 
 
5. Seating arrangements on the verandah should be set on the South or West 
sides. While provisions for shoes to be removed upon entering the house from 
point of the verandah, should be at the Northeast.  
The Staircase 
A staircase which is considered as a heavy installation is preferably situated in the 
South or West part of the house. Do not utilize the North or East part of the house for a 
staircase as it denotes conflict between heavy objects being placed on light zones. 
Should a home dweller insist on putting the staircase on the North or East side of the 
house, it is highly probable that the household will suffer loss of wealth. 
The following are some Vastu Shastra tips in installing a staircase for your house: 
1. In coming up with a staircase, the total number of stairs should not end with a 
zero, for example 10 or 20 steps. Neither should they end with even numbers 
since Vastu Shastra believes that this makes possible the idea of starting your 
climb with the right foot. The right foot is equated with gain while the left foot is 
associated 
with 
loss. 
 
2. Circular 
stairways 
are 
not 
recommended. 
 
3. The doorway meeting the top of the stairway should be at least 20 cm lower than 
the 
doorway 
located 
at 
the 
bottom 
of 
the 
stairs. 
 
4. Broken 
stairs 
should 
immediately 
undergo 
repairs. 
 
5. The prayer room, safe, or toilet should not be placed directly under a staircase. 
 
*** 
 
 


http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                  26 of 30 
 
 
CHAPTER 4 - VASTU AND INTERIOR DECORATION 
In dealing with the interior decoration of a vastu shastra house, a good understanding of 
the zones is required. There are positive and the negative zones which vastu shastra 
aims to balance. These zones deal with placing light objects and furnishings on the 
positive zones while the heavy ones should be kept at the negative zones. Positive 
zones are located at the North, East, and Northeast while negative zones are located at 
the South, West, and Southwest.    
Placement of Furniture 
• 
The ideal spots for the couches and chaise lounge sets are in the south and west 
portion of the room. The person sitting on a couch should make sure that he or 
she is seated facing the North or East directions.   
• 
Beds should be positioned pointing to the southwest direction of the room.  
• 
Bureaus or drawers containing valuables such as cash or jewelry are best kept in 
southwest portion of the room. 
• 
The dining table is best found in Northwest of the kitchen, living room, or dining 
room.  
• 
Study table will bring better results if situated in the North or East of the room.   
• 
Place aquariums in the North, East, or Northeast since they are light and water 
bearers as well. 
Decors and Fixtures 
Paintings and Statues – Vastu Shastra encourages the use of paintings that depict 
natural scenery, for example waterfalls, sunrise, mountains, flower fields, and the likes. 
Do away with war scenes and other forms of conflict and violence since they obviously 
do not promote peace and harmony. Statues of God and deities should have a proper 
niche in the prayer room but take care in choosing its location. Heavy statues should not 
be placed in the Northeast of the room or the house. 
Mirrors: These objects should find suitable places in the North or East wall of the 
rooms. However do not place them on walls opposite the bed or put them in a study 
room. 
Indoor Plants: Do not put large plants in the Northeast of the house nor use cactus and 
other thorny plants as your decor.   


http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                  27 of 30 
 
 
Curtains: Bedrooms are best fitted with light colored curtains while dark colored 
curtains are suitable only for the living room. In choosing dark colored curtains, red and 
black are not the favorable hues. 
Ceilings: Keep ceilings flat since elevated ceilings have less appeal for Vastu Shastra 
concept.  
Lightings: The house should be kept brightly lit to bring more positive vibrations to the 
house; avoid keeping rooms dimly lit.  
Floorings: Flooring materials recommended by Vastu Shastra are mosaic, ceramic 
tiles, and marbles; white marble tiles for regular rooms are not appropriate. Use white 
marble tiles for pooja or prayer rooms since this will prove favorable.  
Paint Colors: Choose light shades of colors of blue and green aside from the naturally 
light shades of pink and cream. Exclude red and black from your choices as they are 
not recommendable hues for house paints.  
Electrical Appliances: Heat emitting appliances like gas, ovens, and microwaves are 
best kept in the Southeast directions. TVs, audio, and video players are best located at 
the North, East, and Southeast of the room. Take note not to install electrical appliances 
in the Northeast corner of the room.  
Colors and their Vastu Impact 
As colors can stir different feelings and emotions, Vastu Shastra also puts emphasis on 
colors that will bring positive influences in our home. The following colors are 
considered complimentary to natural forces.  
Red: The Red is complimentary only for decors and ornaments since its bright hue can 
liven up an otherwise disciplined environment. It is a color symbolic of bravery and 
power and has an energizing quality. However, refrain from using it as your wall paint 
particularly the bedrooms since it can also produce stressful effect.  
Orange: Similar to the red hue, this color is strong and vibrant and at best is used for 
decors and ornaments. It encourages positive feelings of happiness, joy, and good 
relationships. Its variation into a light color can be found in peach-like tints and will make 
the color suitable for curtains and wall paints. 


http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                  28 of 30 
 
 
Green: A color that represents nature which brings hope, freshness, and harmony; it 
denotes energy forces for quick healing, good health, and calmness to the room. This is 
the reason why most hospitals use this color in their environs. This color is suitable for 
the study room as it relaxes and readies the mind for absorption of ideas.     
Yellow: It promotes patience and wisdom and carries the sunlight aura. Rooms that 
receive direct sunlight are discouraged from being painted with yellow colors. However, 
the pooja or prayer room is an ideal choice for applying the yellow color.  
Blue: A cool color that is symbolic for spring and new growth as well as relaxation. 
Bedrooms and the prayer room can function well if painted with this color. 
Purple: A color symbolic of faith encourages respect and trust. However, avoid painting 
the entire room with this color as it tends to be over-powering. Its variation into a lighter 
hue is the lilac or lavender which can now render itself as suitable for bedroom walls.  
White: This color is elegant, pure, and often used as a combination with other colors. 
Ceilings are ideally painted with the white color since it produces a widening and bright 
effect. Vastu Shastra recommends this color for the Northwest bedroom also.  
Pink: A color that represents joy, happiness, and pure feeling; it is suitable for all 
bedrooms in the South and Southwest.  
Black: A somber color which is brooding in nature hence it is powerful in its energy. 
Black by its nature tends to make us feel depressed and heavily laden. In some aspects 
it also borders on the occult hence this color is hardly advisable for wall paints and 
draperies.  However, this color can find its use in small amounts to give emphasis as 
borders and frames to ornate decors. 
Vastu Shastra is intended to give human a more meaningful existence by being able to 
absorb all positive influences. Negative vibrations may sometimes be unavoidable but 
there are certain vastu shastra elements to off-set them. Live life to your fullest and 
learn its maximum potentials by absorbing positive influences, hopefully this ebook 
helps you achieve the meaning of happiness and peace.   
 
*** 


http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                  29 of 30 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
Well done! You now know the basics of Vastu Shastra, how to recognize a suitable land 
as per Vastu, vastu for house, and interior decocation as per vastu principles. 
 
We invite you to learn more about vastu shastra at our website: 
http://www.freevastushastra.com 
 
We truly hope that this information was enlightening and helpful for you. If you enjoyed 
this e-book, please let us know. Likewise, if you think there are ways we can improve it, 
tell us. You can contact us on our website at http://www.freevastushastra.com 
 
Thank you, and good fortune to you, 
Team FreeVastuShastra.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                  30 of 30 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER 
 
The information contained in this ebook is for information purposes only.  
 
FreeVastuShastra.com is not responsible for if any damage caused by using 
FreeVastuShastra.com's web site and ebooks including but not limited to personal, 
business, software, or hardware damages. 
